VIRESCIT VULNERE VERITAS


THE ELEMENTS OF GEOMETRY of the most ancient Philosopher EVCLIDE of Megara.

Faithfully (now first) translated into the English tongue, by H. Billingsley,
Citizen of London. Whereunto are annexed certain Scholics, Annotations, and
Inventions, of the best Mathematicians, both of time past, and i^ this our age.

With a very fruitful Praeface made by M. I. Dee, specifying the chief
Mathematical Sciences, what they are, and whereunto commodious^ where, also,
are disclosed certain new Secrets. Mathematical and Mech^^icall, until these
our days greatly missed:

Imprinted at London by John Day.

The Translator to the Reader.
THere is (gentle Reader) nothing (the word of God only set apart) which so
much beautifieth and adorneth the soul and mind of man, as does the knowledge
of good arts and sciences: as the knowledge of natural and moral
Philosophy. The one sets before our eyes, the creatures of God, both in the
heavens above, and in the earth beneath: in which as in a glass, we behold
the exceeding majesty and wisdom of God, in adorning and beautifying them as
we see: in giving unto them such wonderful and manifold proprieties, and
natural workinges, and that so diversely and in such variety: farther in
maintaining and conseruing them continually, whereby to praise and adore him,
as by S. Paul we are taught. The other teaches us rules and precepts of
virtue, how, in common life amongst men, we ought to walk uprightly: what
duties pertain to our selves, what pertain to the government or good order
both of an household, and also of a city or common wealth. The reading
likewise of histories, conduces not a little, to the adorning of the soul and
mind of man, a study of all men commended: by it are seen and known the
arts and doings of infinite wise men gone before us. In histories are
contained infinite examples of heroical virtues to be of us followed, and
horrible examples of vices to be of us eschewed. Many other arts also there
are which beautify the mind of man: but of all other none do more garnishe
and beautify it, then those arts which are called Mathematical. Unto the
knowledge of which no man can attain, without the perfect knowledge and
instruction of the principles, grounds, and Elements of Geometry. But
perfectly to be instructed in them, requires diligent study and reading of
old ancient authors. Amongst which, none for a beginner is to be preferred
before the most ancient Philosopher Euclide of Megara. For of all others he
has in a true method and just order, gathered together whatsoever any before
him had of these Elements written: inuenting also and adding many things of
his own: whereby he has in due form accomplished the art: first giving
definitions, principles, and grounds, whereof he deduceth his Propositions or
conclusions, in such wonderful wise, that that which goes before, is of
necessity required to the proof of that which follows. So that without the
diligent study of Euclides Elements, it is impossible to attain unto the
perfect knowledge of Geometry, and consequently of any of the other
Mathematical sciences. Wherefore considering the want and lack of such good
authors hitherto in our English tongue, lamenting also the negligence, and
lack of zeal to their country in those of our nation, to whom God has given
both knowledge, and also ability to translate into our tongue, and to publishe
abroad such good authors, and books (the chief instruments of all
learninges): seeing moreover that many good wits both of gentlemen and of
others of all degrees, much desirous and studious of these arts, and seeking
for them as much as they can, sparing no pains, and yet frustrate of their
intent, by no means attaining to that which they seek: I have for their
sakes, with some charge and great travail, faithfully translated into our
vulgar tou^ge, and set abroad in Print, this book of Euclide. Whereunto I
have added easy and plain declarations and examples by figures, of the
definitions. In which book also ye shall in due place find manifold
additions, Scholies, Annotations, and Inventions: which I have gathered out of
many of the most famous and chief Mathematicies, both of old time, and in our
age: as by diligent reading it in course, ye shall well perceive. The fruit
and gain which I require for these my pains and travail, shall be nothing
else, but only that thou gentle reader, will gratefully accept the same: and
that thou may thereby receive some profit: and moreover to excite and
stir up others learned, to do the like, and to take pains in that behalf.
By means whereof, our English tongue shall no less be enriched with good
Authors, then are other strange tounges: as the Dutch, French, Italian, and
Spanishe: in which are red all good authors in a manner, found amongst the
Greeks or Latins. Which is the chiefest cause, that amongst the^ do florishe
so many cunning and skillful men, in the inventions of strange and wonderful
things, as in these our days we see there do. Which fruit and gain if I
attain unto, it shall encourage me hereafter, in such like sort to translate,
and set abroad some other good authors, both pertaining to religion (as partly
I have already done) and also pertaining to the Mathematical Arts. Thus
gentle reader farewell.

TO THE UNFEIGNED LOVERS of truth, and constant Students of Noble Sciences,
JOHN DEE of London, heartily wishes grace from heaven, and most prosperous
success in all their honest attemptes and exercises.
Divine Plato, the great Master of many worthy Philosophers, and the constant
auoucher, and pithy perswader of Vnum, Bonum, and Ens: in his Schole and
Academie, sundry times (besides his ordinary Scholars) was visited of a
certain kind of men, allured by the noble fame of Plato, and the great
commendation of his profound and profitable doctrine. But when such Hearers,
after long harkening to him, perceived, that the drift of his discourses issued
out, to conclude, this Vnum, Bonum, and Ens, to be Spiritual, Infinite,
AEternall, Omnipotent, etc. Nothing being alleged or expressed, How, worldly
goods: how, worldly dignity: how, health, Strength or Iustines of body: nor
yet the means, how a merue^lous sensible and bodyly bliss and felicity
hereafter, might be atteyned: Straightway, the fantasies of those hearers, were
dampt: their opinion of Plato, was clean changed: yea his doctrine was by them
despised: and his schole, no more of them visited. Which thing, his Scholar,
Aristotle, narrowly considering, found the cause thereof, to be, For that they
had no forwarnyng and information, in general, whereto his doctrine tended.
For, so, might they have had occasion, either to have forborne his schole
hauntyng: (if they, then, had misliked his Scope and purpose) or constantly to
have continued therein: to their full satisfaction: if such final scope and
intent, had been to their desire. Wherefore, Aristotle, ever, after that, used in
brief, to forewarne his own Scholars and hearers, both of what matter, and
also to what end, he took in hand to speak, or teach. While I consider the
diverse trades of these two excellent Philosophers (and am most sure, both,
that Plato right well, otherwise could teach: and that Aristotle might
boldly, with his hearers, have dealt in like sort as Plato did) I am in no
little pang of perplexity: Because, that, which I mislike, is most easy for me
to perform (and to have Plato for my example.) And that, which I know to be
most commendable: and (in this first bringyng, into common handling, the Arts
Mathematical) to be most necessary: is full of great difficulty and sundry
dangers. Yet^ neither do I think it me^e, for so strange matter (as now is
meant to be published) and to so strange an audience, to be bluntly, at first,
put forth, without a peculiar Preface: Nor (Imitatyng Aristotle) well can I
hope, that according to the amplenes and dignity of the State Mathematical, I
am able, either plainly to prescribe the material bounds: or precisely to
express the chief purposes, and most wonderful applications thereof. And
though I am sure, that such as did shrink from Plato his s^hole, after they
had perc^iued his final conclusion, would in these things have been his most
diligent hearers) so infinitely might their desires, in fine and at length, by
our Arts Mathematical be satisfied) yet, by this my Praeface and forewarnyng,
As Well all such, may (to their great behofe) the sooner, hither be allured: as
also the Pythagoricall, and Platonicall perfect scholar, and the constant
profound Philosopher, with more ease and speed, may (like the Be,) gather,
hereby, both wax and honey.

Wherefore, seeing I find great occasion (for the causes alleged, and farther, in
respect of my Art Mathematike general) to use a certain forewarnyng and
Praeface, whose content shall be, that mighty, most plesaunt, and fruitful
Mathematical Tree, with his chief arms and second (grifted) branches: The
intent of this Preface.
Both, what every one is, and also, what commodity, in general, is to be
looked for, as well of griff as stock: And forasmuch as this enterprise is so
great, that, to this our time, it never was (to my knowledge) by any achieued:
And also it is most hard, in these our drery days, to such rare and strange
Arts, to win due and common credit: Nevertheless, if, for my sincere endeavor
to satisfy your honest expectation, you will but lend me your tha^kefull mind
a while: and, to such matter as, for this time, my pen (with speed) is hable
to deliver, apply your eye or ear attentifely: perchance, at once, and for
the first salutyng, this Preface you will find a lesson long enough. And
either you will, for a second (by this) be made much the apter: or shortly
become, well hable your selves, of the lions claw, to conjecture his royal
symmetrie, and farther property. Now then, gentle, my friends, and country
men, Turn your eyes, and bend your minds to that doctrine, which for our
present purpose, my simple talent is hable to yield you.

All things which are, and have being, are found under a triple diversity
general.

For, either, they are demed Supernatural, Natural, or, of a third being.
Things Supernatural, are immateriall, simple, indivisible, incorruptible, and
unchangeable. Things Natural, are material, compounded, diuisible,
corruptible, and chaungeable. Things Supernatural, are, of the mind only,
comprehended: Things Natural, of the sense exterior, ar hable to be perceived.
In things Natural, probability and conjecture has place: But in things
Supernatural, chief demo^stration, and most sure Science is to be had. By
which properties and comparasons of these two, more easily may be described,
the state, condition, nature and property of those things, which, we before
termed of a third being: which, by a peculier name also, are called Things
Mathematical. For, these, being (in a manner) middle, between things
supernatural and natural: are not so absolute and excellent, as things
supernatural: Nor yet so base and gross, as things natural: But are things
immateriall: and nevertheless, by material things hable somewhat to be
signified. And though their particular Images, by Art, are agg^egable and
diuisible: yet the general Forms, notwithstanding, are constant,
unchangeable, vntra^sformable, and incorruptible. Neither of the sense, can
they, at any time, be perceived or judged. Nor yet for all that, in the royal
mind of man, first conceived. But, surmountyng the imperfection of conjecture,
weenyng and opinion: and coming short of high intellectual co^ceptio^, are
the Mercurial fruit of Dianoeticall discourse, in perfect imagination
subsistyng. A meruaylous newtralitie have these things Mathematical. and also
a strange participatio^ between things supernatural, immortal,
intellectual, simple and indivisible: and things natural, mortal, sensible,
compounded and diuisible. Probability and sensible proof, may well serve in
things natural: and is commendable: In Mathematical reasoninges, a probable
Argument, is nothing regarded: nor yet the testimony of sense, any whit
credited: But only a perfect demonstration, of truths certain, necessary,
and invincible: universally and necessaryly concluded: is allowed as sufficient
for an Argument exactly and purely Mathematical."

Of Mathematical things, are two principal kinde^^ namely, Number, Number.
and Magnitude. Number, we define, to be, a certain Mathematical Su^me, of
Units. Note the word, Unit, to express the Greek Mona^, and not Unity: as we
hau^ all, commonly, till now, used.
And, an Unit, is that thing Mathematical, Indivisible, by participation of
some likeness of whose property, any thing, which is in de^de, or is counted
One, may resonably be called One. We account an Unit, a thing Mathematical,
though it be no Number, and also indiuisible^ because, of it, materially,
Number does consist^ which, principally, is a thing Mathematical. Magnitude is
a thing Mathematical, Magnitude.
by participation of some likeness of whose nature, any thing is judged long,
broad, or thick. A thick Magnitude we call a Solid, or a Body. What
Magnitude so ever, is Solid or" Thick, is also broad, and long. A broad
magnitude, we call a Superficies or a Plain. Every plain magnitude, has also
length. A long magnitude, we term a Line. A Line is neither thick nor broad,
but only long: Every certain Line, has two ends: The ends of a line, are
Points called. A point.
A Point, is a thing Mathematical, indivisible, which may have a certain
determined situation. If a Point move from a" determined situation, the way
wherein it moved, is also a Line: mathematically produced. whereupon, of the
ancient Mathematiciens, a Line is called the race or course of a Point. A Line.
A Point we define, by the name of a thing Mathematical: though it be no
Magnitude, and indivisible: because it is the propre end, and bound of a Line:
which is a true Magnitude. Magnitude.
And Magnitude we may define to be that thing Mathematical, which is diuisible
for ever, in parts diuisible, long, broad or thick. Therefore though a Point
be no Magnitude, yet Terminatiuely we reckon it a thing Mathematical (as I
said) by reason it is properly the end, and bound of a line.

Neither Number, nor Magnitude, have any Materialitie. First, we will consider
of Number, and of the Science Mathe^a^icall, to it appropriate, called
Arithmetike: and afterward of Magnitude, and his Science, called Geometry. But
that name contenteth me not: whereof a word or two hereafter shall be said. How
Immateriall and free from all matter, Number is, who does not perceive? ye^,
who does not wonderfully wonder at it: For, neither pure Element, nor
Aristoteles, Quinta Essentia, is hable to serve for Number, as his propre
matter. Nor yet the purity and simplenes of Substance Spiritual or
Angelical, will be found propre enough thereto. And therefore the great and
godly Philosopher Anitius Boethius, said: Omnia quaecunque a primaua rerum
na^^ra constructa sunt, Numerorum videntur ratione formata. Hoc enim fuit
principale in animo Conditoris Exemplar. That is: All things (which from the
very first original being of things, have been framed and made) do appear to
be Formed by the reason of Numbers. For this was the principal example or
pattern in the mind of the Creator. O comfortable alluremen^, O rauishing
persuasion, to deal with a Science, whose Subject, i^ so Ancient, so pure, so
excellent, so surmounting all creatures, so used of the Almighty and
incomprehensible wisdom of the Creator, in the distinct creation of all
creatures^ in all their distinct parts, properties, natures, and virtues, by
order, and most absolute number, brought, from Nothing, to the Formalitie of
their being and state. By Numbers property therefore, of us, by all possible
means, (to the perfection of the Science) learned, we may both wind and draw
our selves into the inward and deep search and v^w, of all creatures distinct
virtues, natures, properties, and Former: And also, farther, arise, clime,
ascend, and mount up (with Speculatiue wings) in spirit, to behold in the Glass
of Creation, the Form of Forms, the Exemplar Number of all things Numerable:
both visible and inuisible^ mortal and immortal, Corporal and Spiritual.
Part of this profound and divine Science, had Ioachim the Prophesier atteyned
unto: by Numbers Formal, Natural, and Rational, forseyng, concludyng, and
forshewyng great particular events, long before their coming. His books yet
remainyng, hereof, are good proof: And the noble Earl of Mirandula, (besides
that,) a sufficient witness: that Ioachim, in his prophesies, proceeded by no
other way, then by Numbers Formal. And this Earl him self, in Rome, Ano.
1488.
set up 900. Conclusions, in all kind of Sciences, openly to be disputed of:
and among the rest, in his Conclusions Mathematical, (in the eleventh
Conclusion) has in Latin, this English sentence. By Numbers, a way is had, to
the searchyng out, and understanding of every thing, hable to be known. For
the verifying of which Conclusion, I promise to answer to the 74. Quaestions,
under written, by the way of Numbers. Which Co^clusions, I omit here to
rehearse: as well auoidyng superfluous prolixitie: as, because Ioannes Picus,
works, are commonly had. But, in any case, I would wish that those Conclusions
were red diligently, and perceived of such, as are earnest Obseruers and
Considerers of the constant law of numbers: which is planted in things Natural
and Supernatural: and is prescribed to all Creatures, inuiolably to be kept.
For, so, besides many other things, in those Conclusions to be marked, it
would apeare, how sincerely, and within my bounds, I disclose the wonderful
mysteries, by numbers, to be atteyned unto.

Of my former words, easy it is to be gathered, that Number has a treble
state: One, in the Creator: an other in every Creature (in respect of his
complete constitution:) and the third, in Spiritual and Angelical Minds, and
in the Soul of man. In the first and third state, Number, is termed Number
Numbryng. But in all Creatures, otherwise, Number, is termed Number Numbered.
And in our Soul, Number bears such a swaye, and has such an affinity
therewith: that some of the old Philosophers taught, Man's Soul, to be a Number
mouyng it self. And in deed, in us, though it be a very Accident: yet such an
Accident it is, that before all Creatures it had perfect being, in the Creator,
Sempiternally. Number Numbryng therefore, is the discretion discerning, and
distincting of things. But in God the Creator, This discretion, in the
beginning, produced orderly and distinctly all things. For his Numbryng, then,
was his Creatyng of all things. And his Continual Numbryng, of all things,
is the Conservation of them in being: And, where and when he will lack an
Unit: there and then, that particular thing shall be Discreated. Here I stay. But
our Seuerallyng, distinctyng, and Numbryng, creates nothyng^ but of Multitude
considered, makes certain and distinct determination. And albeit these
things be weighty and truths of great importance, yet (by the infinite
goodness of the Almighty Ternarie,) Artificial Methods and easy ways are made,
by which the zealous Philosopher, may wyn nere this Riuerish Ida^ this Mountain
of Contemplation: and more then Contemplation. And also, though Number, be a
thing so Immateriall, so divine, and aeternall: yet by degrees, by little and
little, stretchyng forth, and applying some likeness of it, as first, to things
Spiritual: and then, bryngyng it lower, to things sensibly perceived: as of a
momentanye sound iterated: then to the least things that may be seen,
numerable: And at length, (most grossly,) to a multitude of any corporal
things seen, or felt: and so, of these gross and sensible things, we are
trained to learn a certain Image or likeness of numbers: and to use Art in
them to our pleasure and proffit. So gross is our conversation, and dull is
our apprehension: while mortal Sense, in us, rules the common wealth of our
little world. Hereby we say, Three Lions, are three: or a Ternarie. Three Egles,
are three, or a Ternarie. Which
Ternaries, are each, the Union, knot, and Uniformity, of three discrete and
distinct Units. That is, we may in each Ternarie, thrice, severally point, and
show a part, One, One, and One. Where, in Numbryng, we say One, two, Three. But
how far, these visible Ones, do differ from our Indivisible Units (in pure
Arithmetike, principally considered) no man is ignorant. Yet from these gross
and material things, may we be led upward, by degrees, so, informyng our rude
Imagination, toward the coceiuyng of Numbers, absolutely (Not supposing, nor
admixtyng any thing created, Corporal or Spiritual, to support, conteyne, or
represent those Numbers imagined:) that at length, we may be hable, to find
the number of our own name, gloriously exemplified and registered in the book
of the Trinity most blessed and aeternall.

But farther understand, that vulgar Practisers, have Numbers, otherwise, in
sundry Considerations: and extend their name farther, then to Numbers, whose
least part is an Unit. For the common Logist, Reckenmaster, or Arithmeticien,
in his using of Numbers: of an Unit, imagines less partes^ and calls them
Fractions. As of an Unit, he makes an half, and thus notes it, and so of
other, (infinitely diverse) parts of an Unit, Yea and farther, has, Fractions
of Fractions. etc. And, forasmuch, as, Addition, Substraction, Multiplication,
Division and Extraction of Rotes, are the chief, and sufficient parts of
Arithmetike: Arithmetike.
which is, the Science that demonstrateth the properties, of Numbers, and all
operatio^s, in numbers to be performed. How often, therefore, Note.
these five sundry sorts of Operations, do, for the most part, of their
execution, differ from the five operations of like general property and
name, in our Whole numbers practisable, So often, (for a more distinct
doctrine) we, vulgarly account and name it, an other kind of Arithmetike. And
by this reason: the Consideration, Unit, is no less part to be allowed: is
named (as it were) an Ari^hmetike by it self. And so of the Arithmetike of
Fractions. In like sort, the necessary, wonderful and Secret doctrine of
Proportion, and proportionalytie has purchased unto it self a peculier
Arithmetike. Moreover, the Astronomers, for speed and more commodious
calculation, have devised Arithmetike of Astronomical or Physical Fractions.
That, have I briefly noted, by the name of Arithmetike Circular. By cause it is
also used in circles, not Astronomicall. etc. Practice has led Numbers farther,
and has framed them, to take upon Magnitudes property: Which is
Incommensurabilitie and Irrationalitie. (For in pu^e Arithmetike, an Unit, is
the common Measure of all Numbers.) And, here, Numbers are become, as Lines,
Playnes and Solides: some times Rational, some times Irrationall^ And have
propre and peculier characters, (as ^.^. and so of other. Which is to signify
Ro^e Square, Rote Cubik: and so forth:) and propre and peculier fashions in the
five principal parts: Wherefore the practiser, estemeth this, a diverse
Arithmetike from the other. Practice brings in, here, diverse compoundyng of
Numbers: as some time, two, three, four (or more) Radical numbers, diversely
knit, by signs, o^ More and Less: as thus ^ 12 + ^ 15. Or ^hus ^^ 19 + ^ 12 -
^ 2^ etc. And some time with whole numbers, or fractions of whole Number, among
them as 20 + ^ ^4^ ^ + 33 - ^ 10, ^^ 44 + 12 - +^9. And so, infinitely, may hap
the varie^ie. After this: Both the one and the other has fractions incident:
and so is this Arithmetike greatly enlarged, by diverse exhibityng and use of
Compositions and mixtynges. Consider how^ I (being desirous to deliver the
student from error and Cauillation) do give to this Practice, the name of the
Arithmetike of Radical numbers: Not of Irrational or Surd Numbers^ which
other while, are Rational: though they have the Sign of a Rote before them,
which, Arithmetike of whole Numbers most usual, would say they had no such
Root: and so account them Surd Numbers: which generally spoken, is untrue: as
Euclides tenth book may teach you. Therefore to call them, generally, Radical
Numbers, (by reason of the sign. prefixed,) is a sure way: and a sufficient
general distinction from all other ordryng and using of Numbers: And yet
(beside all this) Consider: the infinite desire of knowledge, and incredible
power of man's Search and Capacitye: how, they, jointly have waded farther (by
mixtyng of speculation and practice) and have found out, and atteyned to the
very chief perfection (almost) of Numbers Practical use. Which thing, is well
to be perceived in that great Arithmeticall Art of AEquation: commonly called
the Rule of Coss. or Algebra. The Latins termed it, Regulam Rei and Census,
that is, the Rule of the thing and his value. With an apt name: comprehendyng
the first and last points of the work. And the vulgar names, both in Italian,
French and Spanish, depend (in namyng it,) upon the signification of the Latin
word, Res: A thing: vnleast they use the name of Algebra. And therein (commonly)
is a dubble error. The one, of them, which think it to be of Geber his
inuentyng: the other of such as call it Algebra. For, first, though Geber for
his great skill in Numbers, Geometry, Astronomy, and other maruailous Arts,
might have seemed hable to have first devised the said Rule: and also the name
carries with it a very nere likeness of Geber his name: yet true it is, that a
Greek Philosopher and Mathematicien, named Diophantus, before Geber his time,
wrote 13. books thereof (of which, six are yet extant: and I had them to Anno.
1550.
use, of the famous Mathematicien, and my great friend, Petrus Mon^aureus:) And
secondly, the very name, is Algiebar, and not Algebra: as by the Arabien
Auicen, may be proved: who has these precise words in Latin, by Andreas
Alpagus (most perfect in the Arabik tung) so translated. Scientia faciendi
Algiebar and Almachabel. i. Scientia inueniendi numerum ignotum, per additionem
Numeri, and diuisionem and aequationem. Which is to say: The Science of workyng
Algiebar and Almachabel, that is, the Science of findyng an unknown number, by
Addyng of a Number, and Division and aequation. Here have you the name: and
also the principal parts of the Rule, touched. To name it, The rule, or Art
of AEquation, does signi^ie the middle part and the State of the Rule. This
Rule, has his peculier Characters: Arithmetike, to it appertayning, do differe
from the other Arithmeticall operations. This Arithmetike, has Numbers Simple,
Co^pound, Mixed: and Fractions, accordingly. This Rule, and Arithmetike of
Algiebar, is so profound, so general and so (in manner) conteyneth the whole
power of Numbers Application practical: that man's wit, can deal with
nothyng^ more proffitable about numbers: nor match, with a thing, more mete for
the divine force of the Soul, (in humane Studies, affairs, or exercises) to
be tried in. Perchance you looked for, (long ere now,) to have had some
particular proof, or evident testimony of the use, proffit and Commodity of
Arithmetike vulgar, in the Common life and trade of men. Thereto, then, I will
now frame my self: But herein great care I have, least length of sundry
profes, might make you deem, that either I did misdoute your zealous mind to
virtues schole: or else mistrust your hable wits, by some, to guess much more.
A proof then, four, five, or six, such, will I bring, as any reasonable man,
therewith may be persuaded, to love and honor, yea learn and exercise the
excellent Science of Arithmetike.

And first: who, nerer at hand, can be a better witness of the fruit received
by Arithmetike, then all kind of Merchants? Though not all, alike, either need
it, or use it. How could they forbear the use and help of the Rule, called
the Golden Rule? Simple and Compounde^ both fo^ward and backward? How might
they miss Arithmeticall help in the Rules of Felowshyp^ either without time,
or with tyme^ and between the Merchant and his ^actor^ The Rul^^ of Ba^tering
in wares onely^ or part in wares, and part in money, would they gladly want?
Our Merchant venturers, and Trauaylers over Sea, how could they order their
doings justly and without loss, vnleast certa^ne and general Rules for
Exchau^ge of money, and Rechaunge, were, for their use, devised? The Rule of
Alligation, in how sundry cases, does it conclude for them, such precise
verities, as neither by natural wit, nor other experience, they, were hable,
else, to know? And (with the Merchant then to make an end) how ample and
wonderful is the Rule of False positions? especially as it is now, by two
excellent Mathematiciens (of my familer acquayntance in their life time)
enlarged? I mean Gemma Frisius, and Simon Jacob. Who can either in brief
conclude, the general and Capital Rules? or who can Imagine the Myriades of
sundry Cases, and particular examples, in Act and earnest, continually wrought,
tried and concluded by the forenamed Rules, only? How sundry other
Arithmeticall practices, are commonly in Marchantes hands, and knowledge: They
them selves, can, at large, testify.

The Mintmaster, and Goldsmith, in their Mixture of Metals, either of diverse
kinds, or diverse values: how are they, or may they, exactly be directed, and
meruailously pleasured, if Arithmetike be their guide? And the honorable
Phisicia^s, will gladly confess them selves, much beholding to the Science of
Arithmetike, and that sundry ways: But chiefly in their Art of Graduation, and
compounde Medicines. And though Galenus, Auer^ois, Arnoldus, Lullus, and other
have published their positions, as well in the quantities of the Degrees above
Temperament, as in the Rules, concluding the new Form resulting: yet a more
precise, commodious, and easy Method, is extant: R. B.
by a Countreyman of ours (above 200 years ago) invented. And forasmuch as I
am uncertain, who has the same: or when that little Latin treatise, (as the
Author writ it,) shall come to be Printed: (Both to declare the desire I have
to pleasure my Country, wherein I may: and also, for very good proof of Numbers
use, in this most subtle and fruitful, Philosophical Conclusion,) I entend
in the mean while, most briefly, and with my farther help, to communicate the
pith thereof unto you.

First describe a circle: whose diameter let be an inch. Divide the
Circumference into four equal parts. From the Center, by those 4. sections,
extend 4. right lines: each of 4. inches and a half long: or of as many as you
list, above 4. without the circumference of the circle: So that they shall be
of 4. inches long (at the lea^t) without the Circle^ Make good evident marks,
at every inches end. If you list, you may subdiuide the inches again into 10.
or 12. smaller parts, equal. At the ends of the lines, write the names of
the 4. principal elementall Qualities. Hot and Cold^, one against the other.
And likewise Moist and Dry, one against the other. And in the Circle write
Temperate. Which Temperature has a good Latitude: as appears by the
Complexion of man. And therefore we have allowed unto it, the foresaid Circle:
and not a point Mathematical or Physical.

Now, when you have two things Miscible, whose degrees are Take some part of
Lullus counsel in his book de Q. Essentia.
truly knowen^ Of necessity, either they are of one Quantity and weight, or
of diverse. If they be of one Quantity and weight: whether their forms, be
Contrary Qualities, or of one kind (but of diverse intentions and degrees) or
a Temperate, and a Contrary, The form^ resulting of their Mixture, is in the
Middle between the degrees of the forms mixed. As for example, let A, be Moist
in the first degree: and B, Dry in the third degree. Add 1. and 3. that makes
4: the half or middle of 4. is 2. This 2. is the middle, equally distant from
A and B (for the No^e.
Temperament is counted none. And for it, you must put a Ciphre, if at any
time, it be in mixture). Counting then from B, 2. degrees, toward A: you find
it to be Dry in the first degree: So is the Form resulting of the Mixture of
A, and B, in our example, I will give you an other example. Suppose, you have
two things, as C, and D^ and of C, the Heat to be in the 4. degree: and of D,
the Cold, to be remiss, even unto the Temperament. Now, for C, you take 4^
and for D, you take a Ciphre: which, added unto 4, yeldeth only 4. The middle,
or half, whereof, is 2. Wherefore the Form resulting of C, and D, is Hot in
the second degree: for 2. degrees, accounted from C, toward D, end just in
the 2. degree of heat. Of the third manner, I will give also an example: which
let be this: I have a liquid Medicine whose Quality of heat is in the 4.
degree exalted: Note.
as was C, in the example foregoing: and an other liquid Medicine I have: whose
Quality, is heat, in the first degree. Of each of these, I mixed a like
quantitie^ Subtract here, the less from the more: and the residue divide into
two equal parts: whereof, the one part, either added to the less, or
subtracted from the higher degree, does produce the degree of the Form
resulting, by this mixture of C, and E. As, if from 4. ye abate 1. there
rests 3, the half of 3, is 1 1/^: Add to 1^ this 1 1/^: you have 2 1/^. Or
subtract from 4. this 1 1/^: you have likewise 2 ^/^ remaining. Which
declares, the Form resulting, to be Heat, in the middle of the third degree.

But if the Quantities of two things Commixt, The Second Rule.
be diverse, and the Intensions (of their Forms Miscible) be in diverse
degree^, and heigthes. (Whether those Forms be of one kind, or of Contrary
kinds, or of a Temperate and a Contrary, What proportion ^^ of the less
quantiti^ to the greater, the same shall be of the difference, which is between
the degree of the Form resulting, and the degree of the greater quantity of
the thing miscible, to the difference, which is between the same degree of the
Form resulting, and the degree of the less quantiti^. As for example. Let two
pound of Liquor be given, hot in the 4. degree: and one pound of Liqour be
given, hot in the third degree, I would gladly know the Form resulting, in
the Mixture of these two Liquors. Set down your numbers in order, thus. Now by
the rule of Algiebar, have I devised a very ^aste, brief, and general manner
of working in this case. Let us first, suppose that Middle Form resulting, to
be 1^^ at that Rule teaches. And because (by our Rule, here given) as the
weight of 1. is to 2: So is the difference between 4. (the degree of the
greater quantity) and 1^ to the difference between 1^ and 3^ (the degree of
the thing, in less qua^t^tie. And with all, 1^, being always in a certain
middell, between the two heigthes or degrees). For the first difference, I set
-- 1^: and for the second, I set 1^ -- 3. And, now again, I say, as 1. is to
2. so is 4 -- 1^ to 1^ -- 3. Wherefore, of these four proportional numbers,
the first and the fourth Multiplied, one by the other, do make as much, as the
second and the third Multiplied the one by (...) other? Let these
Multiplications be made accordingly. And of the first and the fourth, we have
1^ -- 3. and of the second and the third, 8 -- ^^. Wherefore, our AEquation is
between ^^ -- 3: and 8 -- 2^. Which may be reduced, according to the Art of
Algiebar as, here, adding 3. to each part, ge^eth the AEquation, thus, 1^=11 --
2^. And yet again, contracting, or Reducing it: Add to each part, ^^? Then
have you 3^ equal to 11: thus represented 3^=11. Wherefore, dividing 11 by 3:
the Quotient is 3 ^/^: the Value of our 1^, Coss, or Thing, first supposed. And
that is the height, or Intension of the Form resulting: which is, Heat, in
two thirdes of the fourth degree: And here I set the show of the work in
conclusion, thus. The proof hereof is easy by subtracting 3. from 3 ^/^^
rests ^/^. Subtracte the same height of the Form resulting, (which is 3 ^/^)
from 4: then rests ^/^: You see, that ^/^ is double to ^/^: as 2. ^. is
double to 1. ^. So should it be: by the rule here given. Note. As you added to
each part of the AEquation, 3: so if ye first added to each part 2^, it would
stand, 3^ -- 3=8. And now adding to each part 3^ you have (as before) 3^=11.

And though I, here, speak only of two things Miscible: and most commonly, mo
then three, four, five or six, (etc.) are to be Mixed: (and in one Compound to
be reduced^ and the Form resultyng of the same, to serve the turn) yet these
Rules are sufficient: duly repeated and iterated. Note.
In procedyng first, with any two: and then, with the Fonne Resulting, and an
other: and so forth: For, the last work, concludes the Form resultyng of
them all: I need nothing to speak, of the Mixture (here supposed) what it is.
Common Philosophy has defined it, saying, Mixtio est miscibilium,
alteratorum, per minima coniunctorum, Vnio. Every word in the definition, is of
great importance. I need not also spend any time, to show, how, the other
manner of distributing of degrees, does agree to these Rules. Neither need I of
the farther use belonging to the Cross of Graduation (before described) in this
place declare, unto such as are capable of that, which I have all ready said.
Neither yet with examples specify the Manifold varie^ies, by the foresaid two
general Rules, to be ordered. The witty and Studious, here, have sufficient:
And they which are not hable to atteine to this, without lively teaching, and
more in particular: would have larger discoursing, then is mete in this place
to be dealt w^thall: And other (perchance) with a proud snuff will disdain
this litl^^ and would be unthankful for much more. I, therefore conclude: and
wish such as have modest and earnest Philosophical minds, to laud God highly
for this: and to Marvel, that the profoundest and subtilest point, concerning
Mixture of Forms and Qualities Natural, is so Match^ and married with the most
simple, easy, and short way of the noble Rule of Algiebar. Who can remain,
therefore vnpersuaded, to love, allow, and honor the excellent Science of
Arithmetike? For, here, you may perceive that the little finger of Arithmetike,
is of more might and contriuing then a hunderd thousand men's wits, of the
middle sort, are hable to perform, or truly to conclude, with out help
thereof.

Now will we f^rder, by the wise and valiant Captain, be certified, what
help he has, by the Rules of Arithmetike: in one of the Arts to him
appertaining: And of the Greeks named (...). (...).
That is, the Skill of O^dring Soldiers in Battle ray after the best manner to
all purposes. This Art so much depends upon Numbers use, and the
Mathematicals, that AElianus (the best writer thereof,) in his work, to the
Emperor Hadrianus, by his perfection, in the Mathematicals, (being greater,
then other before him had,) thinks his book to pass all other the excellent
works, written of that Art, unto his days. For, of it, had written AEneas:
Gyneas of Thessaly: Pyrrhus Epirota: and Alexander his son: Clearchus:
Pausanias: Euangelus: Polybi^s, familier friend to Scipio: Eupolemus:
Iphicrates, Possidonius: and very many other worthy Capitaines, Philosophers
and Princes of Immortal fame and memory: Whose fairest flower of their garland
(in this feat) was Arithmetike: and a little perceiuerance, in Geometrical
Figures. But in many other cases does Arithmetike stand the Captain in great
stead. As in proportionyng of vittayles, for the Army, either remaining at a
stay: or suddenly to be increased with a certain number of Soldiers: and for
a certain time. Or by good Art to diminish his company, to make the victuals,
longer to serve the remanent, and for a certain determined time: if need so
require. And so in sundry his other accountes, Reckeninges, Measurynges, and
proportionynges, the wise, expert, and Circumspect ^apitaine will affirm the
Science of Arithmetike, to be one of his chief Counsaylors, directers and
aiders. Which thing (by good means) was evident to the Noble, the Courageous,
the loyal, and Courteous John, late Earl of Warwick. Who was a young
Gentleman, thoroughly known to very few. Albeit his lusty valiantnes, force,
and Skill in Chiualrous feats and exerci^es: his humblenes, and frendelynes to
all men, were things, openly, of the world perceived. But what rotes
(otherwise,) virtue had fastened in his breast, what Rules of godly and
honorable life he had framed to him self: what vices, (in some then living)
notable, he took great care to eschew: what manly virtues, in other noble men,
(flourishing before his eyes,) he Sythingly aspired after: what prowesses he
purposed and meant to achieue: with what feats and Arts, he began to furnish
and fraught him self, for the better service of his King and Country, both in
peace and war. These (I say) his Heroical Meditations, forecas^inges and
determinations, no twain, (I think) beside my self, can so perfectly, and
truly report. And therefore, in Conscience, I count it my part, for the honor,
preferment, and procuring of virtue (thus, briefly) to have put his Name, in
the Register of Fa^^ Immortal.

To our purpose. This John, by one of his acts (besides many other: both in
England and France, by me, in him noted.) did dislose his hearty love to
virtuous Sciences: and his noble intent, to excel in Martial prowess: When
he, with humble request, and instant Soliciting: got the best Rules (either in
time past by Greek or Roman, or in our time used: and new Stratagemes therein
de^ised) for ordring of all Companies, sums and Number^ of me^, (Many or few)
with one kind of weapon, or mo, appointed: with Artillery, or without: on
horseback, or on foot: to give, or take onset: to seem many, being few^ to
s^em few, being many. To march in battle or Iornay: with many such feate^,
to Foughten f^^ld, Skarmoush, or Ambushe appartaining: And of all these, lively
desi^nementes (most curiously) to be in velame parchement described: with Notes
and peculier marks, as the Art requires: and all these Rules^ and
descriptions Arithmeticall, This noble Earl, dyed Anno. 1554. skarse of 24.
years of age^ having no issue by his wife: Daughter to the Duke of Somerset.
enclosed in a rich Case of Gold, he used to wear about his necke^ as his
Iuell most precious, and Counsaylour most trusty. Thus, Arithmetik^, of him was
shryned in gold: Of Numbers fruit, he had good hope. Now, Numbers therefore
innumerable, in Numbers praise, his sh^^ne shall find.

What need I, (for farther ^rofe to you) of the Scholemasters of Justice, to
require testimony: how needful, how fruitful, how skillfull a thing
Arithmetike is? I meane^ the Lawyers of all sorts. Undoubtedly, the Ciuilians,
can meruaylously declare: how, neither the Ancient Roman laws, without good
knowledge of Numbers art, can be perceived: Nor (Justice in infinite Cases)
without due proportion, (narrowly considered,) is hable to be executed^ How
Justly, and with great knowledge of Art, did Pap^^^^anus institute a law of
partition, and allowance, between man and wife a^^^ a ^^^orce: But how
Acc^rsius, Bald^s, Bartolus, Jason, Alex^nder, and finally Alciat^^ (being
o^^^rwise, notably well learned) do iumble, guess, and err, from the ^quity^
^rt and I^^ent of the lawmaker: Arithmetike can detect, and convince: and
clearly, make the truth to shine. Good Bartolus, tired in the examining and
proportioning of the matter: and with Accursius Gloss, much cumbred: burst
out, and said: Nulla est i^ (...) libr^, (...) glossa difficili^r: Cui^s
c^mputationem nec Scholas^ici ^ec Doct^res intellig^^t. etc. That is^ In the
whole book, there is no ^losse harder then thi^^ Whose accoump^ or reckenyng,
neither the Scholars, nor the Doctors understand. etc. What can they say of
I^lianus law, Si ita S^ript^m. etc. Of the Testators will justly performing,
between the wife, Son and daughter? How can they perceive the ^^^^^tie of
Aphricanus, Arithmeticall Reckening, where he treats of Lex Falcid^a^ How ^^n
they deliver him, from his Reprouers: and their maintainers: as I^^^^es,
Accursius Hypolitus and Alciatus? How ^ustly and artificially, was African^s
reckening made? Proportionating to the Sommes bequeathed, the Contributions of
each part? Namely, for the hundred presently received, 17 1/7. And for the
hundred, received after ten months, 12 6/7: which make the 30: which were to
be co^tributed by the legatari^s to the heir. For, what proportion, 100 has
to 75: the same has 17 1/7 to 12 6/7: Which is Sesquitertia: that is, as 4, to
3. which make 7. Wonderful many places, in the Civil law, require an expert
Arithmeticien, to understand the deep Judgment, and Just determination of the
Ancient Roman Lawmakers. But much more expert ought he to be, who should be
hable, to decide with aequitie, the infinite variety of Cases, which do, or
may happen, under every one of those laws and ordinances Civil. Hereby,
easily, ye may now conjecture: that in the Canon law: and in the laws of the
Realm (which with us, bear the chief Authority), Justice and equity might be
greatly preferred, and skilfully executed, through due skill of Arithmetike,
and proportions appertainyng. The worthy Philosophers, and prudent lawmakers
(who have written many books De Republica: How the best state of Common
wealths might be procured and maintained,) have very well determined of
Justice: (which, not only, is the Base and foundation of Commonweals: but
also the total perfection of all our works, words, and thoughts:) defining
it, to be that virtue, Justice.
by which, to every one, is rendered, that to him appertains. God challenges
this at our hands, to be honored as God: to beloved, as a father: to be feared
as a Lord and master. Our neighbors proportion, is also prescribed of the
Almighty lawmaker: which is, to do to other, even as we would be done unto.
These proportions, are in Justice necessary^ in duty, commendable: and of
Common wealths, the life, strength, stay and flourishing. Aristotle in his
Ethikes (to fatch the sede of Justice, and light of direction, to use and
execute the sam^) was feign to fly to the perfection, and power of Numbers: for
proportions Arithmeticall and Geometrical. Plato in his book called Epinomis
(which book, is the Threasury of all his doctrine) where, his purpose is, to
seek a Science, which, when a man had it, perfectly: he might seem, and so be,
in deed, Wise. He, br^efly, of other Sciences discoursing, finds them, not
hable to bring it to pass: But of the Science of Numbers, he says. Illa, qua
numerum mortalium generi d^^n, id profecto efficiet^ Deum antem aliquem, magis
quam fortunam, ^d sa^^tem nostram, hoc m^nus nobis arbitror contulisse. etc.
Nam ipsum ^onorum omnium Authorem, cur non maximi boni, Prudentiae dico, causam
arbitramur? That Science, verily, which has taught mankind number, shall be
able to bring it to pass. And, I think, a certain God, rather then fortune,
to have given us this gift, for our bliss. For, why should we not Judge him,
who is the Author of all good things, to be also the cause of the greatest good
thing, namely, Wisdom? There, at length, he proves Wisdom to be atteyned,
by good Skill of N^mbers. With which great Testimony, and the manifold profes,
and reasons, before expressed^ you may be sufficiently and fully persuaded: of
the perfect Science of Arithmetike, to make this accounte: That of all
Sciences,
next to Theology, it is most divine, most pure, most ample and general, most
profounde, most subtle, most commodious and most necessary. Whose next Sister,
is the Absolute Science of Magnitudes: of which (by the Direction and aid of
him, whose Magnitude is Infinite, and of us Incomprehensible) I now entend, so
to write, that both with the Multitude, and also with the Magnitude of
Meruaylous and fruitful verities, you (my friends and Countrymen) may be
stird up, and awaked, to behold what certain Arts and Sciences, (to our
unspeakable behofe) our heavenly father, has for us prepared, and revealed, by
sundry Philosophers and Mathematiciens.

BOth, Number and Magnitude, have a certain Original sede, (as it were) of an
incredible property: and of man, never hable, Fully, to be declared. Of Number,
an Unit, and of Magnitude, a Point, do seem to be much like Original (...)
pretense of just content, and me^sure^ (...) lan^es and groundes^ ^re^^ (...),
^^^quietnes, murder, and war did (full often) ensue: ^ill^^ by Gods (...) and
(...) industry, The perfect Science of Lines, Plains, and Solides (lik^ ^
divine (...),) gave unto every man, his own. The people then, by this art
pleasured, and greatly relieved, in their lands just measuring: and other
Philosophers^ writing Rules for land measuring^ between them both, thus,
con^^rmed the name of G^^m^tria, that is, (according to the very etimologie of
the word) Land measuring. Wherein, the people knew no farther, of Magnitudes use,
but in Plai^^^: and the Philosophers, of the^, had no feethearers, or Scholers^
^a^der to disclose unto, then of ^lat, plain Geometry. And though, these
Philosophers, knew of farther use, and best understood the etymologye of the
word, yet this name G^^^etria, was of them applied generally to all sorts of
Magnitudes: vnleast, otherwhile, of Plato, and Pythagoras^ When they would
precisely declare their own doctrine. Then, was Plato. 7. de Rep.
Geometria, with them, Studium quod circa planum versatur. But, well you may
perceive by Euclides Elements, that more ample is our Science, then to measure
Plains: and nothing less therein is tought (of purpose) then how to measure
Land. An other name, th^rfore, must needs be had, for our Mathematical Science
of Magnitudes: which regards neither clod, no^ turff^ neither hill, nor dale^
neither ^^^th nor heaven: but is absolute Megeth^logia: not creping on ground,
and dissellng the eye, with pole perch, rod or line:
but liftyng the heart above the heavens, by (...) lines, and immortal beames^
meteth with the reflections, of the light incomprehensible^ and so procures
Joy, and perfection unspeakable. Of which true use of our Meg^thica, or
Megethologia, Divine Plato seemed to have good taste, and iudgement^ and (by
the name of Geometry) so noted it^ and warned his Scholars thereof: as, in his
seventh Dialog, of the Common wealth, may ^uidently be seen. Where (in Latin)
thus it is: right well translated: (...) quid Geometri^ (...) loquuntur, qui in
ipsa vers^^t^^. In English, (...) o^ Verily (says Plat^) whosoever have, (but
even very little) tasted of Geometry, will not deny unto us, this: but that
this Science, is of an other condition, quite contrary to that, which they that
are exercised in it, do speak of it. And there it followeth^ of our Geometry,
Quod q^^ritur cognoscendi illius gratia, quod se^per est, (...) and Interit.
Geometria, eius quod est semper, Cognit^^ est. (...) Veritatem, ^nimum: atque
ita, ad Philosophandum (...) qua, nunc, contra quam decet, ad inf^ri^r^ (...)
etc. (...) praecipiendum est, vt qui praclarissimam hanc (...) spernant. Nam
and quoe pr^ter ipsius propositu^, (...) sunt. etc. It must needs be confessed
(says Plat^) That [(...)] i^ learned, for the knowing of that, which is (...):
and not of that, which, in time, both is bred and is brought to an end. etc.
Geometry is the knowledge of that which is everlasting. It will lif^ up
therefore (O Gentle Sir) our mind to the Verity: and by that means, it will
prepare the Thought, to the Philosophical love of wisdom: that we may turn
or con^ert, toward heavenly things [(...)] which now, otherwise then
b^comme^^^ us, we cast (...) or inferior things etc. Chiefly, therefore,
Comma^^dement must be given, that such as do ^nhabit this most honorable City,
by no means, despise Geometry. For even those things [done by ^^] which, in
manner, seame to be, beside the purpose of Geometry: are of (...) (...) by
untrue measuring and surueying of Land or Woods, any way. And, this I am sure:
that the Value of the difference, between the truth and such Surueyes, would
have been hable to have found (forever) in each of our two Universities, an
excellent Mathematical Reader: to each, allowing (yearly) a hundred Marks of
lawful money of this realm: which, in deed, would seem requisite, here, to be
had (though by other ways provided for) as well, as the famou^ ^^^ersit^e of
Paris, has two Mathematical Readers: and each, two hundredth French Crowns
yearly, of the French Kings magnificent liberality only. Now, again, to our
purpose returning: Moreover, of the former knowledge Geometrical, are grown
the Skills of Geographie, Chorographie, Hydrographie, and S^^^rithmetrie.

Geographie teaches ways, by which, in sundry forms, (as Spharike, Plain or
other), the Situation of Cities, Towns, Villages, Fortes, Castells,
Mountains, Woods, Havens, Rivers, Crekes, and such other things, upon the
outface of the earthly Globe (either in the whole, or in some principal member
and portion thereof contained) may be described and designed, in co^mensurations
Analogicall to Nature and verity: and most aptly to our view, may be
represented. Of this Art how great pleasure, and how manifold commodities do
come unto us, daily and hourly: of most men, is perceived. While, some, to
beautify their Halls, Parlers, Chambers, Galeries, Studies, or Libraries with:
other some for things past, as battles fought, ^arthquakes, heavenly fyringes,
and such occurentes, in histories mentioned: thereby lively, as it were, to vewe
the place, the region adjoining, the distance from us: and such other
circumstances. Some other, presently to vewe the large dominion of the Turk:
the wide Empire of the Moschouite: and the little morsel of ground, where
Christendom (by profession) is certainly known. Little, I say, in respect of
the rest. etc. Some, either for their own iorneyes directing into far
lands: or to understand of other m^n^ trauaile^. To conclude, some, for one
purpose: and some, for another, likes, loves, ge^^^th, and vse^^, Mappes,
Chartes, and Geographicall Globes. Of whose use, to speak su^^iciently, would
require a book peculi^r.

Chorographie (...)

Hydrographie, delivers to our knowledge, on Globe or in Plain, the perfect
Analogicall description of the Ocean Sea coasts, through the whole world ^ or
in the chief and principal parts thereof: with the ^les and chief
particular places of dangers, contained within the bounds, and Sea coasts
described: as, of Quicksandes, Banks, Pittes, Rocks, Races, Countertides,
Whorlepooles. etc. This, deals with the Element of the water chiefly: as
Geographie did principally take the Element of the Earthes description (with
his appertenances) to task. And besides this, Hydrographie, requires a
particular Register of certain Landmarkes (where marks may be had) from the
sea, well hable to be skried, in what point of the Seacumpase they appear, and
what apparent form, Situation, and bigness they have, in respect of any
dangerous place in the sea, or nere unto it, assigned: And in all Coasts,
what Moan, makes full Sea: and what way, the Tides and Ebbes, come and go, the
Hydrographer ought to record. The Soundinges likewise: and the Channels ways:
their number, and depthes ordinarily, at ebb and flud, ought the Hydrographer,
by observation and diligence of Measuring, to have certainly known. And many
other points, are belonging to perfect Hydrographie, and for to make a
Rutter, by: of which, I need not here speak: as of the describing, in any
place, upon Globe or Plain, the 32. points of the Compase, truly: (whereof,
scarsly four, in England, have right knowledge: because, the lines thereof, are
no straight lines, nor Circles.) Of making due proiection of a Sphere in
plain. Of the Variacion of the Compass, from true North: And such like matters
(of great importance, all) I leave to speak of, in this place: because, I may
seame (al ready) to have enlarged the bounds, and duty of an Hydographer,
much more, then any man (to this day) has noted, or prescribed. Yet am I well
hable to prove, all these things, to appertain, and also to be proper to the
Hydrographer. The chief use and end of this Art, is the Art of Navigations; but
it has other diverse uses: even by them to be enjoyed, that never lack sight
of land.

Stratarithmetrie, is the Skill, (appertainyng to the war,) by which a man
can set in figure, analogicall to any Geometrical figure appointed, any
certain number or sum of men: of such a figure capable: (by reason of the
usual spaces between Soldiers allowed: and for that, of men, can be made no
Fractions. Yet, nevertheless, he can order the given sum of men, for the
greatest such figure, that of them, ca^ be ordered) and certify, of the
overplus: (if any be) and of the next certain sum, which, with the overplus,
will admit a figure exactly proportional to the figure assigned. By which
Skill, also, of any army or company of men: (the figure and sides of whose
orderly standing, or array, is known) he is able to express the just number
of men, within that figure contained: or (orderly) able to be contained. Note.
And this figure, and sides thereof, he is hable to know: either being by, and
at hand: or a far of. Thus far, stretches the description and property of
Stratarithmetrie: sufficient for this time and place. It differreth from the
Feate Tacticall, De acic^us instruendis^ because, The difference between
Strataruhmetrie and Tacticie.
there, is necessary the wisdom and foresight, to what purpose he so ordreth
the men: and Skillfull hability, also, for any occasion, or purpose, to devise
and use the aptest and most necessary order, array and figure of his Company
and Sum of men. By figure, I mean: as, either of a Perfect Square, Triangle,
Circle, Ouale, long square, (of the Greeks it is called Eteromekes) Rhombe,
Rhomboid, Lunular, Ryng, Serpentine, and such other Geometrical figures:
Which, in wars, have been, and are to be used: for commodiousnes, necessity,
and advantage etc. And no small skill ought he to have, that should make true
report, or nere the truth, of the numbers and Sums, of footmen or horsemen,
in the Enemies ordring. A far of, to make an estimate, between nere terms of
More and Less, is not a thing very rife, among those that gladly would do it.
Great policy may be used of the Capitaines, I.D. F^end^^ you will find it
hard, to perform^ my descripti^n of ^his F^ate. But by Ch^r^graphie^ you may
help your self some that: where the Figures known (in Sid^^ and Angles) are
not Regular: And where^ Resolution into Triangles can s^^u^. etc. And yet you
will find it strange to deal thus gener^lly with Arithmeticall figures: and,
that for Battle ^ay. Their co^tent^^^ differ so much from like Geometr^call
Figur^s.
(at times fete, and in places convenient) as to use Figures, which make
greatest show, of so many as he has: and using the advantage of the three
kinds of usual spaces: (between footmen or horsemen) to take the largest: or
when he would seem to have few, (being many:) contrary wise, in Figure, and
space. The Herald, Purseuant, Sergeant Royal, Captain, or who soever is
careful to come nere the truth herein^, besides the Judgment of his expert
eye, his skill of Ordering Tacticall, the help of his Geometrical instrument:
Ring, or Staff Astronomicall: (commodiously framed for carriage and use.) He
may wonderfully help him self, by perspectiue Glasses. In which, (I trust)
our posterity will prove more skillfull and expert, and to greater purposes,
then in these days, can (almost) be credited to be possible.

Thus have I lightly passed over the Artificial Feats, chiefly dependyng upon
vulgar Geometry: and commonly and generally reckened under the name of
Geometry. But there are other (very many) Methodicall Arts, which, declyning
from the purity, simplicity, and Immateriality, of our Principal Science of
Magnitudes: do yet nevertheless use the great aid, direction, and Method of the
said principal Science, and have propre names, and distinct: both from the
Science of Geometry, (from which they are derived) and one from the other. As
Perspectiue, Astronomy, Music, Cosmographie, Astrology, Statike,
Anthropographie, Trochilike, Helicosophie, Pneumatithmie, Menadrie,
Hypogeiodie, Hydragogie, Horometrie, Zographie, Architecture, Navigations,
Thaumaturgike and Archemastrie. I think it necessary, orderly, of these to
give some peculier descriptions: and withal, to touch some of their commodious
uses, and so to make this Preface, to be a little sweet, pleasant Nosegaye for
you: to comfort your Spirits, being almost out of courage, and in despair,
(through brutish brute) Weenyng that Geometry, had but served for buildyng of
an house, or a curious bridge, or the roufe of Westminster hall, or some witty
pretty devise, or engyn, appropriate to a Carpenter, or a Ioyner etc. That the
thing is far otherwise, then the world, (commonly) to this day, has demed,
by word and work, good proof will be made.

Among these Arts, by good reason, Perspectiue ought to be had, ere of
Astronomicall Apparences, perfect knowledge can be atteyned. And because of the
prerogative of Light, being the first of Gods Creatures: and the eye, the light
of our body, and his Sense most mighty, and his organ most Artificial and
Geometrical: At Perspectiue, we will begin therefore. Perspectiue, is an Art
Mathematical, which demonstrateth the manner, and properties, of all Radiations
Direct, Broken, and Reflected. This Description, or Notation, is brief^ but it
reaches so far, as the world is wide. It concerns all Creatures, all
Actions, and passions, by Emanation of beams performed. Beams, or natural
lines, (here) I mean, not of light only, or of color (though they, to eye,
give show, witness, and proof, whereby to ground the Art upon) but also of other
Forms, both Substantial, and Accidental, the certain and determined active
Radiall em^nations. By this Art (omitting to speak of the highest points) we
may use our eyes, and the light, with greater pleasure: and perfecter
Judgment: both of things, in l^ght seen; and of other: which by like order of
Lights Radiations, work and produce their effects. We may be ashamed to be
ignorant of the cause, why so sundry ways our eye is deceived, and abused: as,
while the eye weeneth a round Globe or Sphere (being far of) to be a flat and
plain Circle, and so likewise judges a plain Square, to be round: supposes
walls parallels, to approach, a far of: rofe and flower parallels, the one
to bend downward, the other to rise upward, at a little distance from you.
Again, of things being in like swiftnes of moving, to think the nerer, to
move faster: and the farther, much slower. Nay, of two things, whereof the one
(incomparably) does move swifter then the other, to deem the slower to move
very swift, and the other to stand: what an error is this, of our eye? Of the
Raynbow, both of his Colors, of the order of the colors, of the bigness of it,
the place and heith of it, (etc) to know the causes demonstratiue, is it not
pleasant, is it not necessary? of two or three Sons appearing: of Blasing
Sterres: and such like things: by natural causes, brought to pass, (and yet
nevertheless, of farther matter, Significatiue) is it not commodious for man to
know the very true cause, and occasion Natural? Yea, rather, is it not,
greatly, against the Souerainty of Man's nature, to be so ouershot and abused,
with things (at hand) before his eyes? as with a Pecockes tail, and a Doves
neck: or a whole ore, in water, holden, to seem broken. Things, far of, to
seem nere: and nere, to seem far of. Small things, to seem great: and
great, to seem small. One man, to seem an Army. Or a man to be curstly affrayed
of his own shadow. Yea, so much, to fear, that, if you, being (alone) nere a
certain glass, and proffer, with dagger or sword, to foyne at the glass, you
shall suddenly be moved to give back (in manner) by reason of an Image, A
marvelous Glass.
appearing in the air, between you and the glass, with like hand, sword or
dagger, and with like quicknes, foyning at your very eye, likewise as you do at
the Glass. Strange, this is, to hear of: but more marvelous to behold, then
these my words can signify. And nevertheless by demonstration Opticall, the
order and cause thereof, is certified: even so, as the effect is consequent.
Yea, thus much more, dare I take upon me, toward the satisfying of the noble
courrage, that longs ardently for the wisdom of Causes Natural: as to let
him understand, that, in London, he may wish his own eyes, have proof of that,
which I have said herein. A Gentleman, (which, for his good service, S.W.P.
done to his Country, is famous and honorable: and for skill in the
Mathematical Sciences, and Languages, is the Od man of this kind. etc.) even
he, is hable: and (I am sure) will, very willingly, let the Glass, and proof
be seen: and so I (here) request him: for the increase of wisdom, in the
honorable: and for the stopping of the mouths malicious: and repressing the
arrogance of the ignorant. Ye may easily guess, what I mean. This Art of
Perspectiue, is of that excellency, and may be led, to the certifying, and
executing of such things, as no man would easily believe: without Actual proof
perceived. I speak nothing of Natural Philosophy, which, without
Perspectiue, can not be fully understood, nor perfectly atteined unto. Nor,
of Astronomy: which, without Perspectiue, can not well be grounded: Nor
Astrology, naturally Verified, and avouched. That part hereof, which deals
with Glasses (which name, Glass, is a general name, in this Art, for any
thing, from which, a Beam reboundeth) is called Catoptrike and has so many
uses, both merueilous, and proffitable: that, both, it would hold me to long,
to no^^ therein the principal conclusions, all ready known: And also
(perchance) some things, might lack due credit with you: And I, thereby, to
leese my labor^ and you, to slip into light Judgment
^ Before you have learned sufficiently the power of Nature and Art.

NOw, to proceed: Astronomy, is an Art Mathematical, which demonstrateth the
distance, magnitudes, and all natural motions, apparences, and passions propre
to the Planets and fixed St^rtes: for any time past, present and to come: in
respect of a certain Horizon, or without respect of any Horizon. By this Art
we are certified of the distance of the Starry Sky, and of each Planete from
the Center of the Earth: and of the greatness of any Fixed star seen, or
Planete, in respect of the Earthes greatness. As, we are sure (by this Art)
that the Solidity, Massines and Body of the Son, contains the quantity of
the whole Earth and Sea, a hundred three score and two times, less by 1/^ one
eight part of the earth. But the Body of the whole earthly globe and Sea, is
bigger then the body of the Moon, three and forty times less by 1/^ of the Moon. Wherefore the Son is bigger then the Moon, 7000 times, less, by 59
^^/164 that is, precisely 6940 ^5/^^ bigger then the Moon. And yet the
unskillful man, would judge them a like big. Wherefore, of Necessity, the one
is much farther from us, then the other. The Son; when he is fardest from the
earth (which, now, in our age, is, when he is in the 8. degree, of Cancer) is,
1179 Semidiameters of the Earth, distante. And the Moon when she is fardest
from the earth, is 68 Semidiameters of the earth and 1/^ The nerest, that the Moon comes to the earth, is Semidiameters 52 The distance of the Starry Sky
is, from us, in Semidiameters of the earth 20081 1/^ Twenty thousand
fourscore, one, and almost a half. Subtract from this, the Mones nerest
distance, from the Earth: and thereof remains Semidiameters of the earth 20029
1/^ Twenty thousand nine and twenty and a quarter. Note.
So thick is the heavenly Palace, that the Planetes have all their exercise
in, and most meruailously perform the Commandment and Charge to them given
by the omnipotent Majesty of the king of kings. This is that, which in Genesis
is called Ha Rakia. Consider it well. The Semidiameter of the earth; coteineth
of our common miles 3436 ^/^ three thousand, four hundred thirty six and four
eleventh parts of one mile: Such as the whole earth and Sea, round about, is
21600. One and twenty thousand six hundred of our miles. Allowyng for every
degree of the greatest circle, three score miles. Now if you way well with your
self but this little parcel of f^ute Astronomicall, as concerning the
bigness, Dist^nces of Son, Moan, Sterry Sky, and the huge massines of Ha
Rakia, will you not find your Consciences moved, with the kingly Prophet, to
sing the confession of Gods Glory, and say, The Heavens declare the glory of
God, and the Firmament [Ha-Rakia] shows forth the works of his hands. And
so forth, for those five first staves, of that kingly Psalm. Well, well, It is
time for some to lay hold on wisdom, and to Judge truly of things: and not
so to expound the Holy word, all by Allegories: as to Neglect the wisdom,
power and Goodness of God, in, and by his Creatures, and Creation to be seen and
learned. By parables and Analogies of whose natures and properties, the course
of the Holy Scripture, also, declares to us very many, Mysteries. The whole
Frame of Gods Creatures; (which is the whole world,) is to us, a bright glass:
from which, by reflection, reboundeth to our knowledge and perceiuerance,
Beams, and Radiations^ representing the Image of his Infinite goodnes^
Omnipote^cy, and wisdom. And we thereby, are taught and persuaded to Glorify
our Creator as God: and be thankful therefore. Could the Heathenistes find
these uses, of these most pure, beawtifull, and Mighty Corporal Creatures: and
shall we after that the true Son of right wisenesse is risen above the
Horizon, of our tempor^ll Hemispharie, and has so abundantly streamed into our
hearts, the direct beams of his goodness, mercy, and grace: Whose heat All
Creatures feel: Spiritual and Corpor^ll^ Visible and Invisible: Shall we (I
say) look upon the Heaven, Sterres, and Planets, as an Ox and an Ass does:
no further careful or inquisitiue, what they are: why were they Created, How do
they execute that they were Created for? Seeing, All Creatures, were for our
sake created: and both we, and they, Created, chiefly to glorify the Almighty
Creator: and that, by all means, to us possible. Nolite ignorare (says Plat^
in Epinomis) Astronomiam, Sapientissimu^ quiddam esse. Be ye not ignorant,
Astronomy to be a thing of excellent wisdom. Astronomy, was to us, from the
beginning commended, and in manner commanded by God him self. In as much as he
made the Son, Moan, and Sterres, to be to us, for Signs, and knowledge of
Seasons, and for Distinctions of Days, and years. Many words need not. But I
wish, every man should way this word, Signs. And besides that, confer it
also with the tenth Chapter of Hieremie. And though Some think, that there,
they have found a rod: Yet Modest Reason, will be indifferent Judge, who ought
to be beaten therewith, in respect of our purpose. Leaui^g that: I pray you
understand this: that without great diligence of Observation, examination and
Calculation, their periods and courses (whereby Distinction of Seasons, years,
and New Mones might precisely be known) could not exactely be certified. Which
thing to perform, is that Art, which we here have Defined to be Astronomy.
Whereby, we may have the distinct Course of Times, days, years, and Ages:
as well for Consideration of Sacred Prophesies, accomplished in due time,
foretold: as for high Mystical Solemnities holding: And for all other human
affairs, Conditions, and couenantes, upon certain time, between man and man^
with many other great uses: Wherein, (verily), would be great incertainty,
Confusion, untruth, and bru^ish Barbarousnes: without the wonderful diligence
and skill of this Art: continually learning, and determining Times, and
periodes of Time, by the Record of the heavenly book, wherein all times are
written: and to be read with an Astron^micall ^taffe, instead of a fest^e.

Music, of Motion, has his Original cause: Therefore, after the motions most
swift, and most Slow, which are in the Firmament, of Nature performed: and
under the Astronomers Consideration: now I will Speak of an other kind of
Motion, producing sound, audible, and of Man numerable. Music I call here that
Science, which of the Greeks is called Harmonice. Not meddling with the
Controversy between the ancient Harmonistes, and Ca^onistes. Music is a
Mathematical Science, which teaches; by sense and reason, perfectly to judge,
and order the diversities of soundes, hye and low. Astronomy and Music are
Sisters; says Plato. As, for Astronomy, the eyes: So, for Harmonious Motion,
the cares were made. But as Astronomy has a more divine Contemplation, and
commodity, then mortal eye can perceive: So, is Music to be considered, that
the 1.
Mind may be pref^r^ed, before the ear. And from audible sound, we ought to
ascend, to the examination: which numbers are Harmonious, and which not. And
why, either, the one are: or the other are not. I could at large, in the
heavenly 2.
motions and distances, describe a meruallous Harmony, of Pythagoras. Harp
Mercurius 3.
two Harpes, each of four Stringes Elementall. And very strange matter, might
be alleged of the Harmo^^e, to our 5.
Spiritual part appropriate. As in Pt^lom^us third book, in the fourth and
sixth Chapters may appear. 6.
And what is the cause of the apt bond, and friendly fellowship, of the
Intellectual and Mental part of us, with our gross and corruptible body: but
a certain Mean, and Harmonious Spiritualitie, with both participatyng, and of
both (i^ a manner) (...)? In the 7.
T^ne of Man's voice, and also 8.
the sound of Instrument, what might be said, of Harmony: No common Musicien
would lightly believe. But of the sundry Mixture (as I may term it) and
concurse, I.D. Read in Aristotle his 8. book of Politikes: the 5, 6, and 7.
chapters. Where you shall have some occasion farther to think of Music, than
commonly is thought.
diverse collation, and Application of these Harmonies: as of three, four,
five, or mo: Maruailous have the effects ben: and yet may be found, and
produced the like: with some proportional consideration for our time, and
being: in respect of the State, of the things then: in which, and by which,
the wondrous effects were wrought. Democritus and Theophrastus affirmed, that,
by Music, griefs and diseases of the Mind, and body might be cured, or
inferred. And we find in Record, that Terpander, Arion, Ismenias, Orpheus,
Amphion, David, Pythagoras, Empedocles, Asclepiades and Timotheus, by
Harmonicall Consona^cy, have done, and brought to pas, things, more then
marvelous, to here of. Of them then, making no farther discourse, in this
place: Sure I am, that Common Music, commonly used, is found to the Musiciens
and Hearers, to be so Commodious and pleasant, That if I would say and dispute,
but thus much: That it were to be otherwise used, then it is, I should find
more repreeuers, then I could find privy, or skillful of my meaning. In
things therefore evident, and better known, then I can express: and so
allowed and liked of, (as I would wish, some other things, had the like hap) I
will spare to enlarge my lines any farther, but consequently follow my purpose.

Of Cosmographie, I appointed briefly in this place, to give you some
intelligence. Cosmographie, is the whole and perfect description of the
heavenly, and also elementall part of the world, and their homologall
application, and mutual collation necessary. This Art, requires Astronomy,
Geographie, Hydrographie and Music. Therefore, it is no small Art, nor so
simple, as in common practice, it is (slightly) considered. This matcheth
Heaven, and the Earth, in one frame, and aptly applies parts Correspo^dent:
So, as, the Heavenly Globe, may (in practice) be duly described upon the
Geographicall, and Hydrographicall Globe. And there, for us to consider an
AEquinoctiall Circle, an Ecliptike line, Colures, Poles, Sterr^s in their true
Longitudes, Latitudes, Declinations, and Verticalitie: also Climes, and
Parallels: and by an Horizon annexed, and revolution of the earthly Globe (as
the Heaven, is^ by the Pr^mouan^, carried about in 24^ aequall Hours) to learn
the Risinges and Settinges of Sterres (of Virgill in his Georgikes: of Hes^od:
of Hippocrates in his Medicinal Sphare, to Perdic^^ King of the Macedonians:
of Diocles, to King Antigonus, and of other famous Philosophers prescribed) a
thing necessary, for due manuring of the earth, for Navigations, for the
Alteration of man's body^ being, whole, Sick, wounded, or bruised. By the
Revolution, also, or moving of the Globe Cosmographicall, the Rising and
Setting of the Son: the Lengthes, of days and nights: the Hours and times
(both night and day) are known: with very many other pleasant and necessary
uses: Whereof, some are known: but better remain, for such to know and use who
of a spark of true fire, can make a wonderful bonfire, by applying of due
matter, duly.


Of Astrology, here I make an Ar^e, several from Astronomie^ not by new
devise, but by good reason and authority: for, Astrology, is an Art
Mathematical, which reasonably demonstrateth the operations and effects, of
the natural beams, of light, and secret influence: of the Sterres and
Planets: in every element and elementall body: at all times, in any Horizon
assigned. This Art is furnished with many other great Arts and experiences:
As with perfect Perspectiue, Astronomy, Cosmographie, Natural Philosophy of
the 4. Elements, the Art of Graduation, and some good understanding in
Music: and yet moreover, with an other great Art, hereafter following, though
I, here, set this before, for some considerations me moving. Sufficient (you
see) is the stuff, to make this rare and secret Art, of: and hard enough to
frame to the Conclusion Syllogisticall. Yet both the manifold and continual
travails of the most ancient and wise Philosophers, for the atteyning of this
Art: and by examples of effects, to confirm the same: has left unto us
sufficient proof and witness: and we, also, daily may perceive, That man's
body, and all other Elementall bodies, are altered, disposed, ordered,
pleasured, and displeasured, by the Influentiall working of the Sun, Moan,
and the other Stars and Planets. And therefore, says Aristotle, in the first
of his Meteorologicall books, in the second Chapter: Est autem necessario
Mundus iste, supernis lationibus fere continuus. Vt, inde, vis eius vniuersa
regatur. Ea siquidem Causa prima putanda omnibus est, vnde motus principium
existit. That is: This [Elementall] World is of necessity, almost, next
adjoining, to the heavenly motions: That, from thence, all his virtue or force
may be governed. For, that is to be thought the first Cause unto all: from
which, the beginning of motion, is. And again, in the tenth Chapter. Op^rtet
igitur and horum principia sumamus, and causas omnium similiter. Principium
igitur vy mouens, praecipuumque and omnium primum, Circulus ille est, in quo
manifest Solis latio, etc. And so forth. His Meteorologicall books, are full
of arguments, and effectual demonstrations, of the virtue, operation, and
power of the heavenly bodies, in and upon the four Elements, and other
bodies, of them (either perfectly, or imperfectly) composed. And in his second
book, De Generatione and Corruptione, in the tenth Chapter. Quocirca and prima
lati^, Or^us and Interitus causa non est: Sed obliqui Circuli latio: ea namque
and continua est, and duobus motibus fit: In English, thus. Wherefore the
uppermost motion, is not the cause of Generation and Corruption, but the motion
of the Zodiake: for, that, both, is continual, and is caused of two mouinges.
And in his second book, and second Chapter of his Physikes. Homo namque
generat hominem, atque Sol. For Man (says he) and the Son, are cause of man's
generation. Authorities may be brought, very many: both of 1000. 2000. yea and
3000. years Antiquity: of great Philosophers, Expert, Wise, and godly men,
for that Conclusion: which, daily and hourly, we men, may discern and
perceive by sense and reason: All beasts do feel, and simply show, by their
actions and passions, outward and inward; All Plants, Herbs, Trees, Flowers,
and Fruits. And finally, the Elements, and all things of the Elements
composed, do give Testimony (as Aristotle said) that their Whole Dispositions,
virtues, and natural motions, depend of the Actiuitie of the heavenly motions
and Influences. Whereby, beside the specificall order and form, due to every
seed: and beside the Nature, propre to the Individual Matrix, of the thing
produced: What shall be the heavenly Impression, the perfect and circumspecte
Astrologien has to Conclude. Not only (by Apotelesmes) (...) but by Natural
and Mathematical demonstration (...). Whereunto, what Sciences are requis^te
(without exception) I partly have here warned: And in my Brop^de^^^^ besides
other matter there disclosed) I have Mathematically furnished up the whole
Method: To this our age, not so carefully handled by any, that ever I saw, or
heard of. I was, (for Anno. 1548 and 1549. in Louayn.
^1. years ago) by certain earnest disputations, of the Learned G^^ardus
M^rc^t^^, and (...) Goga^a, (and other,) thereto so provoked: and (by my
constant and invincible zeal to the verity) in observations of Heavenly
Influencies (to the Min^te of time,) than, so diligent: And chiefly by the
Supernatural influence, from the Star of Jacob, so directed; That any Modest
and Sober Student, carefully and diligently sel^ing for the Truth, will both
find and confess, therein, to be the Verity, of these my words: And also
become a Reasonable Reformer, of three Sorts of people: about these
Influentiall Operations, greatly erring from the truth. Whereof, the one, is
Light Beleuers, the other, Note.
Light Despisers, and the third Light Practisers. The first, and most common
Sort, think the Heaven and Sterres, to be answerable to any their doutes or
desires: Sun, Moan and Sterres (being so many, so pure, so bright, so
wonderful big, so far in distance, so manifold in their motions, so
constant in their periodes. etc.) they assign a slight, simple office or two,
and so allow unto the^ (according to their capacities) as much virtue, and
power Influentiall, as to the Sign of the Sun, Moan, and seven Sterres,
hanged up (for Signs) in London, for distinction of houses, and such gross
helps, in our wordly affairs: And they understand not (or will not
understand) of the other workinges, and virtues of the Heavenly Sun, Moan,
and Sterres: not so much, as the Mariner, or Husband man^ no, not so much as
the Elephant does, as the Cynocephalus, as the Por^entine does: nor will allow
these perfect, and incorruptible mighty bodies, so much vertuall Radiation, and
Force, as they see in a little piece of a Magnes stone: which, at great
distance, shows his operation. And perchance they think, the Sea and Rivers
(as the Thames) to be some quick thing, and s^ to ebb, and slow, run in and
out, of them selves, at ^hei^ own fantasies. God help God help. Surely,
these men come to short: and either are to dull: or wilfully blind: or,
perhaps, to malicious. The third man, is the common and vulgar Astrologien, or
Practiser: who, being not duly, artificially, and perfectly Wary, and modest
Astrologien: and to the robbing of those most noble corporal Creatures, of
their Natural Virtue: being most mighty: most beneficial to all elementall
Generation, Corr^p^ion and the appa^^^nances^ and most Harmonious in their
Monarchy: For which things, being ^nowen, and modestly used: we might highly
and continually glorify God, with the princely Prophet saying. The Heavens
declare the Glory of God: who made the Heavens in his wisdom: who made the
Son, for to have dominion of the day: the Moon and Sterres to have dominion
of the night: whereby, Day to day ^^^^reth tal^^^ and night, to night declares
knowledge. Praise him, all ye St^rr^s, and Light. Amen.

IN order, now follows, of Statike, somewhat to say, what we mean by that
name^ and what (...) does, on (...) Art, depend. Statike, is an Art
Mathematical, which demonstra^^th the causes of heauynes, and lightness of all
things: and of motions and properties, to heauynes and lightness belonging^ And
for as much as by the Bilanx, or Balance (as the chief sensible Instrument,)
Experience of these demonstrations may be had: we call this Art, Statike: that
is, the Experimentes of the Balance. Oh; that men wist, what proffit, (all
manner of ways) by this Art might grow, to the hable examiner, and diligent
practiser. Thou only, know all things precisely (O God) who have made
weight and Balance, thy Judgment: who have created all things in Number,
Weight, and Measure: and have wayed the mountains and hills in a Balance: who
have peysed in thy hand, both Heaven and earth. We therefore warned by the
Sacred word, to Consider thy Creatures: and by that consideration, to win a
glyms (as it were,) or shadow of perceiuerance, that thy wisdom, might, and
goodness is infinite, and unspeakable, in thy Creatures declared: And being
farther advertised, by thy merciful goodness, that, three principal ways,
were, of the, used in Creation of all thy Creatures, namely, Number, Weight and
Measure, And for as much as, of Number and Measure, the two Arts (ancient,
famous, and to human uses most necessary,) are, all ready, sufficiently
known and extant: This third key, we beseech thee (through thy accustomed
goodness,) that it may come to the needful and sufficient knowledge, of such
thy Servants, as in thy workmanship, would gladly find, thy true occasions
(purposely of the used) whereby we should glorify thy name, and show forth (to
the weaklinges in faith) thy wondrous wisdom and Goodness. Amen.

Marvel nothing at this pang (godly friend, you Gentle and zealous Student.) An
other day, perchance, you will perceive, what occasion moved me. Here, as now,
I will give you some ground, and withal some show, of certain commodities, by
this Art arising. And because this Art is rare, my words and practices might
be to dark: vnleast you had some light, holden before the matter: and that,
best will be, in giving you, out of Archimedes demonstrations, a few principal
Conclusions, as follows.

1. The Superficies of every Liquor, by it self consistyng, and in quiet, is
Sphaericall: the center whereof, is the same, which is the center of the Earth.
2. If Solid Magnitudes, being of the same bigness, or quantity, that any
Liquor is, and having also the same Weight: be let down into the same Liquor,
they will settle downward, so, that no part of them, shall be above the
Superficies of the Liquor: and yet nevertheless, they will not sink utterly
down, or drown. 3. If any Solid Magnitude being Lighter then a Liquor, be
let down into the same Liquor, it will settle down, so far into the same
Liquor, that so great a quantity of that Liquor, as is the part of the Solid
Magnitude, settled dow^e into the same Liquor ^ is in Weight, aequall, to the
weight of the whole Solid Magni^ude. 4. Any Solid Magnitude, Lighter then a
Liquor, forced down into the same Liquor, will move upward, with so great a
power, by how much, the Liquor having aequall quantity to the whole Magnitude,
is heauyer then the same Magnitude. 5. Any Solid Magnitude, heauyer then a
Liquor, being let down into the same Liquor, will sink down utterly: And
will be in that Liquor, Lighter by so much, as is the weight or heauynes of the
Liquor, having bygnes or quantity, aequall to the Solid Magnitude. 6. If any
Solid Magnitude, Lighter then a Liquor, I.D. The Cutting of a Sphare according
to any proportion assigned may by this proposition be done Mechanically by
tempering L^quor to a certain weight in respect of the weight of the Sphare
(...) Swy^^^ng.
be let down into the same Liquor, the weight of the same Magnitude, will be,
to the Weight of the Liquor. (Which is aequall in quantity to the whole
Magnitude,) in that proportion, that the part, of the Magnitude settled down,
is to the whole Magnitude.
BY these verities, great Errors may be reformed, in Opinion of the Natural
Motion of things, Light and Heavy. Which errors, are in Natural Philosophy
(almost) of all me^ allowed: to much trusting to Authority: and false
Suppositions. As, Of any two bodies, the heauyer, to move downward faster then
the lighter. This error, is not first by me, Noted: A common error^ noted.
but by one John Baptist de Benedictis. The chief of his propositions, is this:
which seems a Paradox.

If there be two bodies of one form, and of one kind, aequall in quantity or
unequal, they will move by aequall space, A paradox.
in aequall time: So that both their mouynges be in air, or both in water: or
in any one Middle.

Hereupon, in the feate of Gunnyng, certain good discourses (otherwise) may
receive great amendment, and furderance. N. T.
In the intended purpose, also, allowing somewhat to the imperfection of Nature:
The wonderful use of these Propositions.
not aunswerable to the precisenes of demonstration. Moreover, by the foresaid
propositions (wisely used.) The Air, the water, the Earth, the Fire, may be
nerely, known, how light or heavy they are (Naturally) in their ^^^gned
parts: or in the whole. And then, to things Elementall, turning your
practice: you may deal for the proportion of the Elements, in the things
Compounded. Then, to the proportions of the Humors in Man: their waightes: and
the weight of his bones, and flesh. etc. Than, by weight, to have consideration
of the Force of man, any manner of way: in whole or in part. Then, may you, of
Ships water drawing, diversely, in the Sea and in fresh water, have pleasant
consideration: and of waying up of any thing, sonken in Sea or in fresh water
etc. And (to lift up your head a loft:) by weight, you may, as precisely, as by
any instrument else, measure the Diameters of Son and Moan. etc. Friend, I
pray you, way these things, with the just Balance of Reason. And you will
find Meruailes upon Meruailes: And esteem one Drop of Truth (yea in Natural
Philosophy) more worth, then whole Libraries of Opinions, vndemonstrated: or
not aunswering to Natures Law, and your experience. Leaving these things,
thus: I will give you two or three, light practices, to great purpose^ and so
finish my Annotation Staticall. In Mathematical matters, by the Mechaniciens
aid, we will behold, here, the Commodity of weight. Make a Cube, of any one
Uniform: The practice Staticall, to know the proportion, between the Cube, and
the Sphare.
and through like heavy stuff: of the same Stuff, make a Sphaere or Globe,
precisely, of a Diameter aequall to the Radical side of the Cube. Your stuff,
may be wood, Copper, Tin, Lead, Silver. etc. (being, as I said, of like
nature, condition, and like weight throughout.) And you may, by Say Balance,
have prepared a great number of the smallest waightes: which, by those Balance
can be discerned or tried: and so, have proceeded to make you a perfect Pyle,
company and Number of waightes: to the weight of six, eight, or twelve pound
weight: most diligently tried, all. And of every one, the Content known, in
your least weight, that is wayable. [They that can not have these waightes of
precisenes: may, by Sand, Uniform, and well dusted, make them a number of
waightes, somewhat nere precisenes: by halfing ever the Sand: they shall, at
length, come to a least common weight. Therein, I leave the farther matter, to
their discretion, whom need shall pinche.] The Venetians consideration of
weight, may seem precise enough: I. D.
by eight descentes progressionall, For, so, have you. 256. parts of a Grain.
halfing, from a grain. Your Cube, Sphaere, apt Balance, and convenient
waightes, being ready: fall to work. ^. First, way your Cube. Note the Number
of the weight. Way, after that, your Sphaere. Note likewise, the Number of the
weight. If you now find the weight of your Cube, to be to the weight of the
Sphaere, as 21. is to 11: Then you see, how the Mechanicien and Experimenter,
without Geometry and Demonstration, are (as nerely in effect) tought the
proportion of the Cube to the Sphere: as I have demonstrated it, in the end of
the twelfth book of Euclide. Often, try with the same Cube and Sphaere. Then,
change, your Sphaere and Cube, to an other matter: or to an other bigness: till
you have made a perfect universal Experience of it. Possible it is, that you
shall win to nerer terms, in the proportion.

When you have found this one certain Drop of Natural verity, proceed on, to
Infer, and duly to make assay, of matter depending. As, because it is well
demonstrated, that a Cylinder, whose heith, and Diameter of his base, is
aequall to the Diameter of the Sphaere, is Sesquialter to the same Sphaere
(that is, as 3. to 2:) To the number of the weight of the Sphaere, add half
so much, as it is: and so have you the number of the weight of that Cylinder.
Which is also Comprehended of our former Cube: So, that the base of that
Cylinder, is a Circle described in the Square, which is the base of our Cube.
But the Cube and the Cylinder, being both of one heith, have their Bases in the
same proportion, in the which, they are, one to an other, in their Massines or
Soliditie. But, before, we have two numbers, expressing their Massines,
Solidities, and Quantities, by weight: wherefore, we have The proportion of the
Square to the Circle ins^ribed.
the proportion of the Square, to the Circle, inscribed in the same Square. And
so are we fallen into the knowledge sensible, and Experimental of Archimedes
great Secret: of him, by great travail of mind, sought and found. Wherefore,
to any Circle given, you can give a Square aequall: The Squa^ing of the Cir^le.
M^^hani^ally.
as I have taught, in my Annotation, upon the first proposition of the twelfth
book, And likewise, to any Square given, you may give a Circle aequall: To any
Squir^ g^uen^ to (...).
If you describe a Circle, which shall be in that proportion, to your Circle
inscribed, as the Square is to the same Circle: This, you may do, by my
Annotations, upon the second proposition of the twelfth book of Euclide, in my
third Problem there. Your diligence may come to a proportion, of the Square to
the Circle inscribed, nerer the truth, then is the proportion of 14. to 11. And
consider, that you may begin at the Circle and Square, and so come to conclude
of the Sphaere, and the Cube, what their proportion is: as now, you came from
the Sph^ere to the Circle. For, of Silver, or Gold, or Latton Lamyns or plates
(thorough one hole drawn, as the manner is) if you make a Square figure^ and
way it: and then, describing thereon, the Circle inscribed: and cut of, and file
away, precisely (to the Circle) the overplus of the Square: you shall then,
waying your Circle, see, whether the weight of the Square, be to your Circle,
as 14. to 11. As I have Noted, in the beginning of Euclides twelfth book. etc.
after this resort to my last proposition, upon the last of the twelfth. And
there, help your self, to the end. And, here, Note this, Note Squaring of the
Circle without knowledge of the proportion between Circumference and Diameter.
by the way. That we may Square the Circle, without having knowledge of the
proportion, of the Circumference to the Diameter: as you have here perceived.
And otherwise also, I can demonstrate it. So that, many have cumberd them
selves superfluously, by travailing in that point first, which was not of
necessity, first: and also very intricate. And easily, you may, (and that
diversely) come to the knowledge of the Circumference: the Circles Quantity,
being first known. Which thing, I leave to your consideration: making have to
despatch an other Magistrall Problem: and to bring it, nerer to your
knowledge, and readier dealing with, then the world (before this day,) had it
for you, that I can tell of. And that is, A Mechanical Dubblyng of the Cube:
etc. To Dubble the Cube redily: by Art Mechanical: depending upon
Demonstration Mathematical.
Which may, thus, be done: Make of Copper plates, or Tyn plates, a foursquare
upright Pyramid, or a Cone: perfectly fashioned in the holow, within. Wherein,
let great diligence be used, to approach (as nere as may be) to the
Mathematical perfection of those figures. At their bases, let them be all
open: every where, else, most close, and just to. From the vertex, to the
Circumference of the base of the Cone: and to the sides of the base of the
Pyramid: Let 4. straight lines be drawn, in the inside of the Cone and
Pyramid: I. D. The 4. sides of this Pyrami^ must be 4. Isosceles Triangles ^
lik^ and ^quall.
making at their fall, on the perimeters of the bases, equal angles on both
sides them selves, with the said perimeters. These 4. lines (in the Pyramid:
and as many, in the Cone) divide: one, in 12. aequall parts: and an other, in
24. an other, in 60, and an other, in 100. (reckenyng up from the vertex.) Or
use other numbers of division, I. D.
as experience shall reach you^ Then, In all work^nge^ with this Pyramid or
Cone. Let their Situation^ be in all Pointe^ and Conditions, a like, o^ all
one: while you are about ^ne work. Else you will (...).
set your Cone or Pyramid, with the vertex downward, perpendicularly, in
respect of the Base. (Though it be otherwise, it hinders nothing.) So let
the^ most stedily be stayed. Now, if there be a Cube, which you would have
Dubbled. Make you a pretty Cube of Copper, Silver, Lead, Tynne, Wood, Stone, or
Bone. Or else make a hollow Cube, or Cubi^ coffen, of Copper, Silver, Tynne, or
Wood etc. These, you may so proportion in respect of your Pyramid or Cone, that
the Pyramid or Cone, will be hable to contain the weight of them, in wa^^, 3.
or 4. times: at the least: what stuff so ever they be made of^ Let not your
Solid angle, at the vertex, be to sharp: but that the water may come with
ease, to the very vertex, of your hollow Cone or Pyramid. Put one of your Solid
Cubes in a Balance apt: I. D.
take the weight thereof exactly in water. Power that water, (without loss)
into the hollow Pyramid or Cone, quietly. Mark in your lines, what numbers the
water Cutteth: Take the weight of the same Cube againe^ in the same kind of
water, which you had before: put that Consider well when you must put your
wate^^ together: and when, you must empty you^ first water^ out of your Pyrami^
or Cone. El^ you will (...).
also, into the Pyramid or Cone, where you did put the first. Mark now again,
in what number or place of the lines, the water Cutteth them. Two ways you may
conclude your purpose: it is to wete, either by numbers or lines. By numbers:
as, if you divide the side of your Fundamental Cube into so many aequall
parts, as it is capable of, conveniently, with your ease, and precisenes of
the division. For, as the number of your first and less line (in your hollow
Pyramid or Cone,) is to the second or greater (both being counted from the
vertex) so shall the number of the side of your Fundamental Cube, be to the
number belonging to the Radical side, of the Cube, dubble to your Fundamental
Cube: Which being multiplied Cubik wise, will sone show it self, whether it be
dubble or no, to the Cubik number of your Fundamental Cube. By lines, thus: As
your less and first line, (in your hollow Pyramid or Cone,) is to the second
or greater, so let the Radical side of your Fundame^tall Cube, be to a fourth
proportional line, by the 12. proposition, of the sixth book of Euclide. Which
fourth line, shall be the Rote Cubik, or Radical side of the Cube, dubble to
your Fundamental Cube: which is the thing we desired. For this, may I (with
joy) say, EYPHKA, EYPHKA, EYPHKA: thanking the holy and glorious Trinity:
having greater cause thereto, then Vitruuius. Lib. 9. Cap. 3.

God b^ thanked ^or this Inuention^ and the frui^e ^nsuing.


Archimedes had (for finding the fraud used in the Kings Crown, of Gold): as
all men may easily Judge: by the diversity of the fruit following of the one,
and the other. Where I spoke before, of a hollow Cubik Coffen: the like use, is
of it: and without weight. Thus. Fill it with water, precisely full, and pour
that water into your Pyramid or Cone. And here note the lines cutting in your
Pyramid or Cone. Again, fill your coffen, like as you did before. Put that
Water, also, to the first^ Mark the second cutting of your lines. Now, as you
proceeded before, so must you here proceed. Note.
And if the Cube, which you should Double, be never so great: you have, thus,
the proportion (in small) between your two little Cubes: And then, the side, of
that great Cube (to be doubled) being the third, will have the fourth, found,
to it proportional: by the 12. of the sixth of Eu^lide.

Note, as concerning the Sphaericall Super^icies of the water.
Note, that all this while, I forget not my first Proposition Staticall, here
rehearsed: that, the Supersicies of the water, is Sphaericall. Wherein, use
your discretion: to the first line, adding a small hear breadth, more: and to
the second, half a hear breadth more, to his length. For, you will easily
perceive, that the difference can be no greater, in any Pyramid or Cone, of you
to be handled. Which you shall thus try. For ^inding the swelling of the water
above level. Square the Semidiameter,
from the Center of the earth, to your first Waters Superficies. Square then,
half the Subtendent of that watery Superficies (which Subtendent must have the
equal parts of his measure, all one, with those of the Semidiameter of the
earth to your watery Superficies): Subtracte this square, from the first: Of the
residue, take the Rote Square. That Ro^e, Subtracte from your first
Semidiameter of the earth to your watery Superficies: that, which remains, is
the heith of the water, in the middle, above the level. Which, you will find,
to be a thing insensible. And though it were greatly sensible, Note.
yet, by help of my sixth Theoreme upon the last Proposition of Euclides
twelfth book, noted: you may reduce all, to a true Level. But, farther
diligence, of you is to be used, against accidental causes of the waters
swelling: as by having (somewhat) with a moy^t Sponge, before, made moist your
hollow Pyramid or Cone, will prevent an accidental cause of Swelling, etc.
Experience will teach you abundantly: with great ease, pleasure, and commodity.

Note this Abridge^ent of Dubbling (...) Cube. ^^.
Thus, may you Double the Cube Mechanically, Treble it, and so forth, in any
proportion. Now will I Abridge your pain, cost, and Care herein. Without all
preparing of your Fundamental Cubes: you may (alike) work this Conclusion.
For, that, was rather a kind of Experimental demo^stration, then the shortest
way: and all, upon one Mathematical Demonstration depending. Take water (as
much as conveniently will serve your turn: as I warned before of your
Fundamental Cubes bigness) Way it precisely. Put that water, into your Pyramid
or Cone. Of the same kind of water, then take again, the same weight you had
before: put that likewise into the Pyramid or Cone. For, in each time, your
marking of the lines, how the Water does cut them, shall give you the
proportion between the Radical sides, of any two Cubes, whereof the one is
Double to the other: working as before I have taught you: Note. *
saving that for you Fundamental Cube his Radical side: here, you may take a
right line, at pleasure.

Yet farther proceeding with our drop of Natural truth: you may (now) give
Cubes, one to the other, in any proportion given: To give Cubes one to the
other in any proportion, Rational or Irrational.
Rational or Irrational: on this manner. Make a hollow Parallelipipedon of
Copper or Tin: with one Base wanting, or open: as in our Cubike Coffen. From
the bottom of that Parallelipipedon, raise up, many perpendiculars, in every
of his four sides. Now if any proportion be assigned you, in right lines: Cut
one of your perpendiculars (or a line equal to it, or less then it) likewise:
by the 10. of the sixth of Euclide. And those two parts, set in two sundry
lines of those perpendiculars (or you may set them both, in one line) making
their beginninges, to be, at the base: and so their lengthes to extend upward.
Now, set your hollow Parallelipipedon, upright, perpendicularly, steadie. Pour
in water, handsomely, to the heith of your shorter line. Pour that water, into
the hollow Pyramid or Cone. Mark the place of the rising. Settle your hollow
Parallelipipedon again. Pour water into it: unto the heith of the second
line, exactly. Pour that water Emptying the first.
duly into the hollow Pyramid or Cone: Mark now again, where the water
cutteth the same line which you marked before. For, there, as the first marked
line, is to the second: So shall the two Radical sides be, one to the other,
of any two Cubes: which, in their Soliditie, shall have the same proportion,
which was at the first assigned: were it Rational or Irrational.

Thus, in sundry ways you may furnishe your self with such strange and
profitable matter: which, long has been wished for. And though it be Naturally
done and Mechanically: yet has it a good Demonstration Mathematical. The
demonstrations of this Dubbling of the Cube, and o^ the rest.
Which is this^ Always, you have two Like Pyramids: or two Like Cones, in the
proportions assigned: and like Pyramids or Cones, are in proportion, one to the
other, in the proportion of their Homologall sides (or lines) tripled.
Wherefore, if to the first, and second lines, found in your hollow Pyramid or
Cone, you join a third and a fourth, in continual proportion: that fourth
line, shall be to the first, as the greater Pyramid or Cone, is to the less:
by the 33^ of the eleventh of Euclide. If Pyramid to Pyramid, I.D.
or Cone to Cone, be double, then shall Here (...) of the water.
Line to Line, be also double, etc. But, as our first line, is to the second,
so is the Radical side of our Fundamental Cube, to the Radical side of the
Cube to be made, or to be doubled: and therefore, to those twain also, a third
and a fourth line, in continual proportion, joined: will give the fourth line
in that proportion to the first, as our fourth Pyramidall, or Conike line, was
to his first: but that was double, or treble, etc. as the Pyramids or Cones
were, one to an other (as we have proved) therefore, this fourth, shall be also
double or treble to the first, as the Pyramids or Cones were one to an other:
But our made Cube, is described of the second in proportion, of the four
proportional lines: therefore By the 33. of the eleventh books of Euclide.
as the fourth line, is to the first, so is that Cube, to the first Cube: and
we have proved the fourth line, to be to the first, as the Pyramid or Cone, is
to the Pyramid o^ Cone: Wherefore the Cube is to the Cube, I.D.
as Pyramid is to Pyramid, or Cone is to Cone. But we And your diligence in
pra^^ise, can ^o (in weight of wate^^ pe^forme it: Therefore. now, you ar^ able
to ^eue good reason of your whole doing.
Suppose Pyramid to Pyramid, or Cone to Cone, to be double or treble. etc.
Therefore Cube, is to Cube, double, or treble, etc. Which was to be
demonstrated. And of the Parallelipipedo^, it is evident, that the water Solid
Parallelipipedons, are one to the other, as their heithes are, seeing they have
one base. Wherefore the Pyramids or Cones, made of those water
Parallelipipedons, are one to the other, as the lines are (one to the other)
between which, our proportion was assigned. But the Cubes made of lines, after
the proportion of the Pyramidal or Conik homologall lines, are one to the
other, as the Pyramides or Cones are, one to the other (as we before did prove)
therefore, the Cubes made, shall be one to the other, as the lines assigned, are
one to the other: Which was to be demonstrated. Note. Note this Corollary.
This, my Demonstration is more general, then only in Square Pyramid or Cone:
Consider well. Thus, have I, both Mathematically and Mechanically, ben very
long in words: yet (I trust) nothing tedious to them, who, to these things,
are well a^fected. And verily I am forced (avoiding prolixitie) to omit sundry
such things, easy to be practiced: which to the Mathematicien, would be a
great Threasure: and to the Mechanicien, no small gain. The great Commodities
following of these new Inventions.
Now may you, Between two lines given, find two middle proportionals, in
Continual proportion: by the hollow Parallelipipedon, and the hollow Pyramid,
or Cone. Now, any Parallelipipedon rectangle being given: three right lines may
be found, proportional in any proportion assigned, of which, shall be produced
a Parallelipipedon, aequall to the Parallelipipedon given. Hereof, I noted
somewhat, upon the 36. proposition, of the 11. book of Euclide. Now, all those
things, which Vitruuius in his Architecture, specified hable to be done, by
dubbling of the Cube^ Or, by finding of two middle proportional lines, between
two lines given, may easily be performed. Now, that Problem, which I noted
unto you, in the end of my Addition, upon the 34. of the 11. book of Euclide,
is proved possible. Now may any regular body, be Transformed into an other,
etc. Now, any regular body: any Sphere, yea any Mixed Solid: and (that more is)
Irregular Solides, may be made (in any proportion assigned) like unto the body,
first given. Thus, of a Manneken, (as the Dutch Painters term it) in the same
Symmetrie, may a Giant be made: and that, with any gesture, by the Manneken
used: and contrariwise. Now, may you, of any Mould, or Model of a Ship, make
one, of the same Mould (in any assigned proportion) bigger or lesser. Now, may
you, of any
Gunne, or little piece of ordinance, make an other, with the same Symm^tri^
(in all points) as great, and as little, as you will. Mark that: and think
on it. Infinitely, may you apply this, so long sought for, and now so easily
concluded: and withal, so willingly and frankly communicated to such, as
faithfully deal with virtuous studies. Thus, can the Mathematical mind, Such
is the Fruit of the Mathematical Sciences and Arts.
deal Speculatiuely in his own Art: and by good means, Mount above the
clouds and sterres^ And thirdly, he can, by order, Descend, to frame Natural
things, to wonderful uses: and when he list, retire home into his own
Center: and there, prepare more Means, to Ascend or Descend by: and, all, to
the glory of God, and our honest delectation in earth.

Although, the Printer, has looked for this Praeface, a day or two, yet could
I not bring my pen from the paper, before I had given you comfortable warning,
and brief instructions, of some of the Commodities, by Statike, hable to be
reaped: In the rest, I will therefore, be as brief, as it is possible: and with
all, describing them, somewhat accordingly. And that, you shall perceive, by
this, which in order comes next. For, whereas, it ^s so ample and wonderful,
that, an whole year long, one might find fruitful matter therein, to speak
of: and also in pr^ctise, is a Threasure endeles: yet will I glanse over it,
with words very few.

THis do I call Anthropographie. Which is an Art restored, and of my preferment
to your Service. I pray you, think of it, as of one of the chief points, of
Humane knowledge. Although it be, but now, first Confirmed, with this new name:
yet the matter, has from the beginning, ben in consideration of all perfect
Philosophers. Anthropographie, is the description of the Number, Measure,
Weight, figure, Situation, and color of every diverse thing, contained in the
perfect body of MAN: with certain knowledge of the Symmetrie, figure, weight,
Characterization, and due local motion, of any parcel of the said body,
a^signed^ and of Numbers, to the said parcel appertainyng. This, is the one
part of the Desinition, mete for this place: Sufficient to notify, the
particularitie, and excellency of the Art: and why it is, here, ascribed to
the Mathematicals. If the description of the heavenly part of the world, had ^
^eculier Art, called Astronomy: If the description of the earthly Globe, has
h^^ ^^culier art, called Geographie. If the Matching of both, has his
peculier Art, called Cosmographie: Which is the Description of the whole, and
universal frame of the world: Why should not the description of him, who is
the Less world: and, from the beginning, called Microcosmus (that is. The
Less World. MAN is the Less World.
) And for whose sake, and service, all bodily creatures else, were created: Who,
also, participateth with Spirits, and Angels: and is made to the Image and
similitude of God: have his peculier Art? and be called the Art of Arts:
rather, then, either to want a name, or to have to base and impropre a name?
You must of sundry professions, borow or challenge home, peculier parts
hereof: and farther proceed: as, God, Nature, Reason and Experience shall
inform you. The Anatomistes will restore to you, some part: The
Physiognomistes, some: The Chyromantistes some. The Metaposcopistes, some: The
excellent, Albert Durer, a good part: the Art of Perspectiue, will somewhat,
for the Eye, help forward: Pythagoras, Hipocrates, Plato, Galenus, Meletius,
and many other (in certain things) will be Contributaries. And farther, the
Heaven, the Earth, and all other Creatures, will each show, and offer their
Harmonious service, to fill up, that, which wants hereof: and with your own
Experience, concluding: you may Methodically register the whole, for the
posterity: Whereby, good proof will be had, of our Harmonious, and
Microcosmicall constitution. Microcosmus.
The outward Image, and view hereof: to the Art of Zographie and Painting, to
Sculpture, and Architecture: (for Church, House, Fort, or Ship) is most
necessary and profitable: for that, it is the chief base and foundation of
them. Look in Lib. 3. Cap. 1.
Vitruuius, whether I deal sincerely for your behoufe, or no. Look in
Albertus Durerus, De Symmetria humani Corporis. Look in the 27. and 28.
Chapters, of the second book, De occulta Philosophia. Consider the Ark of Noah. And by that, wade farther. Remember the Delphicall Oracle NOSCE TEIPSVM
(Know thy self) so long ago pronounced: of so many a Philosopher repeated:
and of the Wisest attempted: And then, you will perceive, how long ago, you
have been called to the Schole, where this Art might be learned. Well. I am
nothing affrayde, of the disdain of some such, as think Sciences and Arts,
to be but Seven. Perhaps, those Such may, with ignorance, and shame enough,
come short of them Seven also: and yet nevertheless they can not prescribe a
certain number of Arts: and in each, certain impassable bounds, to God,
Nature, and man's Industry. New Arts, daily rise up: and there was no such
order taken,
that, All Arts, should in one age, or in one land, or of one man, be made
known to the world. Let us embrace the gifts of God, and ways to wisdom,
in this time of grace, from above, continually bestowed on them, who
thankefully will receive them: Et bonis Omnia Cooperabuntur in bonum.

Trochilike, is that Art Mathematical, which demonstrateth the properties of
all Circular motions, Simple and Compounde. And because the fruit hereof,
vulgarly received, is in Wheles, it has the name of Trochilike: as a man would
say, Whele Art. By this art, a Whele may be given which shall move ones about,
in any time assigned. Two Wheles may be given, whose turnynges about in one and
the same time, (or equal times), shall have, one to the other, any proportion
appointed. By Wheles, may a straight line be described: Likewise, a Spirall
line in plain, Conicall Section lines, and other Irregular lines, at pleasure,
may be drawn. These, and such like, are principal Conclusions of this Art:
and help forward many pleasant and profitable Mechanical works: As Milles,
Saw Milles.
to Saw great and very long Deal bordes, no man being by. Such have I seen in
Germany: and in the City of Prage: in the kingdom of Bohemia: Coining Milles,
Hand Milles for Corn grinding: And all manner of Milles, and Whele work: By
Wind, Smoke, Water, Weight, Spring, Man or Beast, moved. Take in your hand,
Agricola ^ere Metallica: and then shall you (in all Mines) perceive, how great
need is, of Whele work. By Wheles, strange works and incredible, are done as
will, in other Arts hereafter, appear. A wonderful example of farther
possibility, and present commodity, was seen in my time, in a certain
Instrument: which by the Inuenter and Artificer (before) was sold for xx.
Talentes of Gold: and then had (by misfortune) received some injury and hurt:
And one Ianellus of Cremona did mend the same, and presented it unto the
Emperor Charles the fifth. Hieronymus Cardanus, can be my witness, that
therein, was one Whele, which moved, and that, in such rate, that, in 7000.
years only, his own periode should be finished. A thing almost incredible:
But how far, I keep me within my bounds: very many men (yet alive) can tell.

Helicosophie, is nere Sister to Trochilike: and is, An Art Mathematical,
which demonstrateth the designing of all Spirall lines in Plain, on Cylinder,
Cone, Sphaere, Conoid, and Sphaeroid, and their properties appertayning. The
use hereof, in Architecture, and diverse Instruments and Engines, is most
necessary. For, in many things, the Skrue works the feate, which, else, could
not be performed. By help hereof, it is Atheneus Lib. 5. cap. 8.
recorded, that, where all the power of the City of Syracusa, was not hable to
move a certain Ship (being on ground) mighty Archimedes, setting to, his
Skruish Engine, caused Hiero the king, by him self, at ease, to remove her, as
he would. Whereat, the King wondering: Proclus. Page 18.
(...). From this day, forward (said the King) Credit ought to be given to
Archimedes, what so^uer he says.

Pneumatithmie demonstrateth by close hollow Geometrical Figures, (regular and
irregular) the strange properties (in motion or stay) of the Water, Air,
Smoke, and Fire, in their co^tinuitie, and as they are joined to the Elements
next them. This Art, to the Natural Philosopher, is very proffitable: to
prove, that Vacuum, or Emptines is not in the world. And that, all Nature,
abhors it so much: that, contrary to ordinary law, the Elements will move
or stand. As, Water to ascend: rather then between him and Air, Spac^ or place
should be left, more then (naturally) that quantity of Air requires, or can
fill. Again, Water to hang, and not descend: rather then by descending, to
leave Emptines at his back. The like, is of Fire and Air: they will descend:
when, either, their Co^tinuitie should be dissolved: or their next Element
forced from them. And as they will not be extended, to discontinuitie: So, will
they not, nor yet of man's force, can be pressed or pent, in space, not sufficient
and aunswerable to their bodily substance. Great force and violence will they
use, to enjoy their natural right and liberty. To go to the bottom of the Sea
without danger.
Hereupon, two or three men together, by keeping Air under a great Cauldron,
and forcyng the same down, orderly, may without harm descend to the Sea
bottom: and continue there a time etc. Where, Note, how the thicker Element
(as the Water) gives place to the thynner (as, is the air:) and receives
violence of the thinner, in manner. etc. Pumps and all manner of Bellows, have
their ground of this Art: and many other strange devises. As Hydraulica,
Organes going by water. etc. Of this Feat, (called commonly Pneumatica,) goodly
works are extant, both in Greek, and Latin. With old and learned Schole men,
it is called Scientia de pleno and vacuo.

Menadrie, is an Art Mathematical, which demonstrateth, how, above Natures
virtue and power simple: Virtue and force may be multiplied: and so, to direct,
to lift, to pull to, and to put o^ cast fro, any multiplied or simple,
determined Virtue, Weight or Force: naturally, not, so, directible or moveable.
Very much is this Art furdred by other Arts as, in some points, by
Perspectiue: in some, by Statike: in some, by Trochilike: and in other, by
Helicosophie: and Pneumatithmie. By this Art, all Granes, Gybbettes, and
Ingines to lift up, or to force any thing, any manner way, are ordered: and the
certain cause of their force^ is known: As, the force which one man has with
the Duche waghen Rack: therewith, to set up again, a mighty waghen laden,
being overthrown. The force of the Crossebow Rack, is certainly, here,
demonstrated. The reason, why one man, does with a leauer, lift that, which
Six men, with their hands only, could no^, so easily do. By this Art, in
out common Cranes in London, where power is to Crane up, the weight of 2000.
pound: by two Wheles more (by good order added) Art concludes, that there may
be Craned up 200000. pound weight etc. So well knew Archimedes this Art: that
he alone, with his devises and engynes, (twice or thrice) spoiled and
discomfited the whole^ Army and Host of the Romans, besieging Syracusa,
Marcus Marcellas the Consul, Plut^^^bus in Marco M^rcello.

Sy^asius in Epistolis.

Polybius.

Plinius.

Quint^lianus.

T. Liuius.


being their General Captain. Such huge Stones, so many, with such force,
and so far, did he with his ^ngynes hayle among them, out of the City. And
by Sea likewise: though their Ships might come to the walls of Syracusa, yet
he utterly confounded the Roman N^uye. What with his mighty Stones hurlyng:
what with Pikes of Athena^s.
18 foot long, made like sliaftes: which he forced almost a quarter of a mile.
What, with his catchyng hold of their Shyps, and hoysing them up above the
Water, and suddenly letting them fall into the Sea again: what with his
Gale^us. Anthemius.
Burning Glasses^ by which he fired their other Ships a far-of: what, with
his other policies, devises, and engines, he so manfully acquit him self:
that all the Force, courage, and policy of the Romans (for a great season)
could nothing prevail, for the winning of Syracusa. Whereupon, the Romans
named Archimedes, Briareus, and Centimanus. Zonaras makes mention of one
Proclus, who so well had perceived Archimedes Art of Menadrie^ and had so well
invented of his own, that with his Burning Glasses, Burning Glasses.
being placed upon the walls of Bysance, he multiplied so the heat of the
Sun, and directed the beams of the same against his enemies Navy with such
force, and so sodeinly (like lightening) that he burned and destroyed both man
and ship. And Dion specifieth of Priscus, a Geometricien in Bysance, who
invented and used sundry Engines, of Force multiplied: Which was cause, that the
Emperor Senerus pardoned him, his life, after he had won Bysance: Because he
honored the Art, wytt, and rare industry of Priscus. But nothing inferior to
the invention of these engines of Force, was the invention of Gunnes. Gunnes.
Which, from an English man, had the occasion and order of first inuenting:
though in an other land, and by other men, it was first executed. And they that
should see the record, where the occasion and order general, of Gunning, is
first discoursed of, would think: that, small things, flight, and common:
coming to wise men's consideration, and industrious men's handling, may grow to
be of force incredible.

Hypogeiodie, is an Art Mathematical, demonstratyng, how, under the
Sphaericall Superficies of the earth, at any depth, to any perpendicular line
assigned (whose distance from the perpendicular of the entrance: and the
Azimuth, likewise, in respect of the said entrance, is known) certain way may
be praescribed and gone: And how, any way above the Superficies of the earth
designed, may under earth, at any depth limited, be kept: going always,
perpendicularly, under the way, on earth designed: And, contrariwise, Any way,
(straight or crooked,) under the earth, being given: upon the vtface, or
Superficies of the earth, to Line out the same: So, as, from the Center of the
earth, perpendiculars drawn to the Sphaericall Superficies of the earth, shall
precisely fall in the Correspondent points of those two ways. This, with all
other Cases and circumstances herein, and appertenances, this Art
demonstrateth. This Art, is very ample in variety of Conclusions^ and very
profitable sundry ways to the Common Wealth. The occasion of my Inuenting this
Art, was at the request of two Gentlemen, who had a certain work (of gain)
under ground: and their grounds did join over the work: and by reason of the
crokednes, diverse depthes, and heithes of the way under ground, they were in
doubt, and at controversy, under whose ground, as then, the work was: The
name only (before this) was of me published, De Itin^r^ Subterranco: The rest,
be at Gods will. For Pioners, Miners, Diggers for Mettalls, Stone, Cole, and
for secret passage^ under ground, between place and place (as this land has
diverse) and for other purposes, any man may easily perceive, both the great
fruit of this Art, and also in this Art, the great aid of Geometry.

Hydragogie, demonstrateth the possible leading of Water, by Natures law, and
by artificial help, from any head (being a Spring, standing, or running
Water) to any other place assigned. Long, has this Art been in use: and much
thereof written: and very marvelous works therein, performed^ as may ye^
appear, in Italy: by the Ruynes remaining of the Aqueductes. In other places,
of Rivers leading through the Maine land, Nauigable many a Mile. And in other
places, of the marvelous forcinges of Water to Ascend which all, declare the
great skill, to be required of him, who should in this Art be perfect, for
all occasions of waters possible leading. To speak of the allowance of the
Fall, for every hundred foot: or of the Ventills (if the waters labor be
far, and great) I need not: Seeing, at hand (about us) many expert men can
sufficiently testi^ie, in effect, the order: though the Demonstration of the
Necessiti^ thereof, they know not: Not yet, if they should be led, up and
down, and about Mountains, from the head of the Spring: and then, a place
being assigned: and of them, to be demanded, how low or high, that last place
is, in respect of the head, from which (so crokedly, and up and down) they be
come: Perhaps, they would not, or could not, very redily, or nerely assoyle
that question. Geometry therefore, is necessary to Hydragogie. Of the sundry
ways to force water to ascend, either by Tympane, Kettell mills, Skrue,
Ctesibike, or such like: in Vitruuius, Agricola, (and other,) fully, the manner
may appear. And so, thereby, also be most ^uident, how the Arts, of
Pneumatithmie, Helicosophie, Statik^, Trochilike, and Menadrie, come to the
furniture of this, in Speculation, and to the Commodity of the Common Wealth,
in practice.

Horometrie, is an Art Mathematical, which demo^strateth, how, at all times
appointed, the precise usual denominatio^ of time, may be known, for any
place assigned. These words, are smoth and plain eas^e English, but the
reach of their meaning, is farther, then you would lightly imagine. Some part
of this Art, was called in old time, Gnomonice: and of late,
Ho^ologiographia:) and in English, may be termed, Dialling. Ancient is the
use, and more ancient, is the Invention. The use, does well appear to have
been (at the least) above two thousand and three hundred year ago: in 4. Reg.
20.
King Acha^ Dial, then, by the Sun, showing the distinction of time. By
Sun, Moan, and Sterres, this Dialling may be performed, and the precise Time
of day or night known. But the demonstratiue delineation of these Dialls, of
all sorts, requires good skill, both of Astronomy, and Geometry Elementall,
Sphaericall, Phaenomenall, and Conikall. Then, to use the grounds of the Art,
for any regular Superficies, in any place offered: and (in any possible apt
position thereof) th^ron, to describe (all manner of ways) how, usual hours,
may be (by the Suns shadow) truly determined: will be found no slight
Painters work. So to Paint, and prescribe the Suns Motion, to the breadth of
a hear. In this Feate (in my youth) I Invented a way, How in any Horizontall,
Murall, or AEquinoctiall Dial, etc. At all hours (the Sun shining) the
Sign and Degree ascendent, may be known. Which is a thing very necessary for
the Rising of those fixed Sterres: whose Operation in the Air, is of great
might, evidently. I speak no further, of the use hereof. But forasmuch as,
Man's affairs require knowledge of Times and Momentes, when, neither Sun,
Moan, or Sterre, can be seen: Therefore, by Industry Mechanical, was
invented, first, how, by Water, running orderly, the Time and hours might be
known: whereof, the famous Ctesibius, was Inuentor: a man, of Vitruuius, to
the Sky (justly) extolled. Then, after that, by Sand running, were hours
measured: Then, by Trochilike with weight: And of late time, by Trochilike with
Spring: without weight. All these, by Sun or Sterres direction (in certain
time) require oversight and reformation, according to the heavenly
AEquinoctiall Motion: besides the inaequalitie of their own Operation. There
remains (without parabolicall meaning herein) among the Philosophers, A
perpetual Motion.
a more excellent, more commodious, and more marvelous way, then all these: of
having the motion of the Primouant (or first ^quinoctiall motion,) by Nature
and Arte^ Imitated: which you shall (by further search in waightier studyes)
hereafter, understand more of. And so, it is time to finish this Annotation, of
Times distinction, used in our common, and private affairs: The commodity
whereof, no man would want, that can tell, how to bestow his time.

Zographie, is an Art Mathematical, which teaches and demonstrateth, how,
the Intersection of all visuall Pyramides, made by any plain assigned, (the
Center, distance, and lights, being determined) may be, by lines, and due
propre colors, represented. A notable Art, is this and would require a whole
Volume, to declare the property thereof: and the Commodities ensuyng. Great
skill of Geometry, Arithmetike, Perspectiue, and Anthropographie, with many
other particular Art^s, has the Zographer, need of, for his perfection. For,
the most excellent Painter, (who is but the propre Mechanicien, and Imitator
sensible, of the Zographer) has atteined to such perfection, that Sense of Man
and beast, have judged things painted, to be things natural, and not
artificial: alive, and not dead. This Mechanical Zographer (commonly called
the Painter) is marvelous in his skill: and seems to have a certain divine
power: As, of friends absent, to make a friendly, present comfort: yea, and of
friends dead, to give a continual, silent presence: not only with us, but
with our posterity, for many Ages. And so procedyng, Consider, How, in Winter,
he can show you, the lively view of Summers Joy, and riches: and in Summer,
exhibit the countenance of Winters doleful State, and nakedness. Cities,
Towns, Fortes, Woods, Armies, yea whole Kingdoms (be they never so far, or
great) can he, with ease, bring with him, home (to any man's Judgment) as
Paternes lively, of the things rehearsed. In one little house, can he, enclose
(with great pleasure of the beholders,) the portrayture lively, of all visible
Creatures, either on earth, or in the earth, living: or in the waters lying,
Creping, slyding, or swimming: or of any ^oule, or fly, in the air flying.
Nay, in respect of the Stars, the Sky, the Clouds: yea, in the show of the
very light it self (that Divine Creature) can he match our eyes Judgment,
most nerely. What a thing is this? things not yet being, he can represent so,
as, at their being, the Picture shall seame (in manner) to have Created them. To
what Artificer, is not Picture, a great pleasure and Commoditie^ Which of them
all, will refuse the Direction and aid of Picture? The Architect, the
Goldsmith, and the Arras Weauer: of Picture, make great account. Our lively
Herbals, our portraitures of birds, beasts, and fishes: and our curious
Anatomies, which way, are they most perfectly made, or with most pleasure, of
us beholden? Is it not, by Picture only? And if Picture, by the Industry of
the Painter, be thus commodious and marvelous: what shall be thought of
Zographie, the Scholemaster of Picture, and chief governor? Though I mention
not Sculpture, in my Table of Arts Mathematical: yet may all men perceive,
How, that Picture and Sculpture, are Sisters german: and both, right
profitable, in a Common wealth. and of Sculpture, as well as of Picture,
excellent Artificers have written great books in commendation. Witness I take,
of Georgio Vasari, Pittore Aretino: of Pomponius Gauricus^ and other. To these
two Arts, (with other,) is a certain od Art, called Althalmasat, much
beholding: more, then the common Sculptor, Entayler, Keruer, Cut^er, Grauer,
Founder, or Paynter ( etc) know their Art, to be commodious.

Architecture, to many may seem not worthy, or not mete, An objection.
to be reckned among the Arts Mathematicall^ To whom, I think good, to give
some account of my so doing. Not worthy, (will they say,) because it is but for
building, of a house, Palace, Church, Forte, or such like, gross works. And
you, also, defined the Arts Mathematical, to be such, as dealed with no
Material or corruptible thing: and al^o did demonstrat^uely proceed in their
faculty, by Number or Magnitude. First, you see, that I count, here,
Architecture, among those Arts Mathematical, The Answer.
which are Derived from the Principals: and you know, that such, may deal with
Natural things and sensib^^ ^a^^er. Of which, some draw nerer, to the Simple
and absolute Mathematical Speculation, then other do. And though, the
Architect
procures, enformeth, and directs, the Mechanicien, to handworke, and the
building actual, of house, Castle, or Palace, and is chief Judge of the
same: yet, with him self (as chief Master and Architect,) remains the
Demonstratiue reason and cause, of the Mechaniciens work in Line, plain, and
Solid: by Geometrical, Arithmeticall, Opticall, Musi^all, Astronomicall,
Cosmographicall (and to be brief) by all the former Derived Arts
Mathematical, and other Natural Arts, hable to be confirmed and stablished.
If this be so^then, may you think, that Architecture, has good and due
allowance, in this honest Company of Arts Mathematical Deriuatiue, I will,
herein, crave Judgment of two most perfect Architect^s: the one, being
Vitruuius, the Roman: who did write ten books thereof, to the Emperor
Augustus (in whose days our Heavenly Archemaster, was borne): and the other,
Leo Baptista Albertus, a Florentine: who also published ten books thereof.
Architectura (says Vitruuius) est Scientia pluribus disciplinis and varijs
eruditionibus ornata^ cuius Iudicio probantur omni^, qua ab cateris Artificibus
perficiuntur opera. That is. Architecture, is a Science garnished with many
doctrines and diverse instructions: by whose Judgment, all works, by other
workmen finished, are Judged. It follows. Ea nascitur ex Fabric^. and
Ratiocinatione. etc. Ratiocinatio aute^ est, quae, res fabricatas, Solertia ac
ratione proportionis, demonstrare atque explicare potest. Architecture, grows
of Framing, and Reasoning. etc. Reasoning, is that, which of things framed,
with forecast, and proportion: can make demonstration, and manifest
declaration. Again. Cum, in omnibus enim rebus, tum maxim etiam in
Architectura, haec duo insunt: qoud significatur, and qoud significa^.
Significatur proposita res, de qua dicitur: hanc autem Significat Demonstratio,
rationibus doctrinarum explicata. Forasmuch as, in all things: therefore
chiefly in Architecture, these two things are: the thing signified: and that
which signifies. The thing propounded, whereof we speak, is the thing
Signified. But Demonstration, expressed with the reasons of diverse doctrines,
does signify the same thing. After that^ Vt literatus sit, peritus Graphidos,
eruditus Geometriae, and Optices non ignarus: instructus Arithmetica: historias
complures nouerit, Philosophos diligenter audiuerit: Musicam sciuerit:
Medicinae non sit ignarus, responsa Iurisperitoru^ nouerit: Astrologiam,
Caelique rations cognitas habeat. An Architect (says he) ought to understand
Languages, to be skillful of Painting, well instructed in Geometri^, not
ignorant of Perspectiue, furnished with Arithmetike, have knowledge of many
histories, and diligently have heard Philosophers, have skill of Music, not
ignorant of Physike, know the aunsweres of Lawyers, and have Astronomy, and
the courses Caelestiall, in good knowledge. He gives reason, orderly,
wherefore all these Arts, Doctrines, and Instructions, are requisite in an
excellent Architect. And (for brevity) omitting the Latin text, thus he has.
Secondly, it is behofefull for an Architect to have the knowledge of Painting^
that he may the more easily fashion out, in patterns painted, the form of
what work he likes. And Geometry, gives to Architecture many helps: and
first teaches the Use of the Rule, and the Cumpasse: whereby (chiefly and
easily) the descriptions of Buildinges, are despatched in Groundplats: and the
directions of Squires, Leuells, and Lines. Likewise, by Perspectiue, the
Lights of the heaven, are well led, in the buildinges: from certain quarters
of the world. By Arithmetike, the charges of Buildinges are summed together:
the measures are expressed, and the hard questions of Symmetries, are by
Geometrical Means and Methods discoursed on. etc. Besides this, of the Nature
of things (which in Greek is called (...)) Philosophy does make declaration.
Which, it is necessary, for an Architect, with diligence to have learned:
because it has many and diverse natural questions: as specially, in
Aqueductes. For in their courses, leadinges about, in the level ground, and in
the mountinges, the natural Spirits or breathes are engendered diverse ways:
The hindrances, which they cause, no man can help, but he, which out of
Philosophy, has learned the original causes of things. Likewise, who soever
shall read C^esibius, or Archimedes books, (and of others, who have written
such Rules) can not think, as they do: unless he shall have received of
Philosophers, instructions in these things. And Music he must needs know:
that he may have understanding, both of Regular and Mathematical Music: that
he may temper well his Balistes, Catapultes, and Scorpions. etc. Moreover, the
Brazen Vessels, which in Theaters, are placed by Mathematical order, in
ambries, under the steps: and the diversities of the soundes (which ye
Grecians call (...)) are ordered according to Musical Symphonies and Harmonies:
being distributed in ye Circuites, by Diatessaron, Diapente, and Diapason. That
the convenient voice, of the players sound, when it came to these preparations,
made in order, there being increased: with yt increasing, might come more
clear and pleasant, to ye ears of the lokers on. etc. And of Astronomy, is
known ye East, West, South, and North. The fashion of the heaven, the
AEquinox, the Solsticie, and the course of the sterres. Which things, vnleast
one know: he can not perceive, any thing at all, the reason of Horologies.
Seeing therefore this ample Science, is garnished, beautified and stored, with so
many and sundry skils and knowledges: I think, that none can justly account
them selves Architectes, of the suddeyne. But they only, who from their
childs years, ascendyng by these degrees of knowledges, being fostered up
with the atteynyng of many Languages and Arts, have won to the high
Tabernacle of Archicture. etc. And to whom Nature has given such quick
Circumspection, sharpnes of wit, and Memory, that they may be very absolutely
skillfull in Geometry, Astronomy, Music, and the rest of the Arts
Mathematical: Such surmount and p^sse the calling, and state, of Architectes:
and are become Mathematiciens. A Mathematicien.
etc. And they are found, seldom. As, in times past, was Aristarchus Samius:
Philolaus, and Archytas, Tarentynes: Apollonius Pergeus: Eratosthenes Cyreneus:
Archimedes, and Scopas, Syracusians. Who also, left to their posterity, many
Engines and Gnomonicall works: by numbers and natural means, invented and
declared.

Thus much, and the same words (in sense) in one only Chapter of this
Incomparable Architect Vitrunius, Vitrunius.
shall you find. And if you should, but take his book in your hand, and
slightly look thorough it, you would say straight way: This is Geometry,
Arithmetike, Astronomy, Music, Anthropographie, Hydragogie, Horometrie etc.
and (to conclude) the Storehouse of all workma^ship. Now, let us listen to our
other Judge, our Florentine, Leo Baptista: and narrowly consider, how he does
determine of Architecture. Sed anteque vltra progrediar. etc. But before I
proceed any further (says he) I think, that I ought to express, what man I
would have to be allowed an Architect. For, I will not bring in place a
Carpenter: as though you might Compare him to the Chief Master^ of other Arts.
For the hand of the Carpenter, is the Architectes Instrument. Who is an
Architect.
But I will appoint the Architect to be that man, who has the skill, (by a
certain and marvelous means and way,) both in mind and Imagination to
determine: and also in work to finish: what works so ever, by motion of
weight, and cuppling and framyng together of bodies, may most aptly be
Commodious for the worthiest. Uses of Man. And that he may be able to perform
these things, he has need of atteynyng and knowledge of the best, and most
worthy things. etc. The whole Feate of Architecture in buildyng, confisteth in
Lineamentes, and in Framyng. And the whole power and skill of Lineamentes,
tends to this: that the right and absolute way may he had, of Coaptyng and
joining Lines and angles: by which, the face of the buildyng or frame, may be
comprehended and concluded. And it is the property of Lineamentes, to prescribe
unto buildings, and every part of them, an apt place, and certain number: a
worthy manner, and a semely order: that, so, ye whole ^orme and figure of the
buildyng, may rest in the very Lineamentes. etc. And we may prescribe in mind
and imagination the whole forms, The Immaterialitie of perfect Architecture.
all material stuff being secluded. Which point we shall atteyne, by Notyng
and forepointyng the angles, and lines, by a ^ure and certain direction and
connection. Seeing then, these things, are thus: Lineamente, What, Lineament is.
shall be the ^ertaine and constant prescribyng, conceived in mind: made in
lines and angles: and finished with a learned mind and wit. We thank you
Master Baptist, that you have so aptly brought your Art, and phrase thereof, to
have some Mathematical perfection: Note.
by certain order, number, form, figure, and Symmetri^ mental: all natural
and sensible stuff set apart. Now, then, it is evident, (Gentle reader) how
aptely and worthily, I have prefer^ed Architecture, to be bred and fostered up
in the Dominion of the per^les Princess, Mathematica: and to be a natural
Subject of hers. And the name of Architectur^, is of the principality, which
this Science has, above all other Arts. And Plato affirms, the Architect to
be Master over all, that make any work. Whereupon, he is neither Smith, not
Builder: nor, separately, any Artificer: but the Head, the Provost, the
Directer, and Judge of all Artificial works, and all Artificers. For, the
true Architect, is hable to teach, Demonstrate, distribute, des^ribe, and Judge
all works wrought. And he, only, searches out the causes and reasons of all
Artificial things. Thus excellent, is Architecture: though few (in our days)
atteyne: ^ereto: yet may not the Art, be otherwise thought on, then in very
deed it is worthy. Nor we may not, of ancient Arts, make new and imperfect
Definitions in our days: for scarsitie of Artificers: No more, than we may
pynche in, the Definitions of Wisdom, or Honesty, or of Frendeshyp or of
Justice. No more will I consent, to Diminish any whit, of the perfection and
dignity, (by just cause) allowed to absolute Architecture. Under the Direction
of this Art, are three principal, necessary Mechanical Arts. Namely,
Howsing, Fortification, and Naupegie. Howsing, I understand, both for Divine
Service, and Man's common usage: public, and private. Of Fortification and
Naupegie, strange matter might be told you: But perchance, some will be
tired, with this Bederoll, all ready rehearsed: and other some, w^^^ nycely nip
my gross and homely discoursing with you: made in post have: for fear you
should want this true and friendly warnyng, and taste giuyng, of the Power
Mathematical. Life is short, and uncertain: Times are perilouse: etc. And
still the Printer awayting, for my pen staying: All these things, with farther
matter of Ingratefulnes, give me occasion to pass away, to the other Arts
remainyng, with all speed possible.

THe Art of Navigations, demonstrateth how, by the shortest good way, by the
aptest Direction, and in the shortest time, a sufficient Ship, between any two
places (in passage Nauigable,) assigned: may be co^ducted: and in all storms,
and natural disturbances chauncyng, how, to use the best possible means,
whereby to recover the place first assigned. What need, the Master Pilote, has
of other Arts, here before recited, it is easy to know: as, of Hydrographie,
Astronomy, Astrology, and Horometrie. Presupposing continually, the common
Base, and foundation of all: namely Arithmetike and Geometry. So that, he be
hable to understand, and Judge his own necessary Instruments, and furniture
Necessary: Whether they be perfectly made or no: and also can, (if need be)
make them, him self. As Quadrantes, The Astronomers Ryng, The Astronomers
staff, The Astrolabe universal. An Hydrographicall Globe. Charts
Hydrographicall, true, (not with parallel Meridians). The Common Sea Compass:
The Compass of variacion: The Proportional, and Paradoxall Compasses (of me
Invented, Anno. 1559.
for our two Moscouy Master Pilotes, at the request of the Company) Clockes
with spryng: hour, half hour, and three hour Sandglasses: and sundry other
Instruments: And also, be hable, on Globe, or Plain to describe the
Paradoxall Compass: and duly to use the same, to all manner of purposes,
whereto it was invented. And also, be hable to Calculate the Planetes places
for all times.

Moreover, with Son Moan or Sterre (or without) be hable to define the
Longitude and Latitude of the place, which he is in: So that, the Longitude and
Latitude of the place, from which he sailed, be given: or by him, be known.
whereto, appertains expert means, to be certified ever, of the Ships way.
etc. And by foreseing the Rising, Setting, Nonestedyng, or Midnightyng of
certain tempestuous fixed Sterres: or their Conjunctions, and Anglynges with
the Planetes, etc. he ought to have expert conjecture of Storms, Tempests,
and Spoutes: and such like Meteorologicall effects, dangerous on Sea. For (as
Plato says,) Mu^ationes^ (...) Some by weight. whereof Ti^^^^^ speaks. Some,
by Stringes strayned, or Springs, therewith Imitating lively Motions. Some, by
other means, as the Images of Mercury: and the brazen head, made by Albertus
Magn^^, which did seem to speak. B^^thius was excellent in these feats. To
whom, Cassiod^^^^ writing, says. Your purpose is to know profound things: and
to show meruayles. By the disposition of your Art, Metals do low: Diomedes of
brass, does blow a Trumpet loud: a brazen Serpent hisseth: birds made, sing
swetely. Small things we rehearse of you, who can Imitate the heaven. etc. Of
the strange Selfmouyng, which, at Saint Denis, by Paris, Anno. 1551
I saw, ones or twice ( Orontius being then with me, in Company) it were to
strange to tell. But some have written it. And yet, (I hope) it is there, of
other to be seen. And by Perspectiue also strange things, are done. As partly
(before) I gave you to understand in Perspectiue. As, to see in the Air, a
loft, the lively Image of an other man, either walkyng to and fro: or standing
still. Likewise, to come into an house, and there to see the lively show of
Gold, Silver or precious stones: and coming to take them in your hand, to
find naught but Air. Hereby, have some men (in all other matters counted
wise) foully ouershot the^ selves: misdeaming of the means. De his quae Mundo
mirabiliter eueniunt. cap. 8.
Therefore said Claudius Caelestinus. Hodie magna liter^^^rae vi^ ^s (...) magna
(...), opera qu^da^^ quasi miranda, supra Natura (...) de qu^^^s in (...)
sa^iliter reddidisse^. That is. Now a days, (...) see (...), y^a of great
learning and reputation, to Judge certain works (...) ^eruaylous, above the
power of Nature: Of which works, one that were skillfull in Perspectiue might
easily have given the Cause. Of Archimedes Sphaere, Cicero witnesses. Tusc. ^.
Which is very strange to think on. For when Archimedes (says he) did fasten
in a Sphere, the mo^ynges of the Son, Moan, and of the fi^e other Planets, he
did, as the God, which (in Timaeus of Plato) did make the world. That, on^
(...), should rule motions most unlike in slownes, and swiftnes. But a greater
cause of meruayling we have by Claudianus report hereof. Who affirm in this
Archimedes w^rke, to have ^en of Glass. And discourses of it more at large:
which I omit. The Dove of wood, which the Mathematicien Arc^y^a^ did make to
fly, is by Agellius spoken of. Of Dadalus strange Images, Plat^ reports.
H^mere of Vul^ans Selfmouers, (by secret wheles) leaves in writing. Aristotle,
in his Politikes, of both, makes mention. Mer^aylous was the workemanshyp, of
la^e days, performed by good skill of Tr^chi^ike. etc. For in Noremberge, A
slye of Iern, heyng let out of the Artifi^ers ^^nd, did (as it were) fly about
by the g^stes, at the table, and at leng^h, as though ^^ were weary, return
to his masters ha^^ again. Moreover, an Artificial E^le, was ordered, to fly
out of the same Town, a mighty way, and that a lo^t in the Air, toward the
Emperor coming thither: and followed him, being come to the gate of the
town^.
Thus, you see, what^ Art Mathematical an p^rforme, when Skill, will,
Industry, and Hability, are duly applied to pro^e.

A Digression. Apologeticall.
ANd for these, and such like marvelous Acts and Feats, Naturally,
Mathematically, and Mechanically, wrought and contrived: ought any honest
Student, and Modest Christian Philosopher, be counted, and called a Coniurer?
Shall the folly of Idio^^s, and the Malice of the Scornful, so much prevail,
that He, who seeks no worldly gain or glory at their handes^ But only, of
God, the threasor of heavenly wisdom, and knowledge of p^re verity: Shall he
(I say) in the mean space, be robbed and spoiled of his honest name and fame?
He that seeks (by S. Paul's advertisement) in the Creatures Properties, and
wonderful virtues, to find just cause, to glorify the AEternall; and
Almighty Creator by: Shall that man, be (in hugger mugger) condemned, as a
Companion of the Helhoundes, and a Caller, and Coniurer of wicked and damned
Spirits? He that bewaileth his great want of time, sufficient (to his
contentation) for learning of Godly wisdom, and Godly Verities in: and only
therein sets all his delight: Will that man leese and abuse his time, in
dealing with the Chief enemy of Christ our Redemer: the deadly foe of all
mankind: the subtle and impudent per^erter of Godly Verity: the
Hypocritical Crocodile: the Envious Basiliske, continually desirous, in the
twinke of an eye, to destroy all Mankind, both in Body and Soul, aeternally?
Surely (for my part, somewhat to say herein) I have not learned to make so
brutish, and so wicked a Bargain. Should I, for my xx. or xxv. years Study:
for two or three thousand Marks spending: seven or eight thousand Miles going
and travailing, only for good learninges sake: And that, in all manner of
wethers: in all manner of ways and passages: both early and late: in danger of
violence by man: in danger of destruction by wild beasts: in hunger: in
thirst: in perilous heates by day, with toil on foot: in dangerous dampes of
cold, by night, almost bereuing life: (as God knows): with lodginges, often
times, to small ease: and sometime to less security. And for much more (then
all this) done and suffered, for Learning and attaining of Wisdom: Should I (I
pray you) for all this, no otherwise, nor more warily: or (by Gods mercifulnes)
no more luckily, have fished, with so large, and costly, a Net, so long time
in drawing (and that with the help and advise of Lady Philosophy, and Queen
Theology): but at length, to have catched, and drawn up, A proverb. Fair
fisht, and caught a Frog.
a Frog? Nay, a Devil? For, so, does the Common peuish Pratler Imagine and
Iangle: And, so, does the Malicious skorner, secretly wish, and bravely and
boldly face down, behind my back. Ah, what a miserable thing, is this kind
of Men? How great is the blindness and boldness, of the Multitude, in things
above their Capacity? What a Land: what a People: what Manners: what Times are
these? Are they become Devils, themselves: and, by false witness bearing
against their Neighbor, would they also, become Murderers? Does God, so long
give them respite, to reclaim them selves in, from this horrible slaundering
of the giltlesse: contrary to their own Consciences: and yet will they not
cease? Does the Innocent, forbear the calling of them, Iuridically to answer
him, according to the rigor of the Laws: and will they despise his Charitable
patience? As they, against him, by name, do forge, fable, rage, and raise
slander, by Word and Print: Will they provoke him, by word and Print,
likewise, to Note their Names to the World: with their particular devises,
fables, beastly Imaginations, and vnchristenlike slanders? Well: Well. O (you
such) my unkind Country men. O unnatural Country men. O unthankful
Country men. O Brainsicke, Rash, Spiteful, and Disdainful Country men. Why
oppress you me, thus violently, with your slaundering of me: Contrary to
Verity: and contrary to your own Consciences? And I, to this hour, neither
by word, deed, or thought, have been, any way, hurtful, damageable, or
injurious to you, or yours? Have I, so long, so dearly, so far, so carefully,
so painfully, so daungerously sought and travailed for the learning of
Wisdom, and atteyning of Virtue: And in the end (in your judgment) am I
become, worse, then when I began? Worse, the^ a Mad man? A dangerous Member in
the Common Wealth: and no Member of the Church of Christ? Call you this, to be
Learned? Call you this, to be a Philosopher? and a lover of Wisdom? To
forsake the straight heavenly way: and to wallow in the broad way of damnation?
To forsake the light of heavenly Wisdom: and to lurk in the dungeon of the
Prince of darkness? To forsake the Verity of God, and his Creatures: and to
fawn upon the Impudent, Crafty, Obstinate Lier, and continual disgracer of
Gods Verity, to the uttermost of his power? To forsake the Life and Bliss
AEternall: and to cleave unto the Author of Death everlasting? that Murderous
Tyrant, most gredily awaiting the Pray of Man's Soul? Well: I thank God and
our Lord Jesus Christ, for the Comfort which I have by the Examples of other
men, before my time: To whom, neither in godliness of life, nor in perfection of
learning, I am worthy to be compared: and yet, they sustained the very like
Injuries, that I do: or rather, greater. Pacient Socrates, his Apology will
testify: Apuleius his Apologies, will declare the Brutishness of the
Multitude. Ioannes Picus, Earl of Mirandula, his Apology will teach you, of
the Raging slander of the Malicious Ignorant against him. Ioannes Trithemius,
his Apology will specify, how he had occasion to make public Protestation:
as well by reason of the Rude Simple: as also, in respect of such, as were
counted to be of the wisest sort of men. Many could I recite: But I defer the
precise and determined handling of this matter: being loath to detect the Folly
and Malice of my Native Country men.
Who, so hardly, can digest or like any extraordinary course of Philosophical
Studies: not falling within the Cumpasse of their Capacity: or where they are
not made privy of the true and secret cause, of such wonderful
Philosophical Feats. These men, are of four sorts, chie^ly. The first, I
may name, Vain prattling busy bodies: The second, Fond Friends: The third,
Imperfectly zealous: and the fourth, Malicious Ignorant. To each of these
(briefly, and in charity) I will say a word Vain prattling busy bodies, use
your idle assemblies, and conferences, otherwise, then in talk of matter,
either above your Capacities, for hardness: or contrary to your Consciences,
in Verity. Fond leave of, so to commend your unacquainted friend, upon blind
affection: As, because he knows more, then the common Student: that,
therefore, he must needs be skillful, and a doer, in such matter and manner, as
you term Coniuring. Weening, thereby, you advance his fame: and that you make
other men, great marueilers of your hap, to have such a learned friend. Cease to
ascribe Impiety, where you pretend Amity. For, if your tounges were true,
then were that your friend, Untrue, both to God, and his Sovereign. Such
Friends and Fondlinges, I shake of, and renounce you: Shake you of, your Folly.
Imperfectly zealous, to you, Malicious Ignorant, what shall I say to thee?
Prohibe linguam tuam a malo. A detractione parcite linguae. Cause thy tongue to
refrain from evil. Refrain your tongue from slander. Though your tounges be
sharpened, Serpent like, and Adders poison lie in your lips: Psalm. 140.
yet take heed, and think, betimes, with your self, Vir linguosus non
stabilietur in terra. Virum violentum venabitur malum, donec praecipitetur.
For, sure I am, Quia faciet Dominus Iudicium afflicti: and vindictam pauperum.

Thus, I require you, my assured friends, and Country men (you Mathematiciens,
Mechaniciens, and Philosophers, Charitable and discrete) to deal in my behalf,
with the light and untrue tounged, my envious Adversaries, or Fond friends. And
farther, I would wish, that at leysor, you would consider, how Basilius
Magnus, lays Moses and Daniel, before the eyes of those, which count all such
Studies Philosophical (as mine has been) to be ungodly, or unprofitable. Way
well S. Stephen his witness of Moses. Act. 7. C.
Eruditus est Moses omni Sapientia AEgyptioru^: and erat potens in verbis and
operibus suis. Moses was instructed in all manner of wisdom of the Egyptians:
and he was of power both in his words, and works. You see this Philosophical
Power and Wisdom, which Moses had, to be nothing misliked of the Holy Ghost.
Yet Plinius has recorded, Moses to be a wicked Magicien. And that (of force)
must be, either for this Philosophical wisdom, learned, before his calling
to the leading of the Children of Israel: or for those his wonders, wrought
before King Pharao, after he had the conducting of the Israelites. As
concerning the first, you perceive, how S. Stephen, at his Martyrdom (being
full of the Holy Ghost) in his Recapitulation of the old Testament, has made
mention of Moses Philosophy: with good liking of it: And Basilius Magnus also,
avouches it, to have been to Moses profitable (and therefore, I say, to the
Church of God, necessary). But as concerning Moses wonders, done before King
Pharao: God, him self, said: Vide vt omnia ostenta, quae posui in manutua,
facias coram Pharaone. See that thou do all those wonders before Pharao, which
I have put in thy hand. Thus, you evidently perceive, how rashly, Plinius has
slaundered Moses, Lib. 30. Cap. 1.
of vain fra^dulent Magike, saying: Est and alia Magices Factio, a Mose,
Iamne, and Iotape, Iudaeis pendens: sed multis millibus annorum post
Zoroastrem. etc. Let all such, therefore, Pliny, take good heed, least they
ouershoote them selves rashly,
in Judging of Philosophers strange Act^s^ and the Means, how they are done.
But, much more, ought they

NOw end I, with Archemastrie. Which name, is not so new, as this Art is rare.
For an other Art, under this, a degree (for skill and power) has been endued
with this English name before. And yet, this, may serve for our purpose,
sufficiently, at this present. This Art, teaches to bring to actual
experience sensible, all worthy conclusions by all the Arts Mathematical
purposed, and by true Natural Philosophy concluded: and both adds to them a
farther scope, in the terms of the same Arts, and also by his propre Method,
and in peculier terms, proceeds, with help of the foresaid Arts, to the
performance of complet Experie^ces, which of no particular Art, are hable
(Formally) to be challenged. If you remember, how we considered Architecture,
in respect of all common handworkes: some light may you have, thereby, to
understand the Souerainty and property of this Science. Science I may call it,
rather, then an Art: for the excellency and Mastershyp it has, over so many,
and so mighty Arts and Sciences. And because it proceeds by Experiences, and
searches forth the causes of Conclusions, by Experiences: and also puts the
Conclusions them selves, in Experience, it is named of some, Scientia
Experimentalis. The Experimental Science. Nicolaus Cusanus terms it so, in
his Experimentes Statikall, And an other Philosopher, R. B.
of this land Native (the flower of whose worthy fame, can never dye nor
wither) did write thereof largely, at the request of Clement the sixth. The Art
carries with it, a wonderful Credit: By reason, it certefieth, sensibly,
fully, and completely to the utmost power of Nature, and Art. This Art,
certifieth by Experience complete and absolute: and other Arts, with their
Arguments, and Demonstrations, persuade: and in words, prove very well their
Conclusions.
But words, and Arguments, are no sensible certifying: nor the full and
final fruit of Sciences practisable. And though some Arts, have in them,
Experiences, yet they are not complete, and brought to the uttermost, they may
be stretched unto, and applied sensibly. As for example: the Natural
Philosopher disputes and makes goodly show of reason: And the Astronomer, and
the Optical Mechanicien, put some things in Experience: but neither, all, that
they may: nor yet sufficiently, and to the utmost, those, which they do, There,
then, the Archemaster steppeth in, and leads forth on, the Experiences, by
order of his doctrine Experimental, to the chief and final power of Natural
and Mathematical Arts. Of two or three men, in whom, this Description of
Archemastry was Experimentally, verified, I have read and hard: and good
record, is of their such perfection. So that, this Art, is no fantastical
Imagination: as some Sophister, might, Cum suis Insolubilibus, make a slorish:
and dassell your Imagination: and dash your honest desire and Courage, from
believing these things, so unheard of, so meruaylous, and of such Importance.
Well: as you will. I have forewarned you. I have done the part of a friend: I
have discharged my Duty toward God: for my small Talent, at his most merciful
hands received. To this Science, does the Science Alnirangiat, great Service.
Muse nothing of this name. I change not the name, so used, and in Print
published by other: being a name, propre to the Science. Under this, comes
Ars Sintrillia, by Artephius, briefly written. But the chief Science, of the
Archemaster, (in this world) as yet known, is an other (as it were) OPTICAL
Science: whereof, the name shall be told (God willing) when I shall have some,
(more just) occasion, thereof, to Discourse.

Here, I must end, thus abruptly (Gentle friend, and unfeigned lover of honest
and necessary verities.) For, they, who have (for your sake, and virtues cause)
requested me, (an old forworne Mathematicien) to take pen in hand: (through the
confidence they reposed in my long experience: and tried sincerity) for the
declaryng and reportyng somewhat, of the fruit and commodity, by the Arts
Mathematical, to be atteyned unto: even they, Sore against their wills, are
forced, for sundry causes, to satiffie the workemans request, in endyng
forthwith: He, so fears this, so new an attempt, and so costly: And in matter
so slenderly (hitherto) among the common Sort of Students, considered or
esteemed.

And where I was willed, somewhat to allege, why, in our vulgar Speech, this
part of the Principal Science of Geometry, called Euclides Geometrical
Elements, is published, to your handlyng: being vnlatined people, and not
University Scholars: Verily, I think it nedelesse.



^

And su^ely, the Common and Vulgar Scholar (much more, the Grama^^an)
University, shall (or may) be, now (according to Plato his Counsel)
su^^iciently ins^ructed in Arithmetike, and Geometry, for the better and
ea^ier learn^ng of all manner of ^hilosophie, Academicall, or Perip^^e^icall.
And by that means, go more cherefu^^y, more skil^ully, and spedily fo^warde,
in his Studies, there to be learned. And, so, in less time, profit more, then
(otherw^se) he should^ or could do.

^

And great Comfort, with good hope, may the Universities have, by reason of
English Geometry and Mathematical Praeface, that they (hereafter) shall be
the more regarded, esteemed, and resorted unto. For, when it shall be known
and reported, that of the Mathematical Sciences only, such great Commodities
are enfu^ng (as Thaue specified): and that in deed, some of you vnlatined
Students, can be good witness, of such rare fruit by you enjoyed (thereby):
as either, before this, was not heard of (...) fully credited: Well, may all
men conjecture, that far greater (...), to win to the Perfection of all
Philosophy, Universities.
may in (...) the Storehouses and Threasory of all Sciences, and (...),
and most noble State of Common Wealths.

Besides this, how ma(...) here, in these Realms of fight against mine own
shadow. For, no man (I am s^re) will open his mouth against this Enterprise.
No man (I say) who either has Charity toward his brother (and would be glad
of his further^nce in virtuous knowledge): o^ that has any care and zeal for
the bettering of the Common state of this Realm. Neither any, that make
account, what the wiser sort of men (Sage and Stayed) do think of them. To
^one (therefore) will I make any Ap^logie, for a virtuous act doing: and for
commending, or setting forth Profitable Arts to English men, in the English
tongue. But, unto God our Creator, let us all be thankful: for that, As he, of
his Goodness, by his Power, and in his wisdom, has Created all things, in
Number, Weight,
and Measure: So, to us, of his great Mercy, he has revealed Means, whereby,
to atteyne the sufficient and necessary knowledge of the foresaid hy^ three
principal Instruments: Which Means, I have abundantly proved unto you, to be
the Sciences and Arts Mathematical.

And though I have been pinched with straightnes of time: that no way, I could
so pen down the m^tter (in my Mind), as I determined^ hopyng of convenient
laysure: Yet, if virtuous zeal, and honest I^tent provoke and bring you to the
readyng and examinyng of this Compendious treatise, I do not doubt, but, as the
verity thereof (according to our purpose) will be evident unto you: So the pith
and force thereof, will persuade you: and the wonderful fruit thereof, highly
pleasure you. And that you may the easier perceive, and better remember, the
principal points, whereof my Preface treats, I will give you the Ground
platt of my whole discourse, The Ground platt of this Praeface in a Table.
in a Table annexed from the first to the last, somewhat Methodically contrived.

If Have, has caused my poor pen, any where, to stumble: You will, (I am
sure) in part of recompence^ (for my earnest and sincere good will to pleasure
you). Conside^ the rockish huge mountains, and the perilous unbeaten ways
which (both night and day, for the while) it has ^oyled and labored through,
to bring you this good News and Comfortable proof of Virtues fruit.

So, I Commit you unto Gods Merciful direction, for the rest: heartily
besechyng him, to prosper your Studyes, and honest Intentes: to his Glory and
the Commodity of our Country. Amen.

Written at my poor H^^se At Mortlake. Anno. 1570^ February ^.
Here have you (according to my promise) the Groundplat of my MATHEMATICAL
Praeface: annexed to Euclide (now first) published in our English tongue. An.
1570. Febr. 3.
^ciences, and Arts Mathe^aticall, are, either Principal, which are two,
only, Arithmetike. Simple, Which deals with Numbers only: and demonstrateth
all their properties and appertenances: where, an Unit, is Indivisible.

The use whereof, is either, In things Supernatural, ^ternall, and Divine: By
Application, Ascending. The like Uses and Applications are, (though in a degree
lower) in the Arts Mathematical Deriuatiue. In things Mathematical: without
farther Application. The like Uses and Applications are, (though in a degree
lower) in the Arts Mathematical Deriuatiue. In things Natural: both
Substa^tiall, and Accidental, Visible, and Invisible. etc. By Application:
Descending. The like Uses and Applications are, (though in a degree lower) in
the Arts Mathematical Deriuatiue.


Mixed, Which with aid of Geometry principal, demonstrateth some
Arithmeticall Conclusion, or Purpose.

The use whereof, is either, In things Supernatural, ^ternall, and Divine: By
Application, Ascending. The like Uses and Applications are, (though in a degree
lower) in the Arts Mathematical Deriuatiue. In things Mathematical: without
farther Application. The like Uses and Applications are, (though in a degree
lower) in the Arts Mathematical Deriuatiue. In things Natural: both
Substa^tiall, and Accidental, Visible, and Invisible. etc. By Application:
Descending. The like Uses and Applications are, (though in a degree lower) in
the Arts Mathematical Deriuatiue.



Geometry. Simple, Which deals with Magnitudes, only: and demonstrat^th all
their properties, passions, and appertenances: whose Point, is Indivisible.

The use whereof, is either, In things Supernatural, ^ternall, and Divine: By
Application, Ascending. The like Uses and Applications are, (though in a degree
lower) in the Arts Mathematical Deriuatiue. In things Mathematical: without
farther Application. The like Uses and Applications are, (though in a degree
lower) in the Arts Mathematical Deriuatiue. In things Natural: both
Substa^tiall, and Accidental, Visible, and Invisible. etc. By Application:
Descending. The like Uses and Applications are, (though in a degree lower) in
the Arts Mathematical Deriuatiue.


Mixed, Which with aid of Arithmetike principal, demonstrateth some
Geometrical purpose: as EVCLIDES ELEMENTS.

The use whereof, is either, In things Supernatural, ^ternall, and Divine: By
Application, Ascending. The like Uses and Applications are, (though in a degree
lower) in the Arts Mathematical Deriuatiue. In things Mathematical: without
farther Application. The like Uses and Applications are, (though in a degree
lower) in the Arts Mathematical Deriuatiue. In things Natural: both
Substa^tiall, and Accidental, Visible, and Invisible. etc. By Application:
Descending. The like Uses and Applications are, (though in a degree lower) in
the Arts Mathematical Deriuatiue.




Deriuatiue from the Principalls: o^ which, some have The names of the
Principalls: as, Arithmetike, vulgar: which considers Arithmetike of most
usual whole Numbers: And of Fractions to them appertaining. Arithmetike of
Proportions. Arithmetike Circular. Arithmetike of Radical Numbers: Simple,
Compound, Mixed: And of their Fractions. Arithmetike of Cossike Numbers: with
their Fractions: And the great Art of Algiebar.
Geometry, vulgar: which teaches Measuring At hand All Lengthes. Mecometrie.
All Plains: As, Land, Board, Glass, etc. Embadometrie. All Solids: As,
Timber, Stone, Vessels, etc. Stereometrie.
With distance from the thing Measured, as, How far, from the Measurer, any
thing is: of him seen, on Land or Water: called Apomecometrie.

Of which are grown the Feats and Arts of Geodesie: more cunningly to
Measure and Survey Lands, Woods, Waters. etc. Geographie. Chorographie.
Hydrographie. Stratarithmetrie.


How high or deep, from the level of the Measurers standing, any thing is:
Seen of him, on Land or Water: called Hypsometrie

Of which are grown the Feats and Arts of Geodesie: more cunningly to
Measure and Survey Lands, Woods, Waters. etc. Geographie. Chorographie.
Hydrographie. Stratarithmetrie.


How broad, a thing is, which is in the Measurers view: so it be situated on
Land or Water: called Platometrie.

Of which are grown the Feats and Arts of Geodesie: more cunningly to
Measure and Survey Lands, Woods, Waters. etc. Geographie. Chorographie.
Hydrographie. Stratarithmetrie.





Propre names as, Perspectiue, Which demonstrateth the manners and properties of
all Radiations: Direct, Broken, and Reflected. Astronomy, Which demonstrateth
the Distances, Magnitudes, and all Natural motions, Apparences, and Passions,
proper to the Planets and fixed Stars: f^r any time, past, pr^sent, and to
come: in respect of a certain Horizon, or without respect of any Horizon.
Music, Which demonstrateth by reason, and teaches by sense, perfectly to
judge and order the diversity of Soundes, hi^ or l^w. Cosmographie, Which,
wholly and perfectly makes description of the Heavenly, and also Elementall
part of the World: and of these parts, makes h^m^l^gall application, and
mutual collation necessary. Astrology, Which reasonably demonstrateth the
operations and effects of the natural bea^es of light, and (...) In^luence of
the Planets, and fixed Stars, (...) every Element and Elementall body: at all
times, in any Horiz^n assigned. Statike, Which demonstrateth the causes of
heaviness and lightness of all things: and of the motions and properties to
heaviness and lightness belonging. Anthropographie, Which describes the Number,
Measure, Weight, Figure, Situation, and color of every diverse thing contained
in the perfect^ body of ^^ AN: and gives certain knowledge of the Figure,
Symmetri^, Weight, Characterization, and due Local motion of any p^rcell of
the said body assigned: and of numbers to the said p^rcell appertaining.
Trochilike, Which demonstrateth the properties of all Circular motions: Simple
and Compound. Helicosophie, Which demonstrateth the designing of all Spirall
lines: in Plain, on Cylinder, Co^^, Sph^re, C^n^id, and Spharo^d: and their
properties. Pneumatithmie, Which demonstrateth by close hollow Geometrical
figures (Regular and Irregular) the strange properties (in motion or stay) of
the Water, Air, Smoke, and Fire, in their Continuiti^, and as they are joined
to the Elements next them. Menadrie, Which demonstrateth, how, about Natures
Virtue, and power simple: Virtue and force, may be multiplied: and so to
direct, to lif^, to pull to, and to put or cast fro, any multiplied, or simple
determined Virtue, Weight, or Force: naturally, not, so, directible, or
moveable. Hypogeiodie, Which demonstrateth, how, under the Spharicall
Superficie^ of the E^rth, at any depth, to any perpendicular line assigned
(whose distance from the perpendicular of the entrance: and the Azi^uth
likewise, (...) respe^^e of the said entrance, is known) certain way, may be
prescribed and g^ne, etc. Hydragogie, Which demonstr^teth the possible leading
of water by Natures l^^, and by artificial help, fr^^ any head (being Spring,
standing, or running water) to any other place assigned. Horometrie, Which
demonstrateth, how, at all times appointed, the precise, usual denomination of
time, ^^y ^e know^n, for any place assigned. Zographie, Which demonstrateth and
teaches, how, the Intersection of all usual (...) assigned (the Center,
distanc^, and lights b^ing determined) may be, by lines, and proper col^urs
repre^^^^. Architecture, Which is a Sci^^^^ gar^ished with many doctrines, and
(...), are judged. Navigations, ^ Thaumaturgike, ^ Archemastrie, ^




The first book of Euclides Elements.
IN THIS FIRST BOOK is entreated of the most simple, The argum^^^ of the first
Book.
easy, and first matters and grounds of Geometry, as, namely, of Lines,
Angles, Triangles, Parallels, Squares, and Parallelogrammes, First of their
definitions, showyng what they are, After that it teach^th how to draw Parallel
lines, and how to form diversely figures of three sides, and four sides,
according to the variety of their sides, and Angles and co^pareth them all
with Triangles, and also together the one with the other. In it also is taught
how a figure of any form may be changed into a Figure of an other form. And
for that it entreats of these most common and general things, this book is
more universal then is the second, third, or any other, and therefore justly
occupies the first place in order: as that without which, the other books of
E^clide which follow, and also the works of others which have written in
Geometry, cannot be perceived nor understood. And forasmuch ^s all the
demonstrations and proofs of all the propositions in this whole book, depend
of these grounds and principles following, which by reason of their playnnes
need no great declaration, yet to remove all (be it never so little)
obscurity, there are here set certain short and manifes^ expositions of them.

Definitions.
1. A sign or point is that, which has no part. Definition of a point.

The better to understand what man^r of thing a sign or point is, ye must note
that the nature and property of quantity (whereof Geometry entreats) is to
be divided, so that whatsoever may be divided into sund^y parts, is called
quantity. But a point, although it pertayne to quantity, and has his being
in quantity, yet is it no quantity, for that it cannot be divided. Because
(as the definition says) it has no parts into which it should be divided. So
that a point is the least thing that by mind and understanding can be
imagined and conceived: then which, there can be nothing less, as the point A
in the margent.

A sign or point is of Pithagoras Scholars after this manner defined.
Definition of a point after Pithagoras.
A point is an unity which has position. Numbers are conceived in mind
without any form and figure, and therefore without matter whereon to (...)
figure, and consequently without place and position. Wherefore unity being a
part of number, has no position, or determinate place. Whereby it is manifest,
that ^umb^^ i^ more simple and pure then is magnitude, and also immateriall:
and so unity which i^ the b^ginning of number, is less material then a ^igne
or poy^^, which is the beginning of magnitude. For a point is ma^eriall, and
requires position and place, and ^^^rby differs from unity.

^. A line is length without breadth. Definition of a li^^.

There pertain to quanti^^e three dimensions, length, breadth, and thicknes, or
depth: and by these three are all qua^titie^ measured and made known. There are
also, according to these three dimensions, three kinds of continual
quantities: a line, a superficies, or plain, and a body. The first kind,
namely, a line is here defined in these words, A line is length without
breadth. A point, for that it is no quantity nor has any parts into which it
may be divided, but remains indivisible, has not, nor can have any of these
three dimensions. It neither has length, breadth, nor thickenes. But to a
line, which is the first kind of quantity, is attributed the first dimension,
namely, length, and only that, for it has neither breadth nor thicknes, but
is conceived to be drawn in, length only, and by it, it may be divided into
parts as many as ye list, equal, or unequal. But as touching breadth it
remains indivisible. As the line AB, which is only drawn in length, may be
divided in the point C equally, or in the point D unequally, and so into as
many parts as ye list. There are also of diverse other given other definitions
of a line; as these which follow.

An other definition of a line.
A line is the mouyng of a point, as the motion or draught of a pin or a
pen to your sense makes a line. An other.
Again, A line is a magnitude having one only space or dimension, namely,
length wantyng breadth and thic^^es.
The ends of a line.
3 The ends or limits of a line, are points.
For a line has his beginning from a point, and likewise ends in a point: so
that by this also it is manifest, that points, for their simplicity and lack
of composition, are neither quantity, nor parts of quantity, but only the
terms and ends of quantity. As the points A, B, are only the ends of the
line AB, and no parts thereof. And herein differs a point in quantity,
Difference of a point fr^ ^nity.
from unity in number^ for that although unity be the beginning of nombers,
and no number (as a point is the beginning of quantity, and no quantity) yet
is unity a part of number. Unity is a part of number.
For number is nothing else but a collection of unities, and therefore may be
divided into them, as into his parts. But a point is no part of quantity, A
point is no part of quantity.
or of a lyne^ neither is a line composed of points, as number is of unities.
For things indivisible being never so many added together, can never make a
thing diuisible, as an instant in time, is neither time, nor part of time, but
only the beginning and end of time, and coupleth and joins parts of time
together.

Definition of a right line.
4 A right line is that which lies equally between his points.
As the whole line AB lies straight and equally between the points AB without
any going up or coming down on either side.

Definition of a right line after Campanus.
Campanus and certain others, define a right line thus:

A right line is the shortest extension or draught, that is or may be from one
point to an other. Archimedes defines it thus.

Definition thereof after Archimedes.
A right line is the shortest of all lines, which have one and the self same
limits or ends: which is in manner al one with the definition of Campanus. As
of all these lines ABC, ADC, AEC, AFC, which are all drawn from the point A,
to the point ^^ as Campanus speaks, or which have the self same limits or
ends, as Archimedes speaks, the line ABC, being a right line, is the
shortest.

Definition thereof after Plato.
Plato defines a right line after this manner: A right line is that whose
middle part shadoweth the ex^reme^. As if you put any thing in the middle of a
right line, you shall not see from the one end to the other, which thing
happens not in a crooked line. The Eclipse of the Sun (say Astronomers)
then happens, when the Sun, the Moon, and our eye are in one right line.
For the Moon then being in the midst between us and the Sun, causes it to
be darkened. Diverse other define a right line diversely, An other definition.
as follows.

A right line is that which stands firm between his extremes.

An other.
Again, A right line is that which with an other line of like form cannot make
a figure.

Again, An other.
A right line is that which has not one part in a plain superficies, and an
other erected on high.

Again, An other.
A right line is that, all whose parts agree together with all his other
parts.

Again, An other.
A right line is that, whose extremes abiding, cannot be altered.

Euclide does not here define a crooked line, Why Euclide here defines not a
crooked line.
for it neded not. It may easily be understand by the definition of a right
line, for every contrary is well manifested and set forth by his contrary. One
crooked line may be more crooked then an other, and from one point to an other
may be drawn infinite crooked lines: but one right line cannot be righter then
an other, and therefore from one point to an other, there may be drawn but one
tight line. As by figure above set, you may see.

5 A superficies is that, which has only length and breadth. Definition of a
superficies.

A superficies is the second kind of quantity, and to it are attributed two
^imensions, namely length, and breadth. A superficies may be divided two ways.
As in the superficies ABCD. whose length is taken by the line AB, or CD, and
breadth by the line AC. or BD: and by reason of those two dimensions a
superficies may be divided two ways, namely by his length, and by his breadth,
but not by thickness, for it has none. For, that is attributed only to a
body, which is the third kind of quantity, and has all three dimensions,
length, breadth, and thicknes, and may be divided according to any of them.

Others define a superficies thus: An other definition of a superficies.
A superficies is the terms or end of a body. As a line is the end and term
of a superficies.

6 Extremes of a superficies, are lines. The extremes of a superficies.

As the ends, limits, or borders of a line, are points, enclosing the line:
so are lines the limits, borders, and ends enclosing a superficies. As in the
figure aforesaid you may see the superficies enclosed with four lines. The
extremes or limits of a body, are superficiesles. And therefore a superficies
is of some thus defined: Another definition of a superficies.
A superficies is that, which ends or inclose^h a body: as is to be seen in
the sides of a die, or of any other body.

7 A plain superficies is that, which lies equally between his lines.
Definition of a plain superficies.

As the superficies ABCD lies equally and smoothe between the two lines AB,
and CD: or between the two lines AC, and BD: so that no part thereof either
swells upward, or is depressed downward. And this definition much agrees
with the definition of a right line. A right line lies equally between his
points, and a plain superficies lies equally between his lines. Others define
a plain superficies after this manner:

A plain superficies is the shortest extension or dr^ught from one line to an
other: Another definition of a plain superficies.
like as a right line is the shortest extension or draught from one point to an
other.

Euclide also leaves out here to speak of a crooked and hollow superficies,
because it may easily be understand by the diffinition of a plain superficies,
being his contrary. And even as from one point to an other may be drawn
infinite crooked lines, and but one right line, which is the shortest: so from
one line to an other may be drawn infinite crooked superficiesses, and but one
plain superficies, which is the shortest. Here must you consider when there is
in Geometry mention made of points, NOTE.
lines, circles, triangles, or of any other figures, ye may not conceive of
them as they be in matter, as in wood, in metal, in paper, or in any such
like, for so is there no line, but has some breadth, and may be deuided^ nor
points, but that shall have some parts, and may also be divided, and so of
others. But you must conceive them in mind, plucking them by imagination from
all matter so shall ye understand them truly and perfectly, in their own
nature as they are defined. As a line to be long, and not broad: and a point
to be so little, that it shall have no part at all.

Another definition of a plain superficies.
Others otherwise define a plain superficies: A plain superficies is that,
which is firmly set between his extremes, as before was said of a right line.

An other definition.
Again, A plain superficies is that, unto all whose parts a right line may
well be applied.

An other definition.
Again, A plain superficies is that, which is the shortest of al superficies,
which have one and the self extremes: As a rig^t line was the shortest line
that can be drawn between two points.

An other definition.
Again, A plain superficies is that, whose middle darkeneth the extremes, as
was also said of a right line.

Definition of a plain angle.
8 A plain angle is an inclination or bowing of two lines the one to the other
and the one touching the other, and not being directly joined together.
As the two lines AB, and BC, incline the one to the other, and touch the one
the other in the point B, in which point by reason of the inclination of the
said lines, is made the angle ABC. But if the two lines which touch the one the
other, be without all inclination of the one to the other, and be drawn
directly the one to the other, then make they not any angle at all, as the
lines CD, and DE, touch the one the other in the point D, and yet as ye see
they make no angle.

Definition of a ^ec^ilined angle.
9 And if the lines which contain the angle be right lines, then is it called
a rightlyned angle.
As the angle ABC, in the former figures, is a rightlined angle, because it is
contained of right lines: where note, that an angle is for the most part
described by three letters, of which the second or middle letter represents
the very angle, and therefore is set at the angle.

By the contrary, a crooked lyned angle, is that which is contained of crooked
lines, which may be diversely figured. Also a mixed angle is that which is caused
of them both, namely, of a right line and a crooked, which may also be diversely
figured, as in the figures before set ye may see. (...) of angles.
There are of angles three kinds, a right angle, an acute angle, and an obtuse
angle, the definitions of which now follow.

What a right angle, and What also a perpendicular line i^.
10 When a right line standing upon a right line makes the angles on either
side equall^ then either of those angles is a right angle. And the right line
which stands erected, is called a perpendiculer line to that upon which it
stands.
As upon the right line CD, suppose there do stand an other line AB, in such
sort, that it makes the angles on either side thereof equal: namely, the angle
ABC on the one side equal to the angle ABD on the other side: then is each of
the two angles ABC, and ABD a right angle, and the line AB, which stands
erected upon the line CD, without inclination to either part is a perpendicular
line, commonly called among artificers a plumbe line.

What an obtuse angle ^^.
11 An obtuse angle is that which is greater then a right angle.
As the angle CBE in the example is an obtuse angle, for it is greater then the
angle ABC, which is a right angle, because it contains it, and contains
moreover the angle ABE.

12 An acute angle is that, which is less then a right angle. What an acute
angle is.

As the angle EBD in the figure before put is an acute angle, for that it is
less then the angle ABD, which is a right angle, for the right angle
contains it, and moreover the angle ABE.

13 A limite or term, is the end of every thing. The limite of any thing.

For as much as of things infinite (as Plato says) there is no science, No
science of things infinite
therefore must magnitude or quantity (whereof Geometry entreats) be finite,
and have borders and limits to enclose it, which are here defined to be the
ends thereof. As a point is the limite or term of a line, because it is thend
thereof: A line likewise is the limite and term of a superficies: and likewise
a superficies is the limite and term of a body, as is before declared.

14 A figure is that, which is contained under one limite or term, or many.
Definition of a figure.

As the figure A is contained under one limit, which is the round line, also
the figure B is contained under three right lines. And the figure C under
four, and so of others, which are their limits or terms.

15 A circle is a plain figure, contained under one line, which is called a
circumference, Definition of a circle.
unto which all lines drawn from one point within the figure and falling upon
the circumference thereof are equal the one to the other.
As the figure here set is a plain figure, that is a figure without grossenes
or thicknes, and is also contained under one line, namely, the crooked line B
CD, which is the circumference thereof, it has moreover in the middle thereof a
point, namely, the point A, from which, all the lines drawn to the
superficies, are equal^ as the lines AB, AC, AD, and other how many soever.

Of all figures a circle is the most perfect, A circle the most perfect of all
figures.
and therefore is it here first defined.

16 And that point is called the center of the circle, as is the point A, which
is set in the mids of the former circle. The center of a circle.

For the more easy declaration, that all the lines drawn from the center of
the circle to the circumference, are equal, ye must note, that although a line
be not made of points: yet a point, by his motion or draught, describes a
line. Likewise a line drawn, or moved, describes a superficies^ also a
superficies being moved makes a solid or body. Now the^ imagine the line AB,
(the point A being fixed) to be moved about in a plain superficies, drawing
the point B continually about the point A, till it return to the place where
it began first to move: so shall the point B, by this motion, describe the
circumference of the circle, and the point A being fixed, is the center of the
circle. Which in all the time of the motion of the line, had like distance:
from the circumference, namely, the length of the line AB. And for that all the
lines drawn from the center to the circumference are described of that line,
they are also equal unto it, and between themselves.

Definition of a diameter.
17 A diameter of a circle, is a right line, which drawn by the center
thereof, and ending at the circumference on either side, deuideth the circle
into two equal parts.
As the line BAC in this circle present is the diameter, because it passes
from the point B, of the one side of the circumfere^ce^ to the point C, on the
other side of the circumference, and passes also by the point A being the
center of the circle. And moreover it deuideth the circle into two equal
parts: the one, namely BDC, being on the one side of the line, and the other
namely, BEC, on the other side, which thing did Thales Miletius (which brought
Geometry out of Egypt into Greece) first observe and prove. For if a line drawn
by the center, do not divide a circle into two equal parts; all the lines
drawn from the center to the circumference should not be equal.

Definition of a semicircle.
18 A semicircle, is a figure which is contained under the diameter, and under
that part of the circumference which is cut of by the diametre.
As in the circle ABCD the figure BAC is a semicircle, because it is contained
of the right line BGC, which is the diametre, and of the crooked line BAC,
being that part of the circumference, which is cut of by the diametre BGC. So
likewise the other part of the circle, namely BDC^ is a semicircle as the other
was.

Definition of a section of a circle.
19 A section or portion of a circle, is a figure which is contained under a
right line, and a part of the circumference, greater or less then the
semicircle.
As the figure ABC, in the example, is a section of a circle, and is greater
then half a circle, and the figure ADC, is also a section of a circle, and is
less then a semicircle. A section, portion, or part of a circle is all one,
and signifies such a part which is either more or less, then a semicircle: so
that a semicircle is not here called a section or portion of a circle. A right
line drawn from one side of the circumference of a circle to the other, not
passing by the center, deuideth the circle into two unequal parts, which are
two sections, of which that which contains the center is called the greater
section, and the other is called the less section. As in the example, the part
of the circle ABC, which contains in it the center E, is the greater section,
being greater then the half circle: the other part, namely ADC, which has not
the center in it, is the less section of the circle, being less then a
semicircle.

Definition of r^^^^lined figures.
20 Rightlined figures are such which are contained under right lines.
As are such as follows, of which some are contained under three right lines,
some under ^oure, some under five, and some under mo.

Definition of three sided figures.
21 Three sided figures, or figures of three sides, are such which are contained
under three right lines.
As the figure in the example ABC, is a figure of three sides because it is
contained under three right lines, namely, under the lines AB, BC, CA.

A figure of three sides, or a triangle, is the first figure in order of all
right lined figures, and therefore of all others it is first defined. For under
less then three lines, can no figure be comprehended.

22. Four sided figures or figures of four sides are such, Definition of
four sided figures.
which are contained under four right lines.
As the figure here set, is a figure of four sides, for that it is
comprehended under four right lines, namely, AB, BD, DC, CA.

Triangles, and four sided figures serve commonly to many uses in
demonstrations of Geometry. Wherefore the nature and properties of them, are
much to be observed, the use of other figures is more obscure.

23. Many sided figures are such which have mo sides then four. Definition of
many sided figures.

Right lined figures having mo sides then four, by continual adding of sides
may be infinite. Wherefore to define them all severally, according to the number
of their ^ides, should be very tedious, or rather impossible. Therefore has
Euclide, comprehended the^ under one name, and under one diffinition: calling
them many sided figures, as many as have mo sides then four: as if they have
five sides, six, seven, or mo^ Here note ye, that every rightlined figure has
as many angles, as it has sides, and takes his denomination as well of the
number of his angles, as of the number of his sides. As a figure contained
under three right lines, of the number of his three sides, is called a three
sided figure ^euen so of the number of his three angles, it is called a
triangle. Likewise a figure contained under four right lines, by reason of the
number of his sides, is called a four sided figure: and by reason of the
number of his angles, it is called a quadrangled figure, and so of others.

24. Of three sided figures or triangles, Definition of an equilater triangle.
an equilatre triangle is that, which has three equal sides.
Triangles have their differences partly of their sides, and partly of their
angles. As touching the differences of their sides, there are three kinds. For
either all three sides of the triangle are equal, or two only are equal, and
the third unequal: (...) three are unequal the one to the other. The first
kind of triangles, namely, that which has three equal sides, is most simple,
and easiest to be known: and is here first defined, and is called an equilater
triangle, as the triangle A in the example, all whose sides are of one length.

Definition of an Isosceles.
25. Isosceles, is a triangle, which has only two sides equal.
The second kind of triangles has two sides of one length, but the third side
is either longer or shorter the^ the other two, as are the triangles here
figured, B, C, D

In the triangle B, the two sides AE and OF are equal the one to the other, and
the side AE, is longer then any of them both: Likewise in the triangle C the
two sides GH and HK, are ^quall, and the side GK is greater. Also in the
triangle D, the sides LM and MN, are ^quall, and the side LN is shorter.

Definition of a Scalenum.
26. Scalenum is a triangle, whose three sides are all unequal.
As are the triangles E, F, in which there is no one side equal to any of the
other. For in the triangle E, the side AC is greater then the side BC, and the
side BC is greater the^ the side AB. Likewise in the triangle F, the side DH,
is greater the^ the side DG, and the side DG, is greater then the side GH.

An Orthigonium triangle.
27. Again of triangles, an Orthigonium or a rightangled triangle, is a
triangle which has a right angle.
As there are three kinds of triangles, by reason of the diversity of the
sides, so are there also three kinds of triangles, by reason of the variety
of the angles. For every triangle either contains one right angle, and two
acute angles: or one obtuse angle, and two acute: or three acute angles: for it
is impossible that one triangle should contain^ two obtuse angles, or two right
angles, or one obtuse angle, and the other a right angle. All which kinds are
here defined. First a rightangled triangle which has in it a right angle. As
the triangle BCD, of which the angle BCD, is a right angle.

An Ambligonium triangle.
28. An ambligonium or an obtuse angled triangle, is a triangle which has an
obtuse angle.
As is the triangle B, whose angle AC D, is an obtuse angle, and is also a
Scalenon, having his three sides unequal: the triangle E, is likewise an
Ambligonion, whose angle FGH, is an obtuse angle, and is an Isosceles, having
two of his sides equal, namely FG and GH.

An Oxigonium triangle.
29. An oxigonium or an acute angled triangle, is a triangle which has all his
three angles acute.
As the triangles A, B, C, in the example, al whose angles are acute: of which
A is an equilater triangle, B, an Isosceles, and C a Scalenon. An equilater
triangle is most simple, and has one uniform construction, and therefore all
the angles of it are equal, and never has in it either a right angle, or an
obtuse: but the angles of an Isosceles or a Scalenon, may diversely vary. It is
also to be noted that in comparison of any two sides of a triangle, the third
is called a base. As of the triangle ABC in respect of the two lines AB and AC,
the line BC, is the base: and in respect of the two sides AC and CB, the line
AB, is the base, and likewise in respect of the two sides CB and BA, the line
AC, is the base.

30 Of four syded figures, Definition of a square.
a quadrate or square is that, whose sides are equal, and his angles right.
As triangles have their difference and variety by reason of their sides and
angles: so likewise do figures of four sides, take their variety and
difference partly by reason of their sides, and partly by reason of their
angles, as appears by their definitions. The four sided figure ABCD is a
square or a quadrate, because it is a right angled figure, al his angles are
right angles, and also all his four sides are equal.

31 A figure on the one side longer, Definition of a long square.
or squarelike, or as some call it, a long square, is that which has right
angles, but has not equal sides.
This figure agrees with a square touching his angles, in that either of them
has right angles, and differs from it only by reason of his sides, in that
the sides thereof be not equal, as are the sides of a square. As in the
example, the angles of the figure ABCD, are right angles, but the two sides
thereof AB, and CD, are longer then the other two sides AC, and BD.

32 Rhombus (or a diamonde) is a figure having four equal sides, Definition
of a Diamond figure
but it is not rightangled.
This figure agrees with a square, as touching the equallitie of lines, but
differs from it in that it has not right angles, as has the square. As of
this figure, the four lines AB, BC, CD, DA, be equal, but the angles thereof
are not right angles. For the two angles ABC and ADC, are obtuse angles,
greater then right angles, and the other two angles BAD and BCD, are two acute
angles less then two right angles. And these four angles are yet equal to
four right angles: for, as much as the acute angle wa^t^th of a right angle,
so much the obtuse angle excedeth a right angle.

Definition of a diamondlike figure.
33 Rhomb^ides (or a diamond like) is a figure, whose opposite sides are
equal, and whose opposite angles are also equal, but it has neither equal
sides, nor right angles.
As in the figure ABCD, all the four sides are not equal, but the two sides
AB and CD, being opposite the one to the other, also the other two sides AC and
BD, being also opposite, are equal the one to the other. Likewise the angles
are not right angles, but the angles CAB, and CDB, are obtuse angles, and
opposite and equal the one to the other. Likewise the angles ABD, and ACD, are
acute angles, and opposite, and also equal the one to the other.

Trapezia or tables.
34 All other figures of four sides besides these, are called trapezia, or
tables.
Such are all figures, in which is observed no equallitie of sides nor angles:
as the figures A and B, in the marge^t, which have neither equal sides, nor
equal angles, but are described at all adventure without observation of order,
and therefore they are called irregular figures.

Definition of Parallel lines.
35 Parallel or equidistant right lines are such, which being in one and the
self same superficies, and produced infinitely on both sides, do never in any
part concur.
As are the lines AB, and CD, in the example.



Peticions or requests.
1 From any point to any point, to draw a right line.
After the definitions, which are the first kind of principles, now follow
petitions, which are the second kind of principles: What Peticions are.
which are certain general sentences, so plain, and so perspicuous, that they
are perceived to be true as soon as they are uttered, and no man that has but
common sense, can, nor will deny them. Of which, the first is that, which is
here set. As from the point A, to the point B, who will deny, but easily grant
that a right line may be drawn? For two points howsoever they be set, are
imagined to be in one and the self same plain superficies, wherefore from the
one to the other there is some shortest draught, which is a right line.
Likewise any two right lines howsoever they be set, are imagined to be in one
superficies, and therefore from any one line to any one line, may be drawn a
superficies.

2 To produce a right line finite, straight forth continually.
As to draw in length continually the right line AB, who will not grant? For
there is no magnitude so great, but that there may be a greter, nor any so
little, but that there may be a less. And a line is a draught from one point to
an other, therefore from the point B, which is the end of the line AB, may be
drawn a line to some other point, as to the point C, and from that to an other^
and so infinitely.

3 Upon any center and at any distance, ^o describe a circle.
A plain superficies may in compass be extended infinitely: as from any
point to any point may be drawn a right line, by reason whereof it comes to
pass that a circle may be described upon any center and at any space or
distance. As upon the center A, and upon the space AB, ye may describe the
circle BC, and upon the same center, upon the distance AD, ye may describe the
circle DE, or upon the same center A, according to the distaunce AF, ye may
describe the circle FG, and so infinitely extendyng your space.

4 All right angles are equal the one to the other.
This peticion is most plain, and offreth it self even to the sense. For as
much as a right angle is (...) ri^ht line falling perpendicularly upon an
other, and no one line can fall more perpendicularly upon a line then an other^
therefore no one right angle can be greater (...) an other^ neither d^ the
length or shortenes of the lines alter the greatness of the angle. For in the
example, the right angle ABC, though it be made of much longer lines then the
right angle DEF, whose lines are much shorter, yet is that angle no greater
then the other. For if ye set the point E ^ust upon the point B^ then shall the
line ED, euenly and justly fall upon the line AB^ and the line OF, shall also
fall equally upon the line BC, and so shall the angle DEF, be equal to the
angle ABC, for that the lines which cause them, are of like inclination.

It may evidently also be seen at the center of a circle. For if ye draw in a
circle two diameters, the one cutting the other in the center by right angles,
ye shall divide the circle into four equal parts, of which each contains
one right angle, so are all the four right angles about the center of the
circle equal.

5 When a right line falling upon ^wo right lines, does make ^n one and the
self same side, the two inward angles less then two right angles, then shall
these two right lines being produced (...) length concur on that part, in
which are the two angles less then two right angles.
As if the right line AB, fall upon two right lines, namely, CD and OF, so that
it make the two inward angles on the one side, as the angles DHI and FIH, less
then two right angles (as in the example they do) the said two lines CD, and
OF, being drawn forth in length on that part, whereon the two angles being
less^ (...) ^wo right angle^ consist, shall (...) length concur and meet
together: as in the point D, as it is easy to see. For the parts of the lines
toward DF, are more inclined the one to the other, then the parts of the
lines toward CE are. Wherefore the more these parts are produced, the more
they shall approach near and near, till at length they shall mete in one point.
Contrariwise the same lines drawn in length on the other side, for that the
angles on that side, namely, the angle CHB, and the angle EIA, are greater then
two right angles, so much as the other two angles are less th^n two right
angles, shall never mete, but the further they are drawn, the further they
shall be distant the one from the other.

6 That two right lines include not a superficies.
If the lines AB and AC, being right lines, should enclose a superficies, they
must of necessity be joined together at both the ends, and the superficies
must be between the^. Join them on the one side together in the point A, and
imagine the point B to be drawn to the point C, so shall the line AB, fall on
the line AC, and cover it, and so be all one with it, and never enclose a space
or superficies.

Common sentences.
1 Things equal to one and the self same thing: are equal also the one to
the other.
What common sentences are.
After definitions and petitions, now are set common sentences, which are the
third and last kind of principles. Which are certain general propositio^s,
commonly known of all men, of themselves most manifest and clear, and therefore
are called also dignities not able to be denied of any. Peticions also are very
manifest, but not so fully as are the common sentences, Difference between
peticions and common sentences.
and therefore are required or desired to be granted. Peticions also are more
peculiar to the art whereof they are: as those before put are proper to
Geometry: but common sentences are general to all things whereunto they can be
applied. Again, peticions consist in actions or doing of somewhat most easy to
be done: but common sentences consist in consideration of mind, but yet of
such things which are most easy to be understood, as is that before set. As
if the line A be equal to the line B, And if the line C be also equal to the
line B, then of necessity the lines A and C, shall be equal the one to the
other. So is it in all super^iciesses, angles, and numbers, and in all other
things (of one kind) that may be compared together.

2 And if ye add equal things to equal things: the whole shall be equal.
As if the line AB be equal to the line CD, and to the line AB, be added the
line BE, and to the line CD, be added also an other line DF, being equal to the
line BE, so that two equal lines, namely, BE, and DF, be added to two equal
lines AB, and CD: then shall the whole line AE, be equal to the whole line CF,
and so of all quantities generally.

3 And if from equal things, ye take away equal things: the things
remaining shall be equal.
As if from the two lines AB and CD, being equal, ye take away two equal
lines, namely, EB and FD, then may you conclude by this common sentence, that
the parts remaining, namely, AE, and CF are equal the one to the other and so
of all other quantities.

4 And if from unequal things ye take away equal things: the things which
remain shall be unequal.
As if the lines AB, and CD, be unequal, the line AB, being longer then the
line CD, and if ye take from them two equal lines, as EB, and FD: the parts
remaining, which are the lines AE and CF, shall be unequal the one to the
other, namely, the line AE, shall be greater then the line CF, which is ever
true in all quantities whatsoever.

5 And if to unequal things ye add equal things: the whole shall be
unequal.
As if ye have two unequal lines, namely, AE the greater, and CF the less, and
if ye add unto the^ two equal lines, EB and FD, then may ye conclude that
the whole lines composed are unequal: namely, that the whole line AB, is
greater then the whole line CD, and so of all other quantities.

6 Things which are double to one and the self same thing: are equal the one
to the other.
As if the line AB be double to the line OF, and if also the line CD, be double
to the same line EF^ the^ may you by this common sentence conclude, that the
two lines AB, and CD, are equal the one to the other. And this is true in all
quantities, and that not only, when they are double, but also if they be triple
or quadruple, or in what proportion soever it be of the greater inequallitie.
What proportion of the greater inequality i^
Which is when the greater quantity is compared to the less.

7 Things which are the half of one and the self same things are equal the
one to the other.
As if the line AB, be the half of the line OF, and if the line CD, be the
half also of the same line OF: then may ye conclude by this common sentence,
that the two lines AB and CD, are equal the one to the other. This is also
true in all kinds of quantity, and that not only when it is a half, but
also if it be a third, a quarter, or in what proportion soever it be of the
less in equallitie. Which is when the less quantity is compared to the
greater. What proportion of the less inequality i^.


8 Things which agree together are equal the one to the other.
Such things are said to agree together, which when they are applied the one
to the other: or set the one upon the other, the one ^^^^deth not the other in
any thing. As if the two triangles ABC, and DEF, were applied the one to the
other, and the triangle ABC, were set upon the triangle DEF, if then the angle
A, do justly agree with the angle D, and the angle B, with the angle E, and
also the angle C, with the angle F: and moreover ^f the line AB, do justly fall
upon the line DE, and the line AC, upon the line DF, and also the line BC,
upon the line OF, so that on every part of these two triangles, there is just
agreement, then may ye conclude that the two triangles are equal.

9 Every whole is greater then his part.
As the whole is equal to all his parts taken together, so is it greater then
any one part thereof. As if the line CB be a part of the line AB, then by this
common sentence ye may conclude that the whole line AB, is greater then the
part, namely, the^ the line CB. And this is general in all things.

What a Proposition is.
THe principles thus placed and ended, now follow the propositions, which are
sentences set forth to be proved by reasoning and demonstrations, and therefore
they are again repeated in the end of the demonstration^ For the proposition
is ever the conclusion, and that which ought to be p^oued.

Propositions of two sorts.
Propositions are of two sorts, the one is called a Problem, the other a
Theoreme.

What a Pr^bleme is.
A Problem, is a proposit^on which requires some action, or doing: as the
making of some ^igure, or to divide a figure or line, to apply figure to
^igure, to add figures together, or to subtrah one from an other, to describe,
to inscribe, to circumscribe one figure within or without another, and such
like. As of the first proposition of the first book is a problem, which is
thus^ Upon a right line given not being infinite, to describe an ^quilater
triangle, or a triangle of three equal sides. For in it, besides the
demonstration and contemplation of the mind, is required somewhat to be done:
namely^ to make an equilater triangle upon a line given. And in the end of
every problem, after the demonstration, is concluded after this man^er, Which
is the thing, which was required to be done.

What a Theoreme is.
A Theoreme, is a proposition, which requires the searching ou^ and
demonstration of some property or passion of some figure: Wherein is only
speculation and contemplation of mind, without doing or working of any things
As the fifth proposition of the first book, which is thus, An Isosceles or
triangle of two equal sides, has his angles at the base, equal the one to
the other, etc. is a Theoreme. For in it is required only to be proved and made
plain by reason and demonstration, that these two angles be equal, without
further working or doing. And in the end^ of ^u^ry Theoreme, after the
demonstration is concluded after this manner, Which thing was required to be
demonstrated or proved.

The first Problem. The first Proposition. Upon a right line given not being
infinite, to describe an equilater triangle, or a triangle of three equal
sides.
SVppose that the right line given be AB. It is required upon the line AB, to
describe an equilater triangle, namely, a triangle of three equal sides.
Construction.
Now therefore making the center the point A and the space AB, describe (by the
third peticion) a circle BCD: and again (by the same) making the center the
point B, and the space B^, describe an other circle ACE. And (by the first
peticion) from the point C, wherein the circles cut the one the other, draw one
right line to the point A, and an other right line to the point B. And
forasmuch as the point A is the center of the circle CBD, Demonstration
therefore (by the 15. definition) the line AC is equal to the line AB: Again
forasmuch as the point B is the center of the circle CAE, therefore (by the same
definition) the line BC is equal to the line BA. And it is proved, that the
line AC is equal to the line AB: wherefore either of these lines CA and CB, is
equal to the line AB: but things which are equal to one and the same thing,
are also equal the one to the other (by the first common sentence) wherefore
the line CA, also is equal to the line CB. Wherefore these three right lines
CA, AB, and BC are equal the one to the other. Wherefore the tria^gle ABC is
equilater. Wherefore upon the line AB, is described an equilater triangle ABC.
Wherefore upon a line given not being infinite, there is described an
equilater triangle, Which is the thing, which was required to be done.

A triangle or any other rectilined figure is then said to be set or described
upon a line, when the line is one of the sides of the figure.

This first proposition is a Problem, because it requires act or doing,
namely, to describe a triangle. And this is to be noted, that every
Proposition, whether it be a Problem, or a Theoreme, commonly contains in it
a thing given, and a thing required to be searched out: although it be not
always so. And the thing given, Thing given.
is ever set before the thing required. Thing required
In some propositions there are more things given then one, and mo things
required then one. In some there is nothing given at all.

Moreover every Problem and Theoreme, being perfect and absolute, ought to
have all these parts, namely. First the Proposition, Proposition.
to be proved. Exposition.
Then the exposition which is the explication of the thing given. After that
follows the determination, Determination.
which is the declaration of the thing required. Then is set the construction
of such things which are necessary either for the doing of the proposition,
Construction.
or for the demo^stration. Afterward follows the demonstration, Demonstration.
which is the reason and proof of the proposition. And last of all is put the
conclusion, Conclusion.
which is inferred and proved by the demonstration, and is ever the
proposition. But all those parts are not of necessity required in every
Problem and Theoreme. But the Proposition, demonstration, and conclusion, are
necessary parts, and can never be absent: the other parts may sometimes be
away.

Case.
Further in diverse propositions, there happen diverse cases: which are nothing
else, but variety of delineatio^ and construction, or change of position, as
when points, lines super^iciesses, or bodies are changed. Which things
happen in diverse propositions.

The thing given in this Problem.
NOw then in this Problem, the thing given, is the line given: the thing
required, The thing required.
to be serched out is, how upon that line to describe an equilater triangle.
The Proposition of this Problem is, The pr^position.
Upon a right line given not being infinite, to describe an equilater triangle.

The exposition.
The exposition is, Suppose that the right line given be AB, and this declares
only the thing given. The determination is, The determination.
It is required upon the line AB, to describe an equilater triangle: for thereby
as you see, is declared only the thing required. The construction begins at
these wo^ds, The constructio^
Now therefore making the ce^tre the point A, and the space AB, describe (by the
third pe^icion) a circle etc, and continues until you come to these words,
And forasmuch at the point A etc. For thethe^to are described circles and
lines, necessary both for the doing of the proposition, and also for the
demonstration thereof. Which demonstration begins at these words: The
demonstration.
And forasmuch as the point A is the center of the circle CBD etc: And so
proceeds till you come to these words, Wherefore upon the line AB is
described an equilater triangle ABC. For until you come thither, is, by
grounds before set and constructions had, proved, and made evident, that the
triangle made, is equilater And then in these words, The p^rticular conclusion.
wherefore upon the line AB, is described an equilater triangle ABC, is put the
first conclusion. For there are commonly in every proposi^ion two conclusions:
the one particular, the other universal: and from the first you go to the last.
And this is the first and particular conclusion, ^or that it conclu^eth, that
upon the line AB is described an equilater tria^gle, which is according to the
exposition. After it, The vn^u^^sall c^nclus^^n.
follows the last and universal conclusion, wherefore upon a right line given
not being infinite is described an equilater triangle. For whether the line
given be greater or less then this line, the ^ame constructio^s and
demonstrations prove the same conclusion. Last of all is added this clause, The
note where by it (...) ^nowne ^o be a Proble^e.
Which is the thing which was required to be done: whereby as we have before
noted, is declared, that this proposition is a Problem and not a Theoreme. As
for variety of cases in this proposition there is none, No cases in this
proposition.
for that the line given, can have no diversity of position.

As you have in this Problem seen plainelye set forth the thing given, and
the thing required, moreover the proposition, exposition, determination,
construction, demonstration, and conclusion (which are general also to many
other both Problemes and Theoremes) so may you by the example thereof distinct
them, and search them out in other Problemes^ and also Theoremes.

Thr^^ kinds of dem^^stration.
This also is to be noted, that there are three kinds of demonstration, The one
is called Demonstratio a priori, or composition. The other is called
Demonstrati^ a posteriori, or resolution. And the third is a demonstration
leadyng to an impossibility.

A demonstration a priori, Demonstration a priori, or composition.
or composition is, when in reaso^ing, from the principles and first grounds,
we pass discending continually, till after many reasons made, we come at the
leng^h to conclude that, which we first chiefly entend. And this kind of
demonstration uses Euclide in his booke^ for the most part.

A demonstration a posteriori, Demonstration a posteriori, or resolution.
or resolution is, when contrariwise in reasoning, we pass from the last
conclusion made by the premises, and by the premises of the premises,
continually ascending, til we come to the first principles and grounds, which
are indemonstrable, and for their simplicity can suffer no farther resolution.

A demonstration leadyng to an impossibility is that argument, whose
conclusion is impossible: Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
that is, when it concludes directly against any principle, or against any
proposition before proved by principles, or propositio^s before proved.

Premises in an argument, are propositions going before the conclusion by
which the conclusion is proved. Premises what they are.


Composition passes from the cause to the effect, or from things simple to
things more compounded. Resolution contrariwise passes from things
compounded to things more simple, or from the effect to ^he cause.

Composition or the first kind of demonstration, which passes from the
principles, may easily be seen in this first proposition of Euclide. An example
of composition in the first proposition.
The demonstration whereof begins thus. And forasmuch as the point A is the
center of the circle CBD, therefore the line AC, is equal to the line AB. This
reason (you see) takes his beginning of a principle, namely, of the definition
of a circle. And this is the first reason. First reason.
Again forasmuch as B is the center of the circle CAE, therefore the line BC is
equal to the line BA: which is the second reason. Second reason.
And it was before proved that the line AC is equal to the line AB, wherefore
either of these lines CA and CB is equal to the line AB. And this is the third
reason. Third reason.
But things which are equal to one and the self same thing, are also equal
the one to the other. Wherefore the line CA is equal to the line CB. And this
is the fourth argument. Fourth reason.
Wherefore these three lines CA, AB, and BC are equal the one to the other
which is the conclusion, Conclusion.
and the thing to be proved.

You may also in the same first Proposition, easily take an example of
Resolution: Example of resolution in the first proposition.
using a contrary order passing backward from the last conclusion of the former
demonstration, til you come to the first principle or ground whereon it began.
For the last argument or reason in composition, is the first in Resolution: and
the first in composition, is the last in resolution. Thus therefore must ye
proceed. The triangle ABC is contained of three equal right lines, namely, AB,
AC, and BC, and therefore it is an equilater triangle by the definition of an
equilater triangle: and this is the first reason. First reason.
That the three lines be equal, is thus proved. The lines AC and CB are equal
to the line AB, wherefore they are equal the one to the other: and this is the
second reason. Second reason.
That the lines AB^ and BC, are equal is thus proved: The lines AB and AC, are
drawn from the center of the circle ACE, to the circumference of the same:
wherefore they are equal by the definition of a circle; and this is the third
reason. Third reason.
Likewise that the lines AC and AB, ^ourth ^eason which is the end of the whole
resolution.
are equal, is proved by the same reason. For the lines AC and AB are drawn
from the center of the circle BCD: wherefore they are equal by the same
definition of a circle: this is the fourth reason or sillogisme. And thus is
ended the whole resolution: for that you are come to a principle, which is
indemo^strable, and can not be resolved.

Of a ^emonstration leading to an impossibility, or to an absurdity, you may
have an example in the ^ourth proposition of this book.

An addition of Campanus.
But now if upon the same line given, namely, AB, ye will describe the other
two kinds of triangles, namely, an Isosceles or a tria^gle of two equal sides,
and a Scalenon, or a triangle of three unequal sides. First for the describing
of an Isosceles triangle produce the line AB on either side, How to describe an
Isosceles triangle.
until it concur with the circumferences of both the circles in the points D
and F, and making the center the point A, describe a circle HFG according to
the quantity of the line AF. Likewise making the center the point B, describe
a circle HDG, according to the quantity of the line BD. Now the^ these circles
shall cut the one the other in two points, which let be H, and G: And let the
^nd^s of the line given be joined with one of the said sections by two right
lines, which let be AG and BG. And forasmuch as these two lines AB and AD are
drawn from the center of the circle CDE unto the circumfere^ce thereof,
therefore ar they equal. Likewise the lines BA and BF, for that they are drawn
from the center of the circle EACF to the circumference thereof, a^e equal. And
forasmuch as either of the lines AD and BF is equal to the line AB, therefore
they are equal the one to the other. Wherefore putting the line AB common to
the^ both, the whole line BD shall be equal to the whole line AF. But BD is
equal to BG, for they are both drawn from the ce^tre of the circle HDG to the
circumfere^ce thereof. And likewise by the same reason the line AF is equal to
the line AG. Wherefore by the common sentence the lines AG and BG are equal the
one to the other, and either of them is greater then the line AB, for that
either of the two lines BD and AF is greater then the line AB. Wherefore upon
the line given is described an Isosceles or triangle of two equal sides.

How to describe a Scale^um.
Ye may also describe upon the self same line a Scale^on, or triangle of three
unequal sides, if by two right lines, ye join both the ends of the line
g^uen to some one point that is in the circumference of one of the two greater
circles, so that that point be not in one of the two sections, and that the
line DF do not concur with it, when it is on either side produced continuallye
and directlye. For let the point K be taken in the circumference of the circle
HDG, and let it not be in any of the sections, neither let the line DF concur
with it, when it is produced continually and directly unto the circumference
thereof. And draw these lines AK and BK, and the line AK shall cut the
circumference of the circle HFG. Let it cut it in the point L: now then by the
common sentence the line BK shall be equal to the line AL, for (by the definition
of a circle) the line BK is equal to the line BG, and the line AL is equal to
the line AG which is equal to the line BG. Wherefore the line AK is greater then
the line BK and by the same reason may it be proved that the line BK is
greater then the line AB. Wherefore the triangle ABK consists of three unequal
sides. And so have ye upon the line given, described all the kinds of
triangles.

This is to be noted, that if a man will mechanically and redely, not regarding
demonstration upon a line given describe a triangle of three equal sides, How
to describe an equilater triangle redily and mechanically.
he needs not to describe the whole foresaid circle, but only a little part
of each: namely, where they cut the one the other, and so from the point of the
section to draw the lines to the ends of the line geuen^ As in this figure
here put.

And likewise, if upon the said line he will describe a triangle of two equal
sides, How to describe an Isosceles triangle redily.
let him extend the compass according to the quantity that he will have the
side to be, whether longer then the line given or shorter: and so draw only a
little part of each circle, where they cut the one the other, and from the point
of the section draw the lines to the end of the line given. As in the figures
here put. Note that in this the two sides must be such, that being joined
together, they be longer then the line given.

And so also if upon the said right line he will describe a triangle of three
unequal sides, How to describe a Scalenum triangle redily.
let him extend the compass. First, according to the quantity that he will
have one of the unequal sides to be, and so draw a little part of the circle,
and then extend it according to the quantity that he will have the other
unequal side to be, and draw likewise a little part of the circle, and that
done, from the point of the section dra^ the lines to the ends of the line
given, as in the figure here put. Note that in this the two sides must be such,
that the circles described according to their quantity may, cut the one the
other.

The second Problem. The second Proposition. From a point given, to draw a
right line equal to a rightline given.
SVppose that the point given be A, and let the right line given be BC. It is
required from the point A, to draw a right line equal to the line BC. Draw
(by the first peticio^) from the point A to the point B a right line AB:
Constru^ti^^.
and upon the line AB describe (by the first proposition) an equilater
triangle, and let the same be DAB, and exte^d, by the second peticio^, the
right lines DA and DB, to the points E and F, and (by the third peticio^)
making the center B and the space BC describe a circle CGH: and again (by the
same) making the center D and the space DG describe a circle GKL. And forasmuch
as the point B is the center of the circle CGH, Demonstration.
therefore (by the 15. definition) the line BC is equal to the line BG: and
forasmuch as the point D is the center of the circle GKL: therefore (by the
same) the line DL is equal to the line DG: of which the line DA is equal to a
line DB (by the proposition going before) wherefore the residue, namely, the
line AL is equal to the residue, namely, to the line BG (by the third common
sentence) And it is proved that the line BC is equal to the line BG Wherefore
either of these lines AL and BC is equal to the line BG. But things which are
equal to one and the same thing are also equal the one to the other (by the
first common sentence.) Wherefore the line AL is equal to the line BC.
Wherefore from the point given, namely, A, is drawn a right line AL equal to
the right line given BC: which was required to be done.

Of Problemes and Theoremes^ as we have before noted, some have no cases at
all, which are those which have only one position and construction^ and other
some have many and diverse cases: which are such propositions which have diverse
descriptions and constructions, and change their positions. Of which sort is
this second proposition, which is also a Problem. This proposition has two
things given: Two things given in this proposition.

Power cases in this proposition.


Namely, a point, and a line: the thing re^uired is, that from the point
given wheresoever it be put, be drawn a line equal to the line given. Now
this point given may have diverse positio^s For it may be placed either without
the right line given, or in some point in it. If it be without it, either it is
on the side of it, so that the right line drawn from it to the end of the
right line given makes an angle^ or else it is put directly unto it^ so that
the right line given being produced shall fall upon the point given which is
without. But if it be in the line given, then either it is in one of the ends
or extremes thereof: or in some place between the extremes. So are there four
diverse positions of the point in respect of the line. Whereupon follow diverse
delineations and constructions, and consequently variety of cases.

The first case.
For the first case the figure before put, serves.

The second case.
To the second case the figure here on the side set belongs. And as touching
the order both o^ construction and of demonstration it is ^ll one with the
first.

The thi^d case.
The third case is easiest of all, namely, when the point given is in one of the
extremes. As for example, if it were in the point C, which is one of the
extremes of the line BC. Then making the center the point C, and the space CB
describe a circle BLG: and from the center C draw a line unto the
circumference, which let the CL, which by the definition of a circle, shall be
equal to the line given, BC.

The fourth case as touching construction herein differs from the two first,
The fourth case.
for that whereas in the^ you are willed to draw a right line from the point
given, namely, A, to the point B which is one of the ends of the line given,
here you shall not need to draw that line, for that it is already drawn. As
touching the rest, both in construction and demonstration you may proceed as
in the two firste^ As it is manifest to see in this figure here on the side
put.

This proposition for the playnes and easines thereof, This proposition though
it be very easy to be done mechanically^ yet is n^ principl^.
seems to be as it were a principle, and may easly mechanically be done. For
opening the compass to the quantitye of the line given, and setting on foot
of it fixed in the point given and marking with the other another point
whersoeuer it fall, and so by the first peticion drawing a right line from the
one of those points to the other, the said right line shall be equal to the
right line given: yet in deed is it no principle, for that it may by
demonstration be proved: but principles can not be proved, as we have before
declared.

The 3. Problem. The 3. Proposition. Two unequal right lines being given, to
cut of from the greater, a right line equal to the less.
SVppose that the two unequal right lines given be AB and C, of which let the
line AB be the greater. It is required from the line AB being the greater, to
cut of a right line equal to the right line C, which is the less line-draw^ on
(by the second proposition) from the point A a right line equal to the line C,
and let the same be AD: and making the center A and the space AD describe (by
the third peticion) a circle DEF. And forasmuch as the point A is the center
of ye circle DEF, therefore AE is equal to AD, but the line C is equal to the
line AD. Wherefore either of these lines AE and C is equal to AD, wherefore the
line AE is equal to the line C, wherefore two unequal right lines being given,
namely, AB and C, there is cut of from AB being ye greater, a right line AE
equal to the less line, namely, to C: which was required to be done.

This proposition, which is a Problem, has two things given, Two (...) given
in ^^is proposition.

Diverse cases in (...).


namely, two unequal right lines: the thing required is, from the greater to
cut of a line equal to the less. It has also diverse cases. For the lines
given either are distinct the one from the other: or are joined together at one
of their ends: or they cut the one the other, or the one cutteth the other in
one of the extremes. Which may be two ways. For either the greater cutteth
the less, or the less the greater. If they cut the one the other, either ^ch
cutteth the other into equal parts: or into unequal parts: or the one into
equal parts, and the other into unequal parts. Which may happ^n in two
sorts, for the greater may be cut into equal parts, and the less into
unequal parts: or contrariwise.

The first case.
When the unequal lines given are distinct the one from the other, the figure
before put serves.

The second case.
If they be joined together at one of their ends, it is easy to do. For making
the center that end where they are joined together, and the space the (...)
line, describe a circle: which shall of necessity (by the definition of a
circle) cut of from the greater line a line equal to the less line, as it is
plain to see in the figure here put.

But if the one cut the other in one of the extremes. The third case.
As for example: Suppose that the unequal right lines given be AB and CD, of
which let the line CD be the greater: And let the line CD cut the line AB in
his extreme C. Then making the center A and the space AB, describe a circle
BE. And upon the line AC describe an equilater triangle (by the first) which
let b^ AEC: and produce the lines EA and EC. And again making the ce^tre E and
the space OF describe a ci^^^e GF. Likewise making the center C and the space
CG, describe a circle GL. Now forasmuch as the line OF is equal to the line EG
(^or E is the center) of which the line EA is equal to the line E^: th^rfore
the residue AF is equal^ to the residue CG. ^ut the line AF is equal to the
line AB, for A is the center, where^o^e also the line CG is equal to the line
AB. But the line CG is also equ^ll ^o the line CL, for the point C is the
center. Wherefore the line AB is equal to the line CL. Wherefore from the line
CD is cut of the line CL which is equal to the line AB.

But now let CD be less then AB, and let it cut AB by his extreme C. The
fourth case
Now then either it cutteth it in the midst or not in the midst. First let
it cut it in the midst: then CD is either the hal^e of AB, and so is AC equal
to CD.

The fifth case.
Or it is less then the half: and then making the center C and the space CD
describe a circle, which shall cut of from the line AB a line equal to the line
CD.

The s^xt case.
Or it is greater then the half. And the^ unto the point A put the line AF
equal to the line CD, by the second. And making the center A and the space AF
describe a circle, which shall cut of from the line AB a line equal to the
line AF, that is, unto the line CD.

But if the line CD do not cut the line AB in the midst: The seventh and eight
cases.
CD shall either be the half of the line AB: or greater then the half, or
less. If CD be the half of AB, or less then the half of AB, the^ making the
center C, and the space CD describe a circle whi^he shall cut of from the line
AB a line equal to the line CD.

But if it be greater then the half, The ninth case.
then again unto the point A put the line AF equal to the line CD (by the
second proposition:) and making the center A, and the space AF describe a
circle which shall cut of from the line AB a line equal to the line AF, that
is, to the line CD.

But if they cut the one the other as the lines CD and AB do. The tenth case.
The^ making the ce^tre B and the space BA describe a circle AF, and draw a
line from the point B to the point C, and produce it to the point F. And
forasmuch as the two right lines BF and CD are unequal, and the line CD
cutteth the line BF by one of his extremes, therefore it is possible to cut of
from CD a line equal to the line BF. For how to do it we have before declared,
wherefore it is possible from the line CD to cut of a line equal to the line
AB: or AB and BF are equal the one to the other.

This is to be noted, that in all these cases, In all these cases the
construction and demo^stration of the first case will serve.
a man may both as touching construction and demonstration, proceed as in the
first case. For it is possible in any position to put to the end of the
greater line a line equal to the less line, and so making the center the said
end, and the space the less line, to describe a circle, which shall cut of
from the greater line a line equal to the line put, namely, to the less line
given, as it is manifest to see in the figures partly here under set, and
partly in the beginning of the other side put.



This Proposi^ion, though also it be most easy to be done mechanically, yet
is no principle.
If a man will mechanically and redily do this proposition, not regardyng
demonstration, he may extend his compass according to the quantity of the
less line given, and so set on foot thereof in one of the ends of the greater
line given, and with the other foot mark a point in the said greater line,
which shall cut of from the greater line a line eq^all to the less. The
easines of doing whereof may cause this proposition also to seem unto some to
be rather a principle, then a proposition. But to that we have before in the
former proposition answered.

The first Theoreme. The 4. Proposition. If there be two triangles, of which
two sides of the one be equal to two sides of the other, each side to his
correspondent side, and having also on angle of the one equal to one angle of
the other, namely, that angle which is contained under the equal right lines:
the base also of the one shall be equal to the base of the other, and the one
triangle shall be equal to the other triangle, and the other angles remaining
shall be equal to the other angles remaining, the one to the other, under which
are subtended equal sides.
SVppose that there be two triangles ABC, and DEF, having two sides of the one,
namely AB, and AC, equal to two sides of the other, namely, to DE and DF, the
one to the other, that is, AB to DE, and AC to DF: having also the angle BAC,
equal to the angle EDF. Then I say that the base also BC is equal to ye base
OF: and yt the triangle ABC, is equal to the triangle DEF: and yt the other
angles remainyng are equal to the other angles remaining, the one to the
other, under which are subtended equal sides: that is, yt the angle ABC is
equal to the angle DEF, and yt the angle ACB is equal to to the angle DFE.
Demonstration lea^ing to an absurdity.
For the triangle ABC exactly agreyng with the triangle DEF, and the point A
being put upon the point D, and the right line AB upon the right line DE, the
point B also shall exactly agree with the point E: for that (by supposition)
the line AB is equal to the line DE. And the line AB exactly agreeyng with the
line DE, the right line also AC exactly agrees with the right line DF, for
that (by supposition) the angle BAC is equal to the angle EDF. And forasmuch
as the right line AC is also (by supposition) equal to the right line DF,
therefore the point C exactly agrees with the point F. Again forasmuch as
the point C exactly agrees with the point F, and the point B exactly agrees
with the point E: therefore the base BC shall exactly agree with the base OF.
For if the point B do exactly agree with the point E, and the point C with the
point F, and the base BC do not exactly agree with the base OF, then two right
lines do include a superficies: which (by the 10. common sentence) is
impossible. Wherefore the base BC exactly agrees with the base OF, and therefore
is equal unto it. Wherefore the whole triangle ABC exactly agrees with the
whole triangle DEF, and therefore (by the 8. common sentence) is equal unto it.
And (by the same) the other angles remaining exactly agree with the other
angles remaining, and are equal the one to the other: that is, the angle ABC
to the angle DEF, and the angle ACB to the angle DFE. If therefore there be two
triangles, of which two sides of the one, be equal to two sides of the other,
each to his correspondent side, and having also one angle of the one equal to
one angle of the other, namely, that angle which is contained under the equal
right lines: the base also of the one shall be equal to the base of the other,
and the one triangle shall be equal to the other triangle, and the other
angles remainyng shall be equal to the other angles remaining, the one to the
other, under which are subtended eqaull sides: which thing was required to be
demonstrated.

This Proposition which is a Theoreme, Two (...)
has two things given: namely, the equality of two sides of the one triangle,
to two sides of the other triangle, and the equality of two angles contained
under the equal sides. In it also are three things required. Three things
required in it.
The equality of base to base: the equality of field to field: and the equality
of the other angles of the one triangle to the other angles of the other
triangle, under which are subtended equal sides.

How one side i^ equal to an other, and so gene^ally how one right line is
equal to an other.
One side of a plain figure is equal to an other, and so generally one right
line is equal to an other, when the one being applied to the other, their
extremes agree together. For otherwise every right line applied to any right
line, agrees therewith: but equal right lines only, agree in the extremes.

How one rectili^ne^ angle is equal to an other
One rectilined angle is equal to an other rectilined angle, when one of the
sides which comprehends the one angle, being set upon one of the sides which
comprehends the other angle, the other side of the one agrees with the other
side of the other. And that angle is the greater, whose side falls without:
and that the less, whose side falls within.

Why this particle (...) to his c^r^espondent side, is put.
Where as in this proposition is put this particle each to his correspondent
side, (instede whereof often times afterward is used this phrase the one to the
other) it is of necessity so put. For otherwise two sides of one triangle added
together, may be equal to two sides of an other triangle added together, and
the angles also contained under the equal sides may be equal: and yet the two
triangles may notwithstanding be unequal. How one triangle is equal to an other
Where note that a triangle is said to be equal to an other triangle, when
the field or area of the one is equal to the area of the other. And the area
of a triangle, What the field or area of a triangle is, and so of any
rectilined (...).
is that space, which is contained within the sides of a triangle. And the
circuit or compass of a triangle is a line composed of all the sides of a
triangle. And so may you think of all other rectilined figures. What (...) of a
triangle is, and ^o also of any (...) figure.
And now to prove that there may be two triangles, two sides of one of which
being added together, may be equal to two sides o^ the other added together,
and the angles contained under the equal sides may be equal, and yet
notwithstanding the two triangles unequal. Suppose that there be two rectangle
triangles: namely, ABC, and DEF, and let their right angles be BAC and EDF. And
in the triangle ABC let the side AB b^ 3. and the side AC 4. which both added
together make 7.

And in the tria^gle DEF, let the side DE be 2. and the side DF be 5. which
added together make also 7. and so the sides of the one triangle added
together, are equal to the sides of the other tria^gle added together. Yet are
both the triangles unequal, and also their bases. For the area of the triangle
ABC is 6 and his base is 5. And the area of the triangle DEF is 5: and his base
^ 29. So that to have the areas of two triangles to be equal, it is requisite
that all the sides of the two triangles be equal, each to his correspondent
side. It happens also sometimes in triangles, that the areas of them being
equal, their sides added together shall be unequal. And contrariwise, their
sides being equal, their areas be unequal. As in these figures here put it is
plain to see. In the first example the areas of the two triangles are equal,
for they are each 12. and the sides in each added together are unequal, for in
the one triangle the sides added together make 18. and in the other they make
16. But in the second example the areas of the two tria^gles are unequal, for
the one is 12. and the other is 15. But the sides added together in each are
equal, for in each they make 18.

That angle is said to subtend a side of a tria^gle, How an angle is said to
subte^d a side: and a side an angle.
which is placed directly opposite, and against that side. That side also is
said to subtend an angle, which is opposite to the angle. For every angle of a
triangle is contained of two sides of the triangle, and is subtended to the
third side.

This is the first Proposition in which is used a demonstration leading to an
absurditi^, o^ an impossib^litie. This proposition proved by a demonstration
leading to an absurdity.
Which is a demonstration that proves not directly the thing intended, by
principles, or by things before proved by these principles: but proves the
contrary thereof to be impossible, and so does indirectly prove the thing
intended.

The 2. Theoreme. The 5. Proposition. An Isosceles, or triangle of two equal
sides, has his angles a^ the base equal the one to the other. And those equal
sides being produced, the angles which are under the base are also equal the
one to the other.
SVppose that ABC be a triangle of two equal sides called Isosceles, having
the side AB equal to the side AC. And (by the second peticio^) produce the
lines AB and AC directly to ye points D and E. The^ I say, that ye angle ABC is
equal to the angle ACB: and ye ye angle CBD is equal to the angle BCE. Take in
the line BD a point at all adventures, Construction.
and let the same be F, and (by the third proposition) from the greater line,
namely, AE, cut of a line equal to AF being the less line, and let the same
be AG: and draw a right line from the point F to the point C, Demonstration.
and an other from the point G to the point B. Now then for as much as AF is
equal to AG, and AB is equal to AC, therefore these two lines FA and AC are
equal to these two lines GA and AB, the one to the other, and they contain a
common angle, namely, that which is contained under FAG: wherefore (by the
fourth proposition) the base FC is equal to the base GB: and the triangle AFC
is equal to the triangle AGB, and the other angles remaining, are equal to
the other angles remaining the one to the other, under which are subtended
equal sides: that is, the angle ACF is equal to the angle ABG, and the angle
AFC is equal to the angle AGB. And forasmuch as the whole line AF is equal to
the whole line AG, of which the line AB is equal to ye line AC, therefore the
residue of the line AF, namely, the line BF, is equal to the residue of the
line AG, namely, to the line CG (by the third common sentence) And it is proved
that CF is equal to BG. Now therefore these two BF and FC are equal to these
two CG and GB the one to the other, and the angle BFC is equal to the angle
CGB, and they have one base, namely, BC, common to them both: wherefore (by the
4. proposition) the triangle BFC is equal to the triangle CGB, and the other
angles remaynyng are equal to the other angles remaining each to other, under
which are subtended equal sides. Wherefore the angle FBC is equal to the
angle GCB, and the angle BCF is equal to the angle CBG. Now forasmuch as the
whole angle ABG is equal to the whole angle ACF (as it has been proved) of
which the angle CBG is equal to the angle BCF. therefore the angle remaining:
namely, ABC is equal to the angle remaining, namely, to ACB (by the third
common sentence) And they are the angles at the base of the triangle ABC. And it
is proved that the angle FBC is equal to the angle GCB, and they are angles
under the base. Wherefore a triangle of two equal sides has his angles at the
base equal the one to ye other. And those equal sides being produced, the
angles which are under the base are also equal the one to the other: which was
required to be proved.

For that this proposition is some what hard to perceue by reason the sides of
the triangles AFC and AGB and also the sides of the tria^gle BFC and CGB run so
one within an other, therefore I have here put the distinctly, namely, the
triangles FAC and BFC on o^e side of the figure of the proposition and the
triangles ACB and CGB on the other side to that ^^de may with less labor see
the demonstration plainly.

That in an Isosceles triangle, the two angles above the base are equal, may
otherwise be (...) on str^red without drawing lines beneath the base somewhat
altering the construction. Namely, drawing the lines within the triangle,
which before were without it after this manner.

Suppose that ABC be an Isosceles triangle and in the line AB take a point at
all adventures, An other demo^stration invented by Proclus.
and let the same be D, And from the line AC out of a line equal to the line
AD. Which let be AE. And draw these right lines BE, DC, and DE. Now forasmuch
as in the triangles, ABE, and ACD, the side AB is equal to the side AC, by
supposition, and the sides AD and AE are also equal by construction, and the
angle at the point A is common to them both, therefore, by the fourth
proposition, the base BE is equal to the base DC. And, by the same, the angles
remaining of the one triangle are equal to the angles remaining of the other
triangle. Wherefore the angle ABE is equal to the angle ACD. Again forasmuch
as in the triangles BDE, and CED the side DB is equal to the side EC, and the
side BE to the side DC, and the angle DBE is equal to the angle ECD and the
base DE being common to both triangles is equal to it self, therefore the
angles remaining of the one triangle, are equal to the angles remaining of the
other triangle. Wherefore the angle ED^ is equal to the angle D EC: and the
angle DEB is equal to the angle EDC. And forasmuch as the angle EDB is equal to
the angle DEC, from which are taken away equal angles DEB, and EDC, therefore
by the common sentence the angles remaining, namely, BDC and CEB are equal,
And as it was before manifest the sides BD and D C are equal to the sides CE
and EB the one to the other, that is, each to his correspondent side: and the
base BC is common to both the triangles: wherefore the angles remaining are
equal to the angles remaining the one to the other, under which are subte^ded
equal sides. Wherefore the angle D BC is equal to the angle ECB. For the line
D C subtendeth the angle D BC, and the line EB subte^deth the angle ECB: which
two lines are as we have before proved equal. Wherefore in an Isosceles
triangle, the angles at the base are equal, though the right lines be not
produced.

To prove this also, there is an other demonstration of Pappus much shorter
which needs no kind of addition of any thing at all: as follows.

Suppose that ABC be an Isosceles triangle, An other demo^stration invented by
Pappus.
and let the side AB be equal to the side AC. Now then understand this one
triangle to be as it were two triangles. And thus reason. Forasmuch as in the
two triangles ABC and ACB, AB is equal to AC and AC to AB, therefore two sides
of the one are equal to two sides of the other, each to his correspondent side,
and the angle BAC is equal to the angle CAB, for it is one and the self same
angle. Wherefore by the 4. proposition the base CB is equal to the base BC, and
the triangle ABC is equal to the triangle ACB: and the angle ABC is equal to
the angle ACB, and the angle ACB to the angle ABC for under them are subtended
equal sides, namely, the lines AB and AC. Wherefore in an Isosceles triangle,
the angels at the base are equal.

Thales Milesius the inuent^r of this proposition.
The old Philosopher Thales Milesius was the first inuenter of this fifth
proposition, as also of many other.

The third Theoreme. The sixth Proposition. If a triangle have two angles equal
the one to the other: the sides also of the same, which subtend the equal
angles, shall be equal the one to the other.
SVppose that ABC be a triangle, having the angle ABC equal to the angle ACB.
Then I say that the side AB is equal to the side AC. For if the side AB be not
equal to the side AC, then one of them is greater. Let AB be the greater. And
by the third proposition, Construction.
from AB being the greater cut of a line equal to the less line, which is AC^
And let the same be D B. And draw a line from the point D to the point C.
Demonstration leading to an impossib^l^ty.
Now forasmuch as the side DB is equal to the side AC, and the line BC is
common to the^ both: therefore these two sides DB and BC are equal to these
two sides AC and CB the one to the other. And the angle DBC is by supposytion
equal to the angle ACB. Wherefore (by the 4 proposytion) the base DC is equal
to the base AB: and (by the same) the triangle DBC is equal to the triangle
ACB: namely, the less triangle unto the greater tria^gle, which is impossible.
VVhe^fore the side AB is not unequal to the side AC. Wherefore it is equal. If
therefore a triangle have two angles equal the one to the other: the sides also
of the same, which subtende the equal angles, shall be equal the one to the
other^ which was required to be demonstrated.

The chiefest and (...) proper kind of conversion.
In Geometry is o^tentimes used conversion of propositions. As this proposition
is the converse of the proposition next before. The chiefest and most proper
kind of conversion is, when that which was the thing supposed in the former
proposition, is the conclusion of the converse and second proposition: and
contrary wise that which was concluded in the first, is the thing supposed in
the second As in the fifth proposition it was supposed the two sides of a
triangle to be equal, the thing concluded is, that the two angles at the base
are equal and in this proposition, which is the converse thereof is supposed
that the angles at the base be equal. Which in the former proposition was the
conclusion. And the conclusion is, that the two sides subtending the two angles
are equal, which in the former proposition was the supposition. This is the
chiefest kind of conversion uniform and certain.

There is an other kind of conversion, An other kind of conversion not so
perfect as the first.
but not so full a conversion nor so perfect as the first is. Which happens
in composed propositions, that is, in such, which have mo suppositions then
one, and pass from these suppositions to one conclusion. In the co^nuerses of
such propositio^s, you pass from the conclusion of the first proposition, with
one or mo of the suppositions of the same: and conclude some other supposition
of the self first proposition: of this kind there are many in Euclide. Thereof
you may have an example in the 8. proposition being the converse of the four^h.
This conversion is not so uniform as the other; but more diverse and uncertain
according to the multitude of the things given, or suppositions in the
proposition.

But because in the fifth proposition there are two conclusions, Two
conclusions in the fifth proposition.
the first, that the two angles at the ba^e be equal: the second, that the
angles under the ba^e are equal: this is to be noted, that this sixth
proposition is the converse of the ^ame fifth as touching the first conclusion
only. The sixth proposition i^ the converse as touching the first conclusion
only. The converse as touching the second conclusion.
You may in like manner make a converse of the same proposition touching the
second conclusion thereof. And that after this manner.

THe two sides of a triangle being produced, if the angles under the base be
equal, the said triangle shall be an Isosceles triangle. In which proposition
the supposition is, that the angles under the base are equal: which in the
fifth proposition was the conclusion^ and the conclusion in this proposition
is, that the two sides of the triangle are equal, which in the fifth proposition
was the supposition. But now for proof of the said proposition:

Suppose that there be a triangle ABC, and let the sides AB^ and AC be produced
to the points D and G, and let the angles under the base be equal, namely,
the angles DBC, and GCB. Then I say that the triangle ABC is an Isosceles
triangle. Construction.
For take in the line AD a point which let be E. And unto the line BE put the
line CF equal (by the 3. proposition). Demonstration^
And draw these lines EC, BF, and OF. Now forasmuch as BE is equal to CF, and
BC is common to the^ both^ therefore these two lines BE and BC, are equal to
these two lines CF and CB the one to the other, and the angle EBC is equal to
the angle FCB by supposition. Wherefore (by the 4. proposition) the base of the
one is equal to the base of the other, and the one triangle is equal to the
other triangle, and the other angles remaining are equal unto the other angles
remaining, the one to the other, under which are subtended equal sides^
Wherefore the base EC is equal to the base FB, and the angle BEC to the angle
CFB, and the angle CBF to the angle BCE. But the whole angle EBC is equal to
the whole angle FCB, of which the angle FBC is equa^l to the angle ECB^
wherefore the angle remaining EBF is equal to the angle remaining FCE. But the
line BE is ^quall to the line CF, and the line BF to the line CE, and they
contain equal angles: wherefore by the same fourth proposition the angle BEF
is equal to the angle CFE. Wherefore by this sixth proposition the side AE is
equal to the side AF^ o^ which B^ is equal to CF, by construction: wherefore
(by the third common sentence) the residue AB is equal to the residue AC
Wherefore the triangle ABC is an Isosceles triangle. If therefore the two sides
of a triangle being produced, the angles under the base be equal, the said
triangle shall be an Isosceles triangle: which was required to be proved.

This moreover is to be noted, that in this proposition there may be an other
case^ for in taking an equal line to AC from AB, An other case in this sixth
proposition.
you may take it from the point A and not from the point B. And yet though
this supposition also be put the self same absurdity will follow.

For suppose that AC be equal to AD: and produce the line CA to the point E:
and put the line AE equal to the line DB (by the third proposition) wherefore
the whole line CE is equal to the whole line AB (by the second common
sentence) Draw a line from the point E to the point B. And forasmuch as the
line AB is equal to the line EC, and the line BC is common to them both, and
the angle ACB is supposed to be equal to the angle ABC: Wherefore (by the
fourth proposition) the triangle EBC is equal to the triangle ABC, namelye,
the whole to the part: which is impossible.

The 4. Theoreme. The 7. Proposition. If from the ends of one line, be drawn
two right lines to any point: there can not from the self same ends on the
same side, be drawn two other lines equal to the two first lines, the one to
the other, unto any other point.
FOr if it be possible: then from the ends of one and the self same right
line, namely, AB, from the points (I say) A and B, let there be drawn two
right lines AC and CB to the point C: and from the same ends of the line AB,
let there be drawn two other right right lines AD and DB equal to the lines
AC and CB the one to the other, is, each to his correspondent line, and on one
and the same side, and to an other point, namely, to D: so that let CA be
equal to DA being both drawn from one end, that is, A: and let CB be equal
to DB, being both also drawn from one end, that is, B. And (by the first
peticion) draw a right line from the point C to the point D. Demonstration
le^^^n^ to an absurdity.
Now forasmuch as AC is equal to AD, the angle ACD also is (by the 5.
proposition) equal to the angle ADC: wherefore the angle ACD is less the^ the
angle BDC. Wherefore the angle BCD is much less then the angle BDC. Again
forasmuch as BC is equal to BD, and therefore also the angle BCD is equal to
the angle BDC. And it is proved that it is much less then it: which is
impossible. If therefore from the ends of one line, be drawn ^wo right lines
to any point: there can not from the self same ends on the same side, be
drawn two other lines equal to the two first lines, the one to the other,
unto any other point: Which was required to be demonstrated.

In this proposition the conclusion is a negation, which very rarely happens
in the mathematical arts. Negative conclu^sions rarely used in the
mathematical arts.
For they ever for the most part use to conclude affirmatively, and not
negatiuely. For a proposition universal affirmative is most agreeable to
sciences, as says Aristotle, and is of it self strong, and needs no negative
to his proof. But an universal proposition negative must of necessity have
to his proof an affirmative, For of only negative propositions there can be
no demonstrations. And therefore sciences using demonstration, conclude
affirmatively, and very seldom use negative conclusions.

An other demonstration after Campanus.
Suppose that there be a line AB, from whose ends A and B, let there be drawn
two lines AC and BC on one side, which let concur in the point C. Then I say
that on the same side there cannot be drawn two other lines, from the ends of
the line AB, which shall concur at any other point, so that that which is
drawn from the point A shall be equal to the line AC, and that which is
drawn from the point B shall be equal to the line BC. For if it be possible,
let there be drawn two other lines on the self same side, which let concur
in the point D, and let the line AD be equal to the line AC, and the line BD
equal to the line BC. Diverse cases in this demonstration.
Wherefore the point D shall fall either within the triangle ABC, or without.
For it cannot fall in one of the sides, for then a part should be equal to
his whole. If therefore it fall without^ then either one of the lines AD and DB
shall cut one of the lines AC and CB, or else neither shall cut neither. First
case.
First let one cut the other and draw a right line from C to D. Now forasmuch
as in the triangle ACD, the two sides AC and AD are equal, therefore the angle
ACD is equal to the angle ADC, by the fifth proposition: likewise forasmuch as
in the tria^gle BCD, the two sides BC and BD are equal, therefore by the same,
the angles BCD and BDC are also equal. And forasmuch as the angle BDC is
greter the^ the angle ADC, it follows that the angle BCD is greater then the
angle ACD, namely, the part greater then the whole: which is impossible.

But if the point D fall without the triangle ABC, Second case.
so that the lines cut not the one the other, draw a line from D to C. And
produce the lines BD and BC beyond the base CD, unto the points E and F. And
forasmuch as the lines AC and AD are equal, the angles ACD and ADC shall also
be equal, by the fifth proposition^ likewise for as much as the lines BC and BD
are equal, the angles under the base, namely, the angles FDC and ECD are
equal, by the second part of the same proposition. And for as much as the
angle ECD is less then the angle ACD: It follows that the angle FDC is less
the^ the angle ADC: which is impossible: for that the angle AD C is a part of
the angle FD C. And the same inconvenience will follow if the point D fall
within the triangle ABC,

The fifth Theoreme. The 8. Proposition. If two triangles have two sides of
the one equal to two sides of the other, each to his correspondent side, and
have also the base of the one equal to the base of the other: they shall have
also the angle contained under the equal right lines of the one, equal to the
angle contained under the equal right lines of the other.
SVppose that there be two triangles ABC and DEF: and let these two sides of
the one AB and AC, be equal to these two sides of the other DE, and DF, each to
his correspondent side, that is, AB to D E, and AC, to DF, and let the base of
the one, namely, BC be equal to the base of the other, namely, to OF. Then I
say, that the angle BAC is equal to the angle EDF. For the triangle ABC
exactly agreing with the triangle DE F, Demonstration leading to an
^mpossibility.
and the point B being put upon the point E, and the right line BC upon the
right line OF: the point C shall exactly agree with the point F (for the line
BC is equal to the line OF) And BC exactly agreeing with OF the lines also BA
and AC shall exactly agree with the lines ED and DF. For if the base BC do
exactly agree with the base FE, but the sides BA and AC do not exactly agree
with the sides ED and DF, but differ as FG and GF do: the^ from ye ends of one
line shall be drawn two right lines to a point, and from the self same ends on
the same side shall be drawn two other lines, equal to the two first lines, ye
one to the other, and unto an other point: but that is impossible, (by the
seventh proposition) Wherefore the base BC exactly agreeing with the base OF,
the sides also BA and AC do exactly agree with the sides ED and DF. Wherefore
also the angle BAC shall exactly agree with the angle EDF, and therefore shall also
be equal to it. If the^fore two triangles have two sides of the one equal to
two sides of the other, each to his correspondent side, and have also the base
of ye one equal to the base of the other: they shall have also the angle
contained under the equal right lines of the one, equal to the angle
contained under the equal right lines of the other: which was required to be
proved.

This proposition is the (...) of the ^ourth, b^t not the che^e^t kind of
conversion.
This Theoreme is the converse of the fourth, but it is not the chiefest and
principal kind o^ conversion. For it turns not the whole supposition into
the conclusion, and the whole conclusion into the supposition. For the fourth
proposition whose converse this is, is a co^pound ^heoreme, having two things
given or s^pposed, which are these: the one, that two sides of the one tria^gle
be equal to two sides of the other tria^gle: the other, that the angle contained
of the two sides of the one is equal to the angle contained of the two sides of
the one: but has amongst other one thing required, which is, that the base of
the one, is equal to the base of the other. Now in this 8. proposition, being
the converse therof^ that the base of the one is equal to the base of the other,
is the supposition, or the thing given: which in the former proposition was the
conclusion. And this, that two sides of the one are equal to two sides of the
other, is in this proposition also a supposition, like as it was in the former
proposition: so that it is a thing given in either proposition. The conclusion
of this proposition is that the angle enclosed of the two equal sides of the
one triangle is equal to the angle enclosed of the two equal sides of the
other triangle: which in the former proposition was one of the things given.

Philo and his scholas demonstrate this proposition without the help of the
former proposition, in this manner.

Suppose that there be two triangles ABC and DEF, having two sides of the one
equal to two sides of the other, namely, AB and AC equal to DE and D F, An
other demo^stration invented by Philo.
the one to the other, and the base BC equal to the base OF. And for that the
base BC is equal to the base E F, therefore the one being applied to the other
they agree. Place the two tria^gles ABC and D OF in one and the self same
plain superficies, and apply the base of the one to the base of the other: But
yet so that the tria^gle ABC be set one the other side of the right line OF,
that the top of the one may be opposite to the top of the other. And in stead
of the triangle ABC put the triangle EFG as in the figure. And let DE be equal
to EG, and DF to FG. After this demonstration three cases in this proposition.
Now then by this means shall happen diverse cases. For the line F G may fall
directly upon the line DF, or it may so fall that it may make with the line DF
an angle within the figure, or with out.

First let it fall directlye. The first case.
And forasmuch as the line DE is equal to the line E G, and DFG, is one
right line: therefore DEGREES is an Isosceles tria^gle: and so, by the fifth
proposition, the angle at the point D is equal to the angle at the point G:
which was required to be proved.

But if it fall not directly, but make with the line D F an angle within the
figure, draw a line from D to G. The second case.
Now forasmuch as ED and EG ^re equal, and the line DG is the base: therefore
by the fifth proposition, the angle EDG is equal to the angle EGD. Again
forasmuch as DF is equal to FG, and DG is the base: therefore by the same, the
angle FDG is equal to the FGD: and it was proved that the angle EDG is equal
to the angle EGD^ wherefore the whole angle EDF is equal to the whole angle FGE:
which was required to be proved.

But if the line FG make with the line DF an angle without the figure: The
third case.
draw a right line without the figure from the point D to the point G. And
forasmuch as DE and EG are equal, and DG is the base, therefore by the fifth
proposition, the angles EDG and DGE are equal. Again forasmuch as DF is
equal to FG, and DG is the base, therefore, by the same, the angle FDG is
equal to the angle FGD. And it was proved that the whole angles EDG and DGE
are equal the one to the other: wherefore the angles remaining EDF and EGF are
equal the one to the other, which was required to be proved.

The 4. Problem. The 9. Proposition. To divide a rectiline angle given, into
two equal parts.
SVppose that the rectiline angle given be BAC. It is required to divide the
angle BAC into two equal parts. Construction.
In the line AB take a point at all adventures, and let the same be D. And (by
the third proposition) from the line AC cut of the line AE equal to AD. And
(by the first peticion) draw a right line from the point D to the point E. And
(by the first proposition) upon the line DE describe an equilater triangle and
let the same be DFE, and (by the first peticion) draw a right line from the
point A to the point F. Then I say that the angle BAC is by ye line AF divided
into two equal parts. Demonstration.
For, forasmuch as AD is equal to AE, and AF is common to them both: therefore
these two DA and AF, are equal to these two EA and AF, the one to the other.
But (by the first proposition) the base DF is equal to the base OF: wherefore
(by the 8. proposition) the angle DAF is equal to the angle FAE. Wherefore the
rectiline angle given, namely, B AC is divided into two equal parts by the
right line AF^ Which was required to be done.

In this proposition is not taught to divide a right lined angle into mo parts
then two: albeit to divide an angle, so it be a right angle, into three parts,
it is not hard. And it is taught of Vi^ellio in his first book of Perspectiue,
It is impossible to divide an acute rectiline angle into three equal parts
without the help of lines which are of a mixed nature.
the 28. Proposition. ^or to divide an acute angle into three equal parts, is
(as says Proclus) impossible: unless it be by the help of other lines which
are of a mixed nature. Which thing Nicomedes did by such lines which are called
Concoide^ linea, who first serched out the invention, nature, and properties of
such lines. And others did it by other means as by the help of quadrant lines
invented by Hippias and Nicomedes. Others by Helices or Spiral lines invented
of Archimedes. But these are things of much difficulty and hardness, and not
here to be entreated of.

Here against this proposition may of the adversary be brought an An instance
is an objection or a doubt, whereby is let or troubled the construction, or
demonstration, and contains an vnruth, and an impossibility: and therefore it
must of necessity be answered unto, and the falsehode thereof made manifest.
instance. For he may cavil that the head of the equilater triangle shall not
fall between the two right lines, but in one of them, or without them both. As
for example.

Suppose that the angle to be divided into two equal parts be BAC, and in the
line BA take the point D, and unto the line DA put the line AE equal (by the
third proposition.) And draw a line from D to E. And upon the line DE describe
(by the first) an equilater triangle, which let be DFE. Now then if it be
possible that the point F do not fall between the lines AB and AC, then it shall
fall either in the line AB or AC, or without them both. Suppose that the point F
be fall upon line AB, so that let DFE be an equilater triangle. Wherefore the
line DF is equal to the line FE: and the angles at the base are equal, namely,
the angles EDF and DEF. Wherefore the whole angle DEC is greater then the angle
EDF. Again forasmuch as AD is equal to AE, therefore ADE is an Isosceles
triangle. Wherefore (by the fifth proposition) the angles under the base are
equal. Wherefore the angle DEC is equal to the angle EDB. But it was also
greater: which is impossible. Wherefore the top of the equilater triangle cannot
be in the right line AB. And in like sort also may we prove that it cannot be
in the right line AC. Wherefore suppose that it be without them both, if it be
possible. And forasmuch as DF is equal to FE, the angles at the base are equal,
namely, the angles DEF and EDF. Wherefore the angle DEF is greater then the
angle EDF. Wherefore the angle DEC is much greater then the angle EDF. But it is
also equal unto it. For they are angles under the base DE of the Isosceles
triangle AD E. Which is impossib^e. Wherefore the point F shall not fall without
the two right lines on that side. And in like sort may we prove that it shall
not fall without them on the other side. Wherefore it shall of necessity fall
between them: which was required to be proved.

There may also in this proposition be diverse cases^ Diverse cases in this
proposition.
^f it so happen that there be no space under the base DE to describe an
equilater triangle, but that of necessity you must describe it on the same
side that the lines AB and AC are. For then the sides of the equilater triangle
either exactly agree with the lines AD and AE, if the said lines AD and AE be
equal with the base DE. Or they fall without them, if the lines AD and AE be
less then the base DE. Or they fall within them, if the said lines be greater
the^ the base DE.

First let them exactly agree^ And let DAE be an equilater triangle. The first
case.
And in the side AD take the point G. And from the side AE cut of a line equal
to the line AG (by the third proposition) which let be AH^ And draw these right
lines GE, HD and GH, and AF. Now forasmuch as AD is equal to AE and AG unto AH^
therefore these two lines DA and AH are equal to these two lines EA and AG: and
they contain one and the self same angle, Wherefore by the fourth proposition,
the angle GDH is equal to the angle HEG. And the base DH is equal to the base
EG. But the line DG is equal to the line EH: wherefore again by the fourth
proposition, the angle EGH is equal to the angle DHG. Wherefore by the sixth
proposition, the base GF is equal to the base HF. And forasmuch as AH is equal
to AG, and AF is common to the^ both, and the base GF is equal to the base HF,
therefore the angle GAF is equal to the angle HAF. Wherefore the angle GAH is
divided into two equal parts: which was required to be done.

The second case.
But if the sides of the equilater triangle fall without the right lines BA and
AC, as do the lines D^ and OF, the^ draw a line from F to A and produce the
line FA to the point G. Now forasmuch as the lines DF and FE are equal, and the
line FA is common to them both, and the bases DA and AE are equal: therefore
(by the eight) the angle DFA is equal to the angle EFA. Again forasmuch as DF
and FE are equal, and FG is common to them both, and they contain equal
angles (as it has been proved) therefore (by the fourth) the base DG is equal
to the base GE. And forasmuch as AD is equal to AE, and AG is common to them
both. Therefore (by the eight) the angle DAG is equal to the angle EAG.
wherefore the angle DAE is divided into two equal parts: Which was required
to be done.

But if the sides of the equilater triangle fall within the right lines BA and
AC, The third case.
as do the lines DF and FE, then again draw a line from A to F. And forasmuch
as DA is equal to AE, and AF is common to them both, and the base DF is equal
to the b^se FE: therefore the angle DAF is (by the eight) equal to the angle
^AF. Wherefore the angle at the point A is divided into two equal parts, how
soever the equilater triangle be placed: which was required to be done.

This is to be noted, that if a man will mechanically or readily, To devide a
(...) angle (...) equal (...).
not regardyng demonstration, divide the foresaid rectiline angle BAC, and so
any other rectiline angle given whatsoeuer^ into two equal parts, he shall
need only with one opening of the compass taken at all adventures to mark
the two points D and E, which cut of equal parts of the lines AB and AC,
howsoever they happen, and so making the centres the two points D and E, to
describe two circles according to the openyng of the compa^^e: and from the
point A to their intersection, which let be the point F to draw a right line:
which shall divide the angle BAC into two equal parts. And here note, that
you shall not need to draw the circles all whole, but one, ly a portion where
they cut the one the other: As in the figure here in the end of the other side
put.

The 5. Problem. The 10. Proposition. To divide a right line given being
finite, into two equal parts.
SVppose that the right line given be AB. It is required to divide the line AB
into two equal parts. Construction.
Describe (by the first proposition) upon the line AB an equilater triangle and
let the same be ABC. And (by the former proposition) divide the angle ACB into
two equal parts by the right line CD. Then I say that the right line AB is
divided into two equal parts in the point D. Demonstration.
For forasmuch as (by the first proposition) AC is equal to CB, and CD is
common to the^ both: therefore these two lines AC and CD are equal to these two
lines BC and CD, ye one to ye other, and the angle ACD is equal to the angle
BCD. Wherefore (by the 4. proposition) the base AD is equal to the base BD.
Wherefore the right line given AB, is divided into two equal parts in the
point D: which was required to be done.

Apollonius ^eacheth to divide a right line being finite into two equal parts
after this manner. An other way to divide a right line being finis^, inverted
by Apollonius.


Suppose that the right line being finite be AB: which it is required to divide
in to two equal parts. Now the^ making the center the point A and the space AB
describe a circle. Again making the center the point B and the space BA
describe an other circle: and from the common sections draw the right line CD,
which let cut the line AB in the point E. Then I say, that the right line CD
deuideth the line AB into two equal parts in the point E. For draw these
right lines D A, DBCA and CB. Which shall be equal the one to the other, for
that they are drawn from the centres to the circumferences of equal circles.
And forasmuch as the lines CA and AD are equal to the lines CB and BD, and the
line CD is common to either of them: therefore, by the eight, the angle ACD is
equal to the angle BCD. Again forasmuch as the line CE is common to the lines
AC and CB, which are equal the one to the other, therefore these two lines AC
and CE are equal to these two lines BC and CE, the one to the other, and they
contain equal angles, as it has been proved. Wherefore by the 4. proposition
the base AE is equal to the base BE. Wherefore the line AB is divided into two
equal parts in the point E: which was required to be done.

By this way of dividing a right line, into two equal parts invented by
Apollonius, it is manifest, that if a man will mechanically, or redely, not
considering the demonstration, divide the said rightline, and so any right line
given whatsoever, into two equal: parts he need only to mark the points of
the intersections of the circles, and to draw a line from the said
intersections, which shall divide the right line given into two equal parts:
as in the figure here put.

The 6. Problem. The 11. Proposition. Upon a right line given, to raise up
from a point given in the same line a perpendicular line.
SVppose that the right line given be AB, and let the point in it given be C.
It is required from the point C to raise up unto the right line AB a
perpendicular line. Take in the line AC a point at all adventures, Construction.
and let the same be D, and (by the 3. proposition) put unto DC an equal line
CE. And by the first proposition) upon the line DE describe an equilater
triangle FDE, and draw a line from F to C. Then I say that unto the right line
given AB, and from the point in it given, namely, C is raised up a
perpendicular line FC. For forasmuch as DC is equal to CE, Demonstration.
and the line CF is common to them both: therefore these two DC and CF, are
equal to these two EC and CF, the one to the other: and (by the first
proposition) the base DF is equal to the base OF: wherefore (by the 8.
proposition) the angle DCF is equal to the angle ECF: and they be side angles.
But when a right line standing upon a right line does make the two side angles
equal the one to the other, either of those equal angles is (by the. 10.
definition) a right angle: and the line standing upon the right line is called
a perpe^dicular line. Wherefore the angle DCF, and thangle FCE are right
angles. Wherefore unto the right line given AB, and from the point in it C, is
raised up a perpendicular line CF: which was required to be done.

Although the point given should be set in one of the ends of the right line
given, it is easy so do it as it was before. For producing the line in length
from the point by the second peticion, you may work as you did before. But if
one require to erect a right line perpendicularly from the point at the end of
the line, without producing the rightlyne, that also may well be done after
this manner.

Suppose that the right line given be AB, and let the point in it given be in
one of the ends thereof, An other case in this proposition.
namely, in A. And take in the line AB a point at all adventures, Construction.
and let the same be C. And from the said point raise up (by the foresaid
proposition) unto AB a perpendiculer line, which let ^e OE. And (by the 3.
proposition) from the line CE cut of the line CD equal to the line CA, And (by
the 9. Proposition) divide the angle ACD into two equal parts by the line CF.
And from the point D raise up unto the line CE a perpe^diculer line, DF, which
let concur with the line CF in the point F. And draw a right line from F to
A. Then I say that the angle at the point A is a right angle. For, forasmuch as
DC is equal to CA, Demonstration.
and CF is common to them both, and they contain ^quall angles (for the angle
at the point C is divided into two equal parts) therefore (by the 4.
Proposition) the line DF is equal to the line FA, and so the angle at the
point A is equal to the angle at the point D. But the angle at the point D is a
right angle. Wherefore also the angle at the point A is a right angle. Wherefore
from the point A unto the line AB, is raised up a perpendiculer line AF,
without producing the line AB. Which was required to be done.

Appollonius teaches to raise up unto a line given, from a point in it given,
a perpendiculer line, after this manner. An other way to erect a perpe^dicular
line invented by Appolonius.

Construction^.




Suppose that the right line given be AB. And let the point in it given, be C.
And in the line AC, take a point at all adue^tures, and let the same be D. And
from the line CB, cut of a line equal to the line CD, which let be CE^ and
making the center D, and the space DE, describe a circle. And again making the
center C, and the space ED, describe an other circle, and let the point of
their intersection be F. And draw a right line from F to C. Then I say that the
line FC is erected perpendiculerly unto the line AB. For draw these lin^s ED
and FE: which shall by the definition of a circl^ be either of them equal to the
line DE. Demonstration.
and therefore (by the first common sentence) are equal the one to the other.
But the lines DC and CE are by construction equal, and the line FC is common
to them both. Wherefore the angles also at the point C are equal (by the 8.
proposition:) wherefore they are right angles. Wherefore the (...) CE is erected
perpendiculerly unto the line AB from the point C^ which was required to be
done.

By this way of erecting a perpendiculer line invented by Appollonius, How to
erect a perpendicular line mechanically.
it is also manifest, that if a man will mechanically, without d^monstration,
erect unto a line given from a point given in it a perpendiculer line: he need
only on either side of the point given, to cut of equal lines: and so making
either of the ends of the said lines (either of th'endes I say, which have not
one point common to them both) the centres, and the space both the lines added
together, or wider then both, or at the lest wider the^ one of them, to
describe those portions of the circles where they cut the one the other, and
from the point of the intersection to the point given, to draw a line, which
shall be perpendicular unto the line given: as in the figure here put it is
manifest to see.

The 7. Problem. The 12. Proposition. Unto a right line given being infinite,
and from a point given not being in the same line, to draw a perpendicular line.
LEt the right line given being infinite be AB, and let ye point given not
being in the said line AB, be C. It is required from the point given, namely,
C, to draw unto the right line given AB, a perpendiculer line. Construction.
Take on the other side of the line AB (namely, on that side wherein is not the
point C) a point at all adventures, and let the same be D. And making the
center C, and the space CD, describe (by the third peticion) a circle, and let
the same be EFG, which let cut the line AB in the points E and G. And (by
the x. proposition) divide the line EG into two equal parts in the point H.
And (by the first peticion) draw these right lines, CG, CH, and CE. Then I say,
that unto the right line given AB, and from the point given not being in it,
namely, C, is drawn a perpendiculer line CHAPTER Demonstration.
For forasmuch as GH is equal to HE, and HC is common to them both; therefore
these two sides GH and HC, are equal to these two sides EH and HC, the one to
the other^ and (by the 15 definition) the base CG is equal to the base CE:
wherefore (by the 8. proposition) the angle CHG is equal to the angle CHE: and
they are side angles: but when a right line standing upon a right line makes
the two side angles equal the one to the other, either of those equal angles
is (by the 10. definition) a right angle, and the line standing upon the said
right line is called a perpendiculer line. Wherefore unto the right line given
AB, and from the point given C, which is not in the line AB, is drawn a
perpendiculer line CH: which was required to be done.

This Problem did Oen^pides first find out, Oenopides the first inuenter of
this problem.
considering the necessary use thereof to the study of Astronomy.

There ar^ two kinds of perpendiculer lines: Two kinds of perpendiculer
lines, namely, a plain perpendiculer line and a solid.
whereof one is a plain perpendiculer line, the other is a solid. A plain
perpendiculer line is, when the point from whence the perpendi^uler line i^
dra^en, is in the same plain superficies with the line whereunto it is a
perpendicular. A solid perpendiculer line is, when the point, from whence the
perpendiculer is drawn, is on high, and without the plain superficies. So
that a plain perpendiculer line is drawn to a right line: and a solid
perpendiculer line is drawn to a superficies. A plain^ perpendiculer line
causes right angles with one only line, namely, with that upon whom it
falls. But a solid perpendiculer line causes right an^le^, not only with
one line, but with as many lines as may be drawn in that superficies, by the
touch thereof. This proposition teaches to draw a plain perpendiculer line.
This proposition teaches to draw a plain perpendiculer line, for it is drawn
to one line, and supposed to be in the self same plain superficies.

There may be in this proposition an other case. An other case in this
proposition.
For if it be so, that on the other side of the line AB, there be no space to
take a point in but only on that side wherein is the point C. Construction^
Then take some certain point in the line AB, which let be D. And making the
center the point C, and the space CD, describe a part of the circumference of a
circle, which let be DEF: which let cut the line AB in the two points D and F.
And divide the line DF into two equal parts in the point H. And draw these
lines CD, CH and CF. And forasmuch as DH is equal to HF, Demonstration.
and CH is common to them both, and CD is equal to CF (by the 15. definition:)
therefore the angles at the point H are equal the one to the other (by the 8.
proposition:) and they are side angles, wherefore they are right angles.
Wherefore the line CH is a perpendiculer to the line DF. But if it happen so
that the circle which is described do not cut the line, but touch it, then
taking a point without the point E, namely, the point G, and making the center
the point C, and the space CG, describe a part of the circumference of a
circle: which shall of necessity cut the line AB: and so may you proceed as
you did before. As you see in the second figure.

The 6. Theoreme. The 13. Proposition. When a right line standing upon a right
line makes any angles: those angles shall be either two right angles, or
equal to two right angles.
SVppose that the right line AB standing upon the right line CD do make these
angles CBA and ABD. Then I say, that the angles CBA and ABD are either two
right angles, or its ^quall to two right angles. If the angle CBA be equal to
the angle ABD: then are they two right angles (by the tenth difinition.
Construction,
) But if not, raise up (by the 11. proposition) unto the right line CD, and
from the point given in it, namely^ Demonstration
B, a perpendiculer line BE^ Wherefore (by the x. definition) the angle CBE and
EBD ar^ right angles. Now forasmuch as the angle CBE, is equal to these two
angles CBA and ABE, put the angle EBD common to them both^ wherefore the angles
CBE and EBD, are equal to these three angles CBA, ABE, and EBD. Again
forasmuch as the angle DBA is equal unto these two angles DBE and EBA, put the
angle ABC common to them both: wherefore the angles DBA and ABC, are equal to
these three angles, DBE, EBA, and ABC. And it is proved that the angles CBE and
EBD are equal to the self same three angles: but things equal to one and the
self same things are also (by the first common sentence) equal the o^e to the
oath. Wherefore the angles CBE and EBD are equal to the angles DBA and ABC.
But the angles CBE and EBD are two right angles: wherefore also the angles DBA
and ABC are equal to two right angles. Wherefore when a right line standing
upon a right line makes any angles: those angles shall be either two right
angles, or equal to two right angles: which was required to be demonstrated.

An other demonstration after Pelitarius.
Suppose that the right line AB do stand upon the right line CD. Then I say,
that the two angles ABC and ABD, An other demonstration after Peli^^riu^.
are either two right angles, or equal to two right angles. For if AB be
perpe^diculer unto CD: the^ is it manifest, that they are right angles (by the
conversion of the definition) But if it incline toward the end C, then (by
the 11. proposition) from the point B, erect unto the line CD a perpendicul^r
line BE. By which construction the proposition is very manifest. For forasmuch
as the angle ABD is gre^ter then the right angle DBE by the angle ABE^ and the
other angle ABC is less then the right angle CBE by the self same angle ABE:
if from the great^r b^e taken away the excess, and the same be added to the
less, they shall be made two right angles. That is, if from the obtuse angle
ABD be taken away the angl^ ABE, there shall remain the right angle DBE. And
then if the same angle ABE be added to the ^cute angle CBA, there shall be
made the right angle CBE. Wherefore it is manifest, that the two angles,
namely, the obtuse angle ABD, and the acute angle ABC, are equal to the two
right angles CBE and DBE: which was requ^red to be proved.

The 7. Theoreme. The 14. Proposition. If unto a right line, and to a point in
the same line, be drawn two right lines, no^ both on one and the same side,
making the side angles equal to two right angles: those two right lines shall
make directly one right line.
Unto the right line AB, and to y^ point in it B^ let ther^ be drawn two right
lines BC, and BD, unto contrary sides, making the side angles, namely, ABC and
ABD, equal to two right angles. Then I say, that ye right lines BD and BC make
both one right line. Demonstration leading to an absurdit^e.
For if CB and BD do not make both one right line, let the right line BE be so
drawn to BC, that they both make one right line. Now forasmuch as the right
line AB stands upon the right line CBE, therefore the angles ABC and ABE are
equal to two right angles (by the 13. proposition) But (by supposition) the
angles ABC and ABD are equal to two right angles: wherefore the angles CBA, and
ABE, are equal to the angles CBA, and ABD: take away the angle ABC, which is
common to them both. Wherefore the angle remaining ABE, is equal to the angle
remaining ABD, namely, the less to the greater, which is impossible.
Wherefore the line BE is not so directly drawn to BC, that they both make one
right line. In like sort may we prove, that no other line, besides BD, can so
be drawne^ Wherefore the lines CB and BD, make both one right line. If therefore
unto a right line, and to a point in the same line, be drawn two right lines,
not both on one and the same side, making the side angles equal to two right
angles: those two lines shall make directly one right line: which was required
to be proved.

An other demonstration after Pelitarius.
Suppose that there be a right line AB, unto whose poi^te ^, An other
demonstration after Pelitarius.
let there be drawn two right lines CB and BD, unto contrary sides: and let
the two angles CBA, and DBA, be either two right angles, or equal to two right
angles. Then I say, that the two lines CB and BD, do make directly one right
line, namely, CD. For if they do not, the^ let ^E b^ ^o d^awn unto CB, that
they both make directly one right line C^^: which shall pass ^ither above the
line BD, or under it. First let it pass above it. And for a^ much as the two
angles CBA and ABE, are (by the former proposition) equal to two right angles,
and are a part of the two angles, CBA and ABD: but the angles CBA and AND a^e
by (supposition) equal also to two right angles^ therefore the par^^ is equal
to the whole which is im^ossible. And the like absurdity will follow if CB E
pass under the line BD: namely, that the whole shall be equal to the part^
which is also impossible. Wherefore CD is one right line: which was required to
be proved.

The 8. Theoreme. The 15. Proposition. If two right lines cut the one the
other: the head angles shall be equal the one to the other.
SVppose that these two right lines AB and CD, do cut the one the other in the
point E. Then I say, that the angle AEC, is equal to the angle DEB.
Demonstration.
For forasmuch as the right line AE, stands upon the right line DC, making
these angles CEA, and AED: therefore (by the 13. proposition) the angles CEA,
and AED, are equal to two right angles. Again forasmuch as the right line DE,
stands upon the right line AB, making these angles AED, and DEB: therefore (by
the same proposition) the angles AED, and DEB, are equal to two right angles:
and it is proved, that the angles CEA, and AED, are also equal to two right
angles. Wherefore the angles CEA, and AED, are equal to the angles AED, and
DEB. Take away the angle AED, which is common to them both. Wherefore the
angle remaining CEA, is equal to the angle remaining DEB. And in like sort may
it be proved, that the angles CEB, and DEA, are equal the one to the other. If
therefore two right lines cut the one the other, the head angles shall be equal
the one to the other: which was required to be demonstrated.

Thales Milesius the first inuent^r of this proposition.
Thales Milesius the Philosopher was the first inuenter of this Proposition, as
witnesses Eudemius, but yet it was first demonstrated by Euclide. And in it
there is no construction at all. No construction in this proposition.
For the exposition of the thing given, is sufficient enough for the
demonstration.

Head Angles, What head angles are.
are apposite angles, caused of the intersection of two right lines: and are so
called, because the heddes of the two angles are joined together in one point.

The converse of this proposition after Pelitarius.
The converse of this propositio after Pelitarius.
If four right lines being drawn from one point, do make four angles, of
which the two opposite angles are equal: the two opposite lines shall be drawn
directly, and make one right line.

Suppose that there be four right lines AB, AC, AD, and AE, drawn from the
point A, making four angles at the point A: of which let the angle BAC be
equal to the angle DAE, and the angle BAD to the angle CAE. Then I say, that
BE and CD are only two right lines: that is, the two right lines BA and AE are
drawn directly, and do make one right line, and likewise the two right lines
CA and AD are drawn directly, and do make one right line. For otherwise if it
be possible, Demonstration leading to an absurdity.
let OF be one right line, and likewise let CG be one right line. And forasmuch
as the right line EA stands upon the right line CG, therefore the two angles
EAC and EAG, are (by the 13 proposition) equal to two right angles. And
forasmuch as the right line B A stands upon the right line OF: therefore (by
the self same) the two angles EAG and FAG are also equal to two right angles.
Wherefore taking away the angle EAG, which is common to them both, the angle
EAC, shall (by the third common sentence) be equal to the angle FAG: but the
angle EAC is supposed to be equal to the angle BAD. Wherefore the angle BAD is
equal to the angle FAG, namely a part to the whole: which is impossible. And
the self same absurdity will follow, on what side soever the lines be drawn.
Wherefore BE is one line, and CD also is oue line: which was required to be
proved.

The same converse after Proclus.
If unto a right line, and to a point thereof be drawn two right lines, not on
one and the same side, in such sort that they make the angles at the top
equal: The same converse after Pelitarius, which is demonstrated directly.
those right lines shall be drawn directly one to the other, and shall make one
right line.

Suppose that there be a right line AB, and take a point in in C. And unto the
point in it C, draw these two right lines CD and CE unto contrary sides, making
the angles at the head equal, namely, the angles ACD and BCE. Then I say, that
the lines CD and CE are drawn directly, and do make one right line. For
forasmuch as the right line CD standing upon the right line AB, does make the
angles DCA and DCB equal to two right angles (by the 13 proposition:) and the
angle DCA is equal to the angle BCE: therefore the angles DCB and BCE are
equal to two right angles. And forasmuch as unto a certain right line BC, and
to a point thereof C, are drawn two right lines not both on one and the same
side, making the side angles equal to two right angles, therefore (by the 14
proposition) the lines CD and CE are drawn directly, and do make one right
line, which was required to be proved.

The same may also be demonstrated by an argument leading to an absurdity. The
same converse after Proclus demonstrated indirectly.
For if CE be not drawn directly to CD, so that they both make one right line,
then (if it be possible) let CF be drawn directly unto it. So that let DCF
be one right line. And forasmuch as the tw^ right lines AB and DF do cut the
one the other, they make the head angles equal (by the 15. proposition)
Wher^fore the angles ACD and BCF are equal: but (by supposition) the angles
ACD and BCE are also equal. Wherefore (by the first common sentence) the angle
BCE is equal to the angle BCF: namely, the greater to the less: which is
impossible. Wherefore no other right line besides CE is drawn directly to CD.
Wherefore the lines, CD and CE are (...), and make one right line: which was
required to be proved.

What a Corrollary is.
Of this fiuetenth Proposition follows a Corrollary. Where note that a
Corollary is a Proposition, whose demonstration depends of the demonstration
of an other Proposition, and it appears suddenly, as it were by chance
offering it self unto us: and therefore is reckoned as lucre or gain. The
Corollary which follows of this proposition, is thus.

A Corollary following of this proposition.
If four right lines cut the one the other: they make four angles equal to
four right angles.

This Corollary gave great occasion to find out that wonderful proposition
invented of Pithagoras, which is thus.

A wonderful proposition invented by P^^hagoras.
Only three kinds of figures of many angles, namely, an equilater triangle, a
right angled figure of four sides, and a figure of six sides, having equal
sides and equal angles, can fill the whole space about a point, their angles
touching the same point.

Every angle o^ an equilater triangle i^ equal ^o ^wo ^hird par^^^ of a right
angle
Every angle of an equilater triangle contains two third parts of a right
angle: six times two thirdes of a right angle make four right angles.
Wherefore six equilater triangles fill the whole space about a point which is
equal to four right angles, as in the 1. figure. Also every angle of a
rectangle quadrilater figure is a right angle: wherefore four of them fill the
whole space as in the 2. figure. Every angle of a six angled figure is equal
to a right angle, Every angle of a si^e angled figu^e i^ equal to a right
angle, and to a third part of a right angle.
and moreover to a third part of a right angle. But a right angle, and a third
part of a right angle, taken three times, make 4. right angles: wherefore three
equilater six angled figures fill the whole space about a point: which space
(by this Corrollary) is equal to four right angles: as in the third figure.
Any other figure of many sid^, howsoever you join the^ together at the angles,
shall either want of four angles, or exceed them. By this Corrollary also it
is mani^est that if mo then two lines, that is, three, or four, or how many
soever do cut the one the other in one point, all the angles by them made at
the point shall be equal to four right angles. For they fill the place of four
right angles. And it is also many sest, that the angles by those right lines
made are double in number to the right lines which cut the one the other. So
that if there b^ two lines which cut the one the other, the^ are there made
four angles equal to four right angles: but if three, then are there made
six angles: if four, eight angles, and so infinitely. Forever the mul^itude,
or number of of the angles is dubled to the multitude of the ^igh^ lines which
cut the one the other. And as the angles increase in multitude, so diminish
they in magnitude. For that that which is divided is always one and the self
same thing, namely, four right angles.

The 9. Theoreme. The 16. Proposition. Whenever in any triangle, the line of
one side is drawn forth in length: the outward angle shall be greater then
any one of the two inward and opposite angles.
SVppose that ABC be a triangle: and let one of ye sides thereof, namely, BC be
produced unto the point D. Then I say, that the outward angle ACD, is greater
then any one of ye two inward and opposite angles, that is, then the angle CBA,
Cons^ru^^ion.
or then the angle BAC. Divide the line AC (by the 10. proposition) into two
equal parts, in the point E. And draw a line from the point B to the point E.
And (by the 2. peticion) extend BE to the point F. And (by the 2. proposition)
unto the line BE put an equal line OF. And (by the first peticion) draw a line
from F to C: and (by the 2. peticion) extend the line AC to the point G.
Demonstration.
Now forasmuch as the line AE, is equal to the line EC, and BE is equal to
OF. therefore these two sides AE and EB, are equal to these two sides CE and
OF, the one to the other: and the angle AEB, is (by the 15. proposition) equal
to the angle FEC, for they are head angles: wherefore (by the 4. proposition)
the base AB is equal to the base FC: And the triangle ABE is equal to the
triangle FEC: and the other angles remaining are equal to the other angles
remaining, the one to the other, under which are subtended equal sides.
Wherefore the angle BAE is equal to the angle ECF. But the angle ECD is
greater then the angle ECF. Wherefore the angle ACD, is greater then the angle
BAC. In like sort also if the line BC be divided into two equal parts, may it
be pro^ed, that the angle BCG, that is, the angle ACD, is greater then the
angle ABC. Whensoever therefore in any triangle, the line of one side is drawn
forth in length: the ou^ward angle shall be greater then any one of the two
inward and opposite angles: which was required to be demonstrated.

An other demonstration after Pelitarius.
Suppose that the triangle given be ABC. An other Demonstration after
Pelitarius.
Whose side AB let be produced unto the point D. Then I say, that the angle DBC
is greater then either of the angles BAC and ACB. For forasmuch as the two
lines AC and BC do concur in the point C, and upon them falls the line AB:
therefore (by the converse of the first peticion) the two inward angles on one
and the self same side, are less then two right angles. Wherefore the angles
ABC and CAB are less then two right angles: but the angles ABC and DBC are (by
the 13 proposition) equal to two right angles. Wherefore the two angles ABC and
DBC are greater then the two angles ABC and BAC. Wherefore taking away the
angle ABC, which is common to them both, there shall be left the angle DBC
greater then the angle BAC. And by the same reason, forasmuch as the two lines
BA and CA concur in the point A, and upon them falls the right line CB,
the two inward angles ABC and ACB are less then two right angles. But the
angles ABC and DBC are equal to two right angles. Wherefore the two angles ABC
and DBC, are greater then the two angles ABC and ACB. Wherefore taking away the
angle ABC, which is common to them both, there shall remain the angle DBC
greater then the angle ACB: which was required to be proved.

Here is to be noted, that when the side of a triangle is drawn forth, the
angle of the triangle which is next the outwa^d angle, is called an angle in
order unto it: and the other two angles of the triangle are called opposite
angles unto it.

A Corrollary following of this proposition.
Of this Proposition follows this Corrollary, that it is not possible that
from one and the self same point should be drawn to one and the self same
right line, three equal right lines. For from one point, namely, A, if it be
possible, let there be drawn unto the right line BD, these three equal right
lines AB, AC, and AD. And forasmuch as AB is equal to AC, the angles at the
base are (by the fifth proposition) equal. Wherefore the angle ABC is equal to
the angle ACB. Again forasmuch as AB is equal to AD, the angle ABD is (by the
same) equal to the angle ADB: but the angle ABC was equal to the angle ACB.
Wherefore the angle ACB is equal to the angle ADB: namely, the outward angle
to the inward and opposite angle: which is impossible. Wherefore from one and
the self same point, can not be drawn to one and the self same right line
three equal right lines: which was required to be proved.

An other Corrollary ^ollowing also of the same.
By this Proposition also may this be demonstrated, that if a right line falling
upon two right lines, do make the outward angle equal to the inward and
opposite angle, those right lines shall not make a triangle, neither shall they
concur. For otherwis^ one and the self same angle should be both greater,
and also equal: which is impossible. As for example.

Suppose that there be two right lines AB and CD, and upon them let the right
line BE fall, making the angles ABD and CDE equal. Then I say, that the right
lines AB and CD shall not concur. For if they concur, the foresaid angles
abidyng equal, namely, the angles CDE and ABD: Then forasmuch as the angle CDE
is the outward angle it is of necessity greater then the inward and opposite
angle, and it is also equal unto it: which is impossible. Wherefore if the said
lines co^curre, the^ shall not the angles remain equal, but the angle at the
point D shall be increased. For whether AB abiding fixed you suppose the line
CD to be moved unto it, so that they concur, the space and distance in the
angle will be greater: for how much more CD approaches to AB, so much farther
of goes it from DE. Or whether CD abiding fixed, you imagine the line AB to be
moved unto i^, so that they concur, the angle ABD will be less, for
therewith all it comm^th nere unto the lines CD and BD. Or whether you imagine
either of them to be moved the one to the other, you shall find that the line
AB coming near to CD, makes the angle ABE less, and CD going farther from
DE by reason of his motion to the line BD^ makes the angle CDE to increase.
Wherefore it follows of necessity, that if it be a triangle, and that the
right lines AB and CD do conc^rre, the outward angle also shall be greater^
then the inward and opposite angle. For either the inward and opposite angle
abiding fixed, the outward i^ increased: or the outward abiding fixed, the
inward and opposi^^ is diminished^ or else both of them being moved till they
concur, the inward is diminished, and the outward is more increased. And
the caus^ hereof is the motion of the right lines the one tending to that part
where it diminishes the inward angle, the other tending to that part where it
increases the outward angle.

The 10. Theoreme. The 17. Proposition. In every triangle, two angles, which
two soever be taken, are less then two right angles.
SVppose that ABC be a triangle. Then I say that two angles of the said
triangle ABC, which two angles soever be taken, are less the^ two right angles
Extend (by the 2. peticio^) the line BC, Construction.
to the point D. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as (by the proposition going before) the outward angle of the
triangle ABC, namely, the angle ACD is greater then the inward and opposite
angle ABC: put the angle ACB common to them both: wherefore the angles ACD and
ACB are greater then the angles ABC and BCA. But (by the 13 proposition) the
angles ACD and ACB are equal to two right angles. Wherefore the angles ABC
and BCA are less then two right angles. In like sort also may we prove, that
the angles BAC and ACB are less then two right angles^ and also that the
angles CAB and ABC are less then two right angles. Wherefore in every
triangle, two angles, which two soever be taken, are less then two right
angles: which was required to be proved.

This may also be demonstrated without the help of the former propo^ition, by
the converse of the fifth petition, and by the 13. proposition as you saw was
done in the former after Politarius.

It may also be demonstrated without producing any of the sides of the
triangle, after this manner.

An other demo^stration inuen^ed by Proclus.
Suppose that there a be triangle ABC. And in the side BC take a point at all
adventures, and let the same be D, and draw the line AD. And forasmuch as in
the triangle ABD, the side BD is produced, therefore (by the former
proposition) the outward angle ADC, is greater then the inward and opposite
angle ABD. Again forasmuch as in the triangle ADC, the side CD is produced,
therefore (by the same) the outward angle ADB, is greater then the inward and
opposite angle ACD: but the angles at the point D are equal to two right
angles (by the 13. proposition:) wherefore the angles ABC and ACB are less then
two right angles. And by the same reason may we prove that the angles BAC and
BCA are less then two right angles, if we take a point in the line AC, and
draw a right line from it to the point B: and so also may it be proved that the
angles CAB and ABC are less the two right angles, if there be taken in the
line AB a point, and from it be a line drawn to the point C.

A Corrollary fo^l^wi^g this Proposition.
By this proposition also may be proved this Corrollary, that from one and the
self same point to one and the self same right line, can not be drawn two
perpendicular lines.

For if it be possible, from the point A, let there be drawn unto the right
line BC, two perpendicular lines AB, and AC: wherefore the angles ABC and ACB
are right angles. But forasmuch as ABC is a triangle. therefore any two angles
thereof are (by this proposition) less then two right angles. Wherefore the
angles ABC and ACB are less then two right angles: but they are also equal to
two right angles, by reason AB and AC are perpendicular lines upon BC^ which is
impossible. Wherefore from one and the self same point cannot be drawn to one
and the self same line two perpendicular lines: which was required to be
proved.

The 11. Theoreme. The 18. Proposition. In every triangle, to the greater side
is subtended the greater angle.
SVppose that ABC be a triangle, having the side AC greater then the side AB.
Then I say that the angle ABC is greater then the angle BCA. Construction.
For forasmuch as AC is greater the^ AB, put (by the 3. proposition) unto AB an
equal line AD. And (by the first peticion) draw a line from the point B to the
point D. Demonstration^
And forasmuch as the outward angle of the triangle DBC, namely, the angle ADB
is greater then the inward and opposite angle DCB (by the 16. proposition,) but
(by the 5. proposition) the angle ADB is equal to the angle ABD, for the side
AB is equal to the side AD: therefore the angle ABD is greater then the angle
AC^. Wherefore the angle ABC is much greater then the angle ACB. Wherefore in
every triangle, to the greater side is subtended the greater angle: which was
required to be proved.

You may also prove the angle at the point B greater then the angle at the
point C (the side AC being greater then the side AB) if from the line AC you
cut of a line equal to the line AB, An other demonstration after Prophyrius.
beginning at the point C, as before you begaune at the point A: and that after
this manner. Let the line DC be equal to the line AB and draw the line BD: and
produce AB to the point E: and put the line BE equal to the line AD. Wherefore
the whole line AE is equal to the whole line AC: draw a line from E to C. And
forasmuch as AE is equal to AC, therefore the angle AEC is also equal to the
angle ACE (by the 5. proposition:) but the angle ABC is greater then the angle
AEC. For one of the sides of the triangle CBE, namely, the side BE is produced,
and so the outward angle ABC is greater then the inward and opposite BEC (by
the 16 proposition^) wherefore the angle ABC is much greater then the angle
ACB^ which was required to be proved.

Note that that which is here spoken in this propositi^on, That which is spoken
in this Proposition is to be understood in one and the self same triangle.
is to be understood in one and the self same triangle. For it is possible
that one and the self same angle may be subtended of a greater line, and of a
less line: and one and the self same right line may subtend a greater angle,
and a less angle. As for example.

Suppose that there be an Isosceles triangle ABC and, in the side AB take the
point D at all adventures: and from the line AC cut of (by the 3. proposition)
the line AE equal to the line AD. And draw a right line from D to E. Wherefore
the right lines DE and BC do subtend the angle at the point A, and of them the
one is greater, and the other less. And after the self same manner a man may
put infinite right lines greater and less, subtending the angle at the point A.

Again suppose that ABC be an Isosceles triangle. And let BC be less then
either of the lines BA and AC. And upon BC describe (by the first) an equilater
triangle BCD. And draw a line from A to D, and produce it to the point E. And
forasmuch as in the triangle ABD, the outward angle BDE, is greater ^hen the
inward and opposite angle BAD (by the 16. proposition) And by the same in the
tria^gle ACD, the outward angle CDE, is greater then the inward and opposite
angle CAD^ therefore the whole angle BDC is greater the^ the whole angle BAC.
And one and the self same right line subtendeth both these angles, namely, the
greater angle and the less. And it is also proved, that greater right lines
and less subtende one and the self same angle. But in one and the self same
triangle one right line subtendeth one angle, and the great right line ever
subtendeth the great angle, and the less the less, as it was proved in the
proposition.

The 12. Theoreme. The 19. Proposition. In every triangle, under the greater
angle is subtended the greater side.
SVppose that ABC be a triangle, ^auyng the angle ABC greater then the angle
BCA. Then I say that the side AC is greater then ye side AB. For if no^,
Demonstration lea^in^ to an i^possibilitie.
the the side AC is either equal to ye side AB, or else it is less the^ it^ The
side AC is not equal to ye side AB, for then (by the 5^ proposition) ye angle
ABC should be equal to the angle ACB: but (by suppositio^) it is not.
Wherefore the side AC is not equal to the side AB. And the side AC can not be
less then the side AB, for then the angle ABC should be less then the angle
ACB (by the proposition next going before). But (by supposition it is not)
Wherefore the side AC is not less then the side AB. Wherefore the side AC is
greater then the side AB. Wherefore in every triangle, under the greater angle
is subtended the greater side: which was required to be demonstrated.

This proposition (...) the converse the former.
This proposition is the converse of the proposition next going before.
Wherefore as you see, that which was the conclusion in the former, is in this
the supposition, or thing given: and that which was there the thing given, is
here the thing required or conclusion. And it is proved by an argument leading
to an impossibility, as commonly all conuerses are.

P^oclus demonstrateth this proposition after an other way: but first he
puts this An Assumpt is (...) of necessity in the help of a demonstration,
the certainty whereof is not so pl^i^e, and the^fore ^e^e^h is self first to
be demonstrated. An assumpt put by Pr^i^s^er the demonstration of this
Propo^i^ion.
Assumpt following.

If an angle of a triangle be divided into two equal parts, and if the line
which deuideth it being drawn to the base, do divide the same into two
unequal parts: the sides which contain that angle shall be unequal, and that
shall be the greater side, which falls on the grater side of the base, and that
the less which falls on the less side of the base.

Suppose ABC to be a triangle, and (by the 9. proposition) divide the angle at
the point A, into two equal parts, by the right line AD. And let the line AD
divide the base BC, into two unequal parts, and let the part CD be greater
then the part BD. Then I say, that the side AC is greater then the side AB.
Produce the line AD to the point E, and (by the third) put the line DE equal
to the line DA. And forasmuch a^ DC is by supposition greater then DB, put (by
the 3. proposition) DF equal to BD, and draw a line from E to F, and produce it
to the point G. Now forasmuch as AD is equal to ED and DB is equal to DF,
therefore in the two triangles ABD, and EFD, two sides of the one are equal to
two sides of the other, each to his correspondent side. and (by the 15.
proposition) they contain equal angles, namely, the head angles: wherefore (by
the fourth proposition) the base BA is equal to the base BF: and the angle DEF
is equal to the angle DAB. But the angle DAG is by construction equal to the
same angle DAB: wherefore (by the first common sentence) the angles EAG and AEG
are equal. Wherefore (by the ^^ proposion) the side AG is equal to the side
EG. Wherefore the side AC is greater then the side EG. Wherefore it is much
greater then the side OF. But the side OF is equal to the side AB, as it has
been proved. Wherefore the side AC is greater then the side AB: which was
required to be proved.

This assumpt being put, this Proposition is of Proclus thus demonstrated.

Suppose ABC to be a triangle, having his angle at the point B greater then the
angle at the point C. An other demonstration after Proclu^.
Then I say that the side AC is greater then the side AB. Divide the line BC
into two equal parts in the point D, and draw a line from A to D. And produce
the line AD to the point E: and put the line DE equal to the line AD, and draw
a line from B to E. Now forasmuch as BD is equal to DC, and AD is equal to DE
therefore in the two triangles ADC and BDE, two sides of the one are equal to
two sides of the other, each to his correspondent side, and they contain equal
angles (by the 15. proposition): wherefore (by the fourth proposition) the base
BE is equal to the base AC, and the angle DBE is equal to the angle at the
point C. Divide also th'angle ABE into two equal parts by the line BF: wherefore
the line OF is greater then the line FA. And forasmuch as in the triangle A^E,
the angle at the point B is divided into two equal parts by the right line
BF, and the line OF is greater then the line AF^ therefore by the former
Assumps the side RE is greater then the side BA: but the line BE is equal to
the line AC. Wherefore the side AC is greater then the side AB: which was
required to be proved.

The 13. Theoreme. The 20. Proposition. In every triangle two sides, which two
sides soever be taken, are greater then the side remaining.
SVuppose that ABC be a triangle. Then I say that two sides of the triangle
ABC, which two sides soever be taken, are greater^ then the side remaining that
is, the sides BA and AC are greater then the side BC: and the sides AB and BC
then the side AC: and the sides AC and BC then the side BA. Construction.
Produce (by the 2. peticion) the line BA to the point D. And (by the third
proposition) unto the line AC put an equal line AD. and draw^ a line from the
point D to the point C. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the line DA is equal to the line AC, therefore (by the 5.
proposition) the angle ADC, is equal to the angle ACD. But the angle BCD is
greater then the angle ACD, therefore the angle BCD is greater then the angle
ADC. And forasmuch as DCB is a triangle, having the angle BCD greater then the
angle ADC, but (by the 18. proposi^ion) under the greater angle is subtended
the greater side: wherefore DB is greater then BC. But the line DB is equal to
the lines AB and AC (for the line AD is equal to the line AC) wherefore the
sides BA and AC, are greater then the side BC. And in like ^orte may we prove,
that the sides AB and BC are greater then the side AC: and that the sides BC
and CA are greater then the side AB. Wherefore in every triangle two sides,
which two sides soever be taken, are greater then the side remayning^ which was
required to be demonstrated.

This Proposition may also be demonstrated without producing any of the sides,
after this manner.

An other demo^stra^ion without producing one of the sides.
Suppose ABC to be triangle. Then I say, that the two sides AB and AC are
greater then the side BC: divide the angle at the point A (by the 9.
proposition) into two equal parts by the right line AE. And forasmuch as in
the triangl ABE, the outward angle AEC is greater then the angle BAE (by the 16
proposition), and the angle BAE is put to be equal to the angle EAC, therefore
the side AC is greater then the side CE. And by the same reason the side AB is
greater the the side BE. For in the triangle A^C the outward angle AEB, is
greater then the angle CAE, that is then the angle EAB^ Wherefore also the side
AB is greater then the side BE. Wherefore the sides AB and AC are greater then
the whole side BC. And after the same manner may you prove touching the other
sides also.

The same may yet also be demonstrated an other way.

An other Demonstration.
Suppose ABC to be a triangle. Now if ABC be an equilater triangle, then without
doubt any, two sides thereof are greater then the third. For the three sides
being equal any two sides of them are double to the third. But if it be an
Isosceles triangle, either the base is less then either of the equal sides or
it is greater. If the base be less, then again two of them are greater then
the third, but if the base be greater^ let BC being the base of the Isosceles
triangle ABC be greater the^ either of the sides AB and AC and from it ^ut of
(by the 3. proposition) a line equal to any one of the other sides, which let
be BE, and draw a line from A to E. And forasmuch as in the triangle AEB, the
angle AEC is an outward angle: therefore it is greater then the angle BAE (by
the 16. proposition). And by the same reason, the angle AEB is greater then the
angle CAE. Wherefore the angles at the point E are greater then the whole angle
at the point A. But the angle BEA is equal to the angle BAE (by the 5.
proposition) for AB is put to be equal to BE. Wherefore the angle remaining
AEC is greater then the angle CAE. Wherefore also the side AC is greater then
the side EC. But the side AB is equal to the side BE. Wherefore the sides AB
and AC are greater then the side BC.

But if the triangle ABC be a S^^lenum, let the side AB be the greatest, and
let AC be the mean, and BC the least. Wherefore the greatest side being added
to any one of the two sides must ^edes be greater then the third. For of it
self it is greater then any of them. But if AB being the greatest^ you would
prove the sides AC and CB to be greater then it. Then as you did in the
Isoceles triangle, cut of from the greatest a line equal to one of them, and
from the point C to the point of the intersection draw a right line, and reason
as you did before by the outward angles of the triangle, and you shall have your
purpose.

This proposition may yet moreover be demonstrated by an argument leading to an
absurdity, and that after this manner.

Suppose ABC to be a triangle. An other demo^stration leading to an absurditi^
Then I say that the sides AB and AC, are greater then the side BC. For if they
be not greater, they are either equal or less. First let them be equal, and
from the line BC cut of the line BE equal to the line AB (by the 3.
proposition) wherefore the residue EC is equal to AC. Now forasmuch as AB is
equal to BE they subtend equal angles. Likewise forasmuch as AC is equal to
CE they subtend equal angles. Wherefore the angles which are at the point E are
equal to the angles which are at the point A, which is impossible (by the
16. proposition).

But now let the sides AB and AC be less then the side BC, and from the line
BC cut of (by the 3. proposition) the line BD equal to the line AB, and
likewise from the same line BC cut of the line CE equal to the line AC. And
forasmuch as AB is equal to BD, the angle BDA also is equal to the angle BAD
(by the fifth proposition). Again forasmuch as AC is equal to CE, therefore
(by the same) the angle CEA is equal to the angle EAC. Wherefore these two
angles BDA and CEA are equal to these two angles BAD and EAC. Again forasmuch
as the angle BDA is the outward angle of the triangle ADC, therefore it is
greater then the angle EAC. For it is greater then the angle DAC (by the 16.
proposition). And by the same reason, forasmuch as CEA is the the outward angle
of the triangl^ ABE, therefore it is greater then the angle BAD (for it is
greater then the angle BAE). Wherefore the angles BDA and CEA are greater then
the two angles BAD and EAC. But they were also proved equal unto them: which
is impossible. Wherefore the sides AB and AC are neither equal to the side BC,
nor less then it, but greater. And so also may it be proved of the rest.

A brief demonstration by the definition of a right line.
A man may also more briefly demonstrate this proposition by Campanus
definition of a right line, which as we have before declared is thus: A right
line is the shortest extension or drawght that is or may be from one point to
another. Wherefore any one side of a triangle, for that it is a right line
drawn from some one point to some other one point, is of necessity shorter
then the other two sides drawn from and to the same points.

Not all things manifest to the sese, are straight way manifest to reason and
understanding.
Epicurus and such as followed him derided this proposition, not counting it
worthy to be added in the number of propositions of Geometry for the easines
thereof, for that it is manifest even to the sense. But not all things
manifest to sense, are straight ways manifest to reason and understanding. It
pertayneth to one that is a teacher of sciences, by proof and demonstration to
render a certain and undoubted reason, why it so appears to the sense^ and
in that only consists science.

The 14. Theoreme. The 21. Proposition. If from the ends of one of the sides
of a triangle, be drawn to any point within the said triangle two right
lines. those right lines so drawn, shall be less then the two other sides of
the triangle, but shall contain the greater angle.
SVppose that ABC be a triangle: and from the ends of the side BC, namely,
from the points B and C, let there be drawn within ye triangle two right
lines BD and CD to ye point D. Then I say, that the lines BD and CD are less
then the other sides of the triangle, namely, then the sides BA and AC: and
that the angle which they contain, namely, BDC, is greater then the angle BAC.
Extend (by the second peticion) the line BD to the point E. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as (by the 20. proposition) in every triangle the two sides are
greater then the side remaining, therefore the two sides of the triangle ABE,
namely, the sides AB and AE, are greater then the side EB. Put the line EC
common to them both. Wherefore the lines BA and AC, are greater then the lines
BE and EC^ Again forasmuch as (by the same) in the triangle CED, the two sides
CE and ED, are greater then ye side DC, put ye line DB common to them both^
wherefore ye lines CE and ED, are greater then the lines CD and DB. But it is
proved that the lines BA and AC, are greater then the lines BE and EC.
Wherefore the lines BA and AC, are much greater then the lines BD and DC.
Again forasmuch as (by the 16. proposition) in every triangle, the outward
angle is greater then the inward and opposite angle, therefore the outward
angle of the triangle CDE, namely, BDC, is greater then the angle CED.
Wherefore also (by the same) the outward angle of the triangle ABE, namely,
the angle CEB is greater then the angle BAC. But it is proved, that the angle
BDC is greater then the angle CEB. Wherefore the angle BDC is much greater then
the angle BAC. Wherefore if from the ends of one of the sides of a triangle,
be drawn to any point within the said triangle two right lines: those right
lines so drawn shall be less then the two other sides of the triangle, but shall
contain the greater angle: which was required to be demonstrated.

In this proposition is expressed, that the two right lines drawn within the
triangle, have their beginning at the extremes of the side of the triangle. For
from the one extreme of the side of the triangle, and from some one point of
the same side, may be drawn two right lines within the triangle, which shall
be longer the^ the two outward lines: which is wonderful and seems strange,
that two right lines drawn upon a part of a line, should be greater then two
right lines drawn upon the whole line. And again it is possible from the one
extreme of the side of a triangle, and from some one point of the same side to
draw two right lines within the triangle which shall contain an angle less
then the angle contained under the two outward lines.

As touching the first part.

Suppose ABC to be a rectangle triangle, whose right angle let be at the point
B. And in the side BC take a point at al adventures, which let be D: and draw a
right line from A to D Wherefore the line AD is greater then the line AE (by the
19. proposition) From the line AD cut of (by the third) a lin^ equal to the
line AB, which let be DE. And divide the line EA into two equal parts in the
point F (by the 10. proposition) And draw a line from F to C. Now forasmuch as
AFC is a triangle, therefore the lines AF and FC are greater the^ the line AC
(by the former proposition): but AF is equal to FE^ wherefore the right lines FE
and FC are greater then the line AC. And the line DE is equal to the line AB.
Wherefore the right lines FC and FD are greater then the right lines AB and AC^
and they are drawn within the triangle ABC, the one from one extreme of the
side BC, and the other from a point in the same side BC: which was required to
be proved.

As touching the second part. Suppose ABC to be an Isosceles triangle, and
let the base thereof namelye, BC be greater then either of the equal sides,
and from the line AC ^utte of a line equal to the line AB (by the third
proposition) which let be BD: and draw a line from A to D: and in the line
AD take a point at al adventures, which let be E, and draw a line from C to E.
Now forasmuch as the line AB, is equal to the line BD, therefore (by the fifth
proposition) the angle BAD is equal to the angle BDA. And forasmuch as in the
triangle EDC the angle EDB is an outward angle, therefore (by the 16.
proposition) it is greater then the inward and opposite angle DEC. Wherefore
the angle BAD is greater then the angle DEC. Wherefore the angle BAC is much
greater then the angle DEC: and the angle BAC is contained of the outward right
lines BA and AC, and the angle DEC is contained of the inward right lines DE
and EC: which was required to be proved.

By means of this proposition also is described that kind of triangles, which
contains fouresides. As for example, this figure ABC. For it is contained of
four sides BA, AC, CE, and EB. But it has only three angles, one at the
point B, an other at the point A, and the third at the point C. Wherefore this
present figure ABC is a quadrilater triangle: which of old philosophers has
ever been counted wonderful. And here is to be noted, that there is difference
between a three sided figure, and a three angled figure. For not every figure
having three angles has also only three sides as it is plain to see in this
figure. Likewise it is not all on, a figure to have lower sides, and four
angles. For a four sided figure may have only three angles, as in the former
figure: and a four angled figure may have five sides, as in this figure
following. And so of all other figures.

The 8. Problem. The 22. Proposition. Of three right lines, which are equal to
three right lines given, to make a triangle. But it behooves two of those lines,
which two soever be taken, to be greater then the third. For that in every
triangle two sides, which two sides soever be taken, are greater then the side
remaining.
SVppose that the three right lines given be A, B, C: of which let two of them,
which two soever be taken, be greater then the third, that is, let the lines A,
B, be greater then the line C, and the lines A, C, then the line B, and the
lines B, C, then the line A. It is required of three right lines equal to the
right lines A, B, C, to make a triangle. Construction.
Take a right line having an appointed end on the side D, and being infinite
on the side E. And (by the 3. proposition) put unto the line A, an equal line
DF, and put unto the line B, an equal line FG, and unto ye line C, an equal
line GH. And making the center F, and the space DF, describe (by the 3.
peticio^) a circle DKL. Again making the center G, and the space G H, describe
(by the same) a circle HKL; and let the point of the intersection of the said
circles be K, and (by the first peticion) draw a right line from the point K to
ye point F, and an other from the point K to the point G. Then I say, that of
three right lines equal to the lines A, B, C, is made a triangle KFG.
Demonstration.
For forasmuch as the point F is the center of the circle DKL. therefore (by
the 15. definition) the line FD is equal to the line FK. But the line A is
equal to the line FD Wherefore (by the first common sentence) the line FK is
equal to the line A. Again forasmuch as the point G, is the center of the
circle LKH, therefore (by the same definition) the line GK is equal to the
line GH^ But the line C is equal to the line GH: wherefore (by the first
common sentence) the line KG is equal to the line C. But the line FG is by
supposition equal to the line B wherefore these three right lines GF, FK, and
KG, are equal to these three right lines A, B, C. Wherefore of three right
lines, that is, KF, FG, and GK, which are equal to the three right lines given,
that is to A, B, C, is made a triangle KFG: which was required to be done.

An other construction, and demonstration after Flussates.
Suppose that the three right lines be A, B, C. And unto some one of them,
namely, An other construction and demonstration after Flussates.
to C, put an equal line DE, and (by the second proposition) from the point E,
draw the line EG, equal to the line B: and (by the same) unto the point D put
the line DH equal to the line A. And making the center the point E, and the
space EG, describe a circle FG: likewise making the center the point D, and the
space DH, describe an other circle HF: which circles let cut the one the
other in the point F. And draw these lines DF and OF. Then I say that DFE is a
triangle described of 3. right lines equal^ to the right lines A, B, C. For
forasmuch as the line DH is equal to the right line A, the line DF, shall also
be equal to the same right line A. (For that the lines DH and DF, are drawn
from the center to the circumference). Likewise forasmuch as EG is equal to OF
(by the 15. definition) and the right line B is equal to the same right line
EG: therefore the right line OF is equal to the right line B: but the right
line DE, was put to be equal to the right line C. Wherefore of three right
lines ED, DF, and FE, which are equal to three right lines given, A, B, C, is
described a triangle: which was ^equired to be done.

Instances in this Problem.
In this proposition the adversary paraduenture will cavil, that the circles
shall not cut the one the other (which thing Euclide puts them to do) But
now if they cut not the one the other, either they touch the one the other,
or they are dista^nte the one from the other. First if it be pos^ible let them
tooche the one the other: as in the figure here put (the construction whereof
answers to the construc^ion of Euclide).

First instance.
And forasmuch as F is the center of the circle DK, therefore the line DF is
equal to the line FN. And forasmuch as the point G, is the center of the circle
HL, therefore the line HG, is equal to the line GM. Wherefore these two lines
DF, and GH, are equal to one line, namely, to FG. But they were put to be
greater then it: for the lines DF, FG, and GH, were put to be equal to the
lines A, B, C, every two of which are supposed to be greater then the third:
wherefore they are both greater, and also equal, which is impossible. Second
instance
Again if it be possible, let the circles be distant the one from the other,
as are the circles DK and HL. And forasmuch as F is the center of the circle
DK, therefore the line DF is equal to the line FN. And forasmuch as G is the
center of the circle LH, therefore the line HG is equal to the line GM:
wherefore the whole line FG is greater then the two lines DF, and GH, (for the
line FG, excedeth the lines DF, and GH, by the line NM) but it was supposed
that the (...) ^ DF and HG (...) the^ the (...) FG: a^ also i^ (...) suppos^d
that the lines A and C, were (...) line B (for the (...) D^ is put to be ^qu^ll
to the line A, and the line F^ to the line B^ and the line HG to the line G^)
Wh^^^fo^^ they are both greater and also equal: which is impossible. Wherefore
the circles neither tooch the one the other, nor are distant the one from the
other. Wherefore of necessity they cut the one the other: which was required
to be proved.

The 9. Problem. The 23. Proposition. Upon a right line given, and to a point
in it given: to make a rectiline angle equal to a rectiline angle given.
SVppose yt the right line given be AB, and let ye point in it given be A. And
let also the rectiline angle given be DCH. It is required upon the right line
given AB, and to the point in it given A, to make a rectil^ne angle equal to
the rectiline angle given DCH. Construction.
Take in either of the lines CD and CH a point at all adventures, and let the
same be D and E. And (by the first peticion) draw a right line from D to E. And
of three right lines, AF, FG and GA, which let be equal to the three right
lines given, that is, to CD, DE, and EC, make (by ye proposition going before)
a triangle, and let the same be AFG^ so that let the line CD be equal to the
line AF, and the line CE to the line AG, and moreover the line DE to the line
FG. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as these two lines DC and CE are equal to these two lines FA
and AG, the one to the other, and the base DE is equal to the base FG:
therefore (by the 8. proposition) the angle DCE is equal to the angle FAG.
Wherefore upon the right line given AB, and to the poi^^ i^ i^ given namely A,
is made a rectiline angle FAG, equal to the rectiline angle given DCH: which
was required to be done.

An other construction and demons^^ation after Proclus.
Suppose that the right line given be AB: An other construction and
demonstration after Proclus.
and let the point in it given be A, and let the rectiline angle given be CDE.
It is required upon the right line given AB, and to the point in it given A, to
make a rectiline angle equal to the rectiline angle given CDE. Draw a line
from C to E. And produce the line AB on either side to the points F and G. And
unto the line CD, put the line FA equal, and unto the line DE let the line AB
be equal, and unto the line EC put the line BG equal. And making the ce^tre the
point A, and the space AF, describe a circle KF. And again making the center
the point B and the space BG describe an other circle ^L: which shall of
necessity cut the one the other, as we have before proved. Let them cut the
one the other in the points M and N. And draw these right lin^s AN, AM, BN,
and BM. And forasmuch as FA is equal to AM^ and also to AN (by the definition
of a circle) but CD is equal to FA, wherefore the lines AM and AN are ech^
equal to the line DC. Ag^yne forasmuch as BG, is equal to BM, and to BN, and
BG is equal to CE: therefore either of these lines BM and BN is equal to the
line CE. But the line BA is equal to the line DE. Wherefore these two lines BA
and AM, are equal to these two lines D E and DC, the one to the other, and the
base BM is equal to the base CE. Wherefore (by the 8. proposition) the angle
MAB, is equal to the angle at the point D. And by the same reason the angle
NAB, is equal to the same angle at the point D. Wherefore upon the right line
given AB, and to the point in it given A, is described a rectiline angle on
either side of the line AB: namely, on one side the rectiline angle NAB, and on
the other side the rectiline angle MAB, either of which is equal to the
rectiline angle given CDE: which was required to be done.

An other construction also, and demonstration after Pelitar^us.
A^ other D^mons^ra^ion after ^eli^arius.
Suppose that the right line given be AB: and let the point in it given be C,
and let the rectiline angle given be DEF. It is required upon the line given
AB, and to the point in it given C, to describe a rectiline angle equal to the
rectiline angle given DEF. Produce the line FE to the point G: and from the
point E erect (by the 11. proposition) unto the line GF a perpendiculer line
EH, which if it exactly agree with the line ED, then was the angle given a
right angle. Wherefore if from the point C you erecte a perpendiculer line unto
the line AB, that shall be done which was req^ired to be done But if it do not,
then from the point H, ere^t unto the line HE, a perpendiculer line HD, which
being produced shall (by the fift^ peticion) concur with the line FD being
also produced: for the angle DEH is less then a right angle (when as GEH is a
right angle). Where^ore let them concur in the point D, and so is made the
triangle DEH. After the same manner from the point given C, erect unto the line
AB a perpendiculer line CK: which let be equal to the perpendicular line EH
(by the 3. proposition): and from the point K erect unto the line K C, a
perpendiculer line KL, which let be equal to the perpendiculer line HD. And
draw a line from C to L. Then I s^y that the angle LCB, is equal to the angle
given DEF. For the two triangles HEAD and KCL, are (by the fourth proposition)
equal, and equilater the one to the other: and the two angles LCK and DEH are
equal. And the two angles BCK and FEH are equal, for either of them is a right
angle. Wherefore (by the 2. common sentence) the whole angle LCB, is equal to
the whole angle DEF. Which was required to be done.

And if the perpendiculer line chance to fall without the angle given, namely,
if the angle given be an acute angle, the self same manner of demonstration
will serve: but only that instead of the second common sentence, must be used
the 3. common sentence.

Appollonius puts another construction and demonstration of this
proposition: which (though the demonstration thereof depend of propositions
put in the third book, yet for that the construction is very good for him that
will redely, and mechanically, without demonstration, describe upon a line
given, and to a point in it given, a rectiline angle equal to a rectiline
angle given) I thought not amiss here to place it. And it is thus.

Suppose that the rectiline angle given be CDE, An other construction and
d^^monstration after Appollonius.
and let the right line given be AB, and let the point in it given be A. Take
in the line CD, a po^^^ at all adventures, which let be F. And making the
ce^tre the point D, and the space DF, describe a circle FG, cutting the line
DE, in the point G, and draw a right line from F to G. Likewise from the line
AB, cut of a line equal to the line DF, which let be AH. And making the ce^tre
the point A, and the space AH describe a circle HK, and from the point H^
subtend unto the circumference of the circle a right line equal to the right
line FG, which let be HK: and draw a right line from A to K. Then I say that
the angle HAK, is equal to the angle CDE. The proof whereof I now omit for
that it depends of the ^8 and 27 propositions of the third book.

But now, as I said, by this you may very redily, and mechanically, How to do
this pr^position redily and mechanically.
without demonstration, upon a line given, and to a point in it given describe
a rectiline angle equal to a rectiline angle given. For in the rectiline angle
given, you need only to mark the two points, where the circumference of the
circle cutteth the lines containing the angle geuen^ as the points F and G^ and
likewise to mark in the line given as in AB, the point H, and so making the
center the point A, according to the space AH (which is put to be equal to FD)
describe a pe^^e of a circumference on that side that you will have the angle to
be, as for example the circumference HK, and opening your compass to the
wideth from the point F, to the point G, set one foot thereof fixed in the
point H, and mark the point where the other foot cutteth the said
circumference, which point let be K. And from that point to the point. A, draw
a right line: and so shall you have described at the point A, an angle equal to
the angle at the point D. As in the figures in the end of the other side put.

Oenopides the first inuenter of this proposition.
Oenopides was the first inuenter of this proposition as witnesses Eudemius.

The 15. Theoreme The 24. Proposition. If two triangles have two sides of the
one equal to two sides of the other, each to his correspondent side, and if the
angle contained under the equal sides of the one, be greater then the angle
contained under the equal sides of the other: the base also of the same,
shall be greater then the base of the other.
SVppose that there be two triangles ABC, and DEF, having two sides of the one,
that is, AB, and AC, equal to two sides of the other, that is, to DE, and DF,
each to his correspondent side: that is, the side AB, to the side DE, and the
side AC to the side DF: and suppose that the angle BAC be greater then the
angle EDF. Then I say that the base BC, is greater then the base OF. For
forasmuch as the angle BAC is greater then the angle EDF, Construction.
make (by the 23. proposition) upon the right line DE, and to the point in it
given D, an angle EDG equal to the angle given BAC. And to one of these lines,
that is, either to AC, or DF, put an equal line DG. And (by the first
peticio^) draw a right line from the point G, to the point E, and an other from
the point F, Demonstration.
to the point G. And forasmuch as the line AB is equal to the line DE, and the
line AC to the line DG, the one to ye other, and the angle BAC is (by
construction) equal to the angle EDG, therefore (by the 4. proposition) the
base BC, is equal to the base EG. Again for as much as the line DG is equal
to the line DF, ther^ (by the 5. proposition) the angle DGF, is equal to the
angle DFG. Wherefore the angle DFG is greater then the angle EGF. Wherefore
the angle EFG is much greater then the angle EGF. And forasmuch as EFG is a
triangle, having the angle EFG greater then the angle EGF, and (by the 18.
pr^position) under the greater angle is subtended the greater side, therefore
the side EG is greater then the side OF. But the side EG is equal to the side
BC: wherefore the side BC is greater then the side OF. If therefore two
triangles have two sides of the one equal to two sides of the other, each to
his correspondent side, and if the angle contained under the equal sides of
the one, be greater then the angle contained under the equal sides of the
other: the base also of the same shall be greater then the base of the other:
which was required to be proved.

In this Theoreme may be three cases. Three cases in this pr^position.
For the angle EDG, being put equal to the angle BAC, and the line DG, being
put equal to the line AC, and a line being drawn from E to G, the line EG
shall either fall above the line GF, or upon it, or under it. Euclides
demonstration serves, The first cas^. 2.
when the line GE falls above the line GF, as we have, before manifestly
seen.

But if it fall upon it, Second case.
as in this figure here put. Then forasmuch as the two lines AB and AC, are
equal to the two lines DE and DG, the one to the other, and they contain
equal angles by construction: therefore (by the 4. proposition) the base BC,
is equal to the base EG, but the base EG, is greater then the base OF:
wherefore also the base BC, is greater then the base OF: which was required to
be proved.

But now let the line EG, Third case.
fall under the line E F, as in the figure here put. And forasmuch as these two
lines AB, and AC, are equal to these two lines DE and DG, the one to the
other, and they contain equal angles, therefore (by the 4. proposition) the
base BC, is equal to the base EG. And forasmuch as within the triangle DEGREES, the
two linnes DF and FE, are set upon the side DE: therefore (by the 21.
proposition) the lines DF and F^ are less then the outward lines DG and GE:
but the line DG is equal to the line DF. Wherefore the line GE is greater then
the line FE. But GE is equal to BC. Wherefore the line BC is greater the the
line OF. Which was required to be proved.

This third case may also another way be demonstrated. An other demonstration
of the third case.
Produce the lines DF and DG, which are equal, unto the points K and H: and
draw a line from F to G: wherefore (by the second part of the fifth
proposition) the angles KFG and FGH, which are under the base FG^ are equal:
therefore the angle EFG is greater then the angle FG^. Wherefore (by the 18
proposition) the sid^ EG is greater then the side OF: but the base BC is equal
unto the base EG: Wherefore the base BC, is greater then the base EF^ Which was
required to be proved.

It may peradventure seme^ that Euclide should here in this proposition have
proved, that not only the bases of the triangles are unequal, but also that
the areas of the same are unequal: for so in the fourth proposition, after he
had proved the base to be equal, he proved also the areas to be equal. But
hereto may be answered, Why Euclide etc.
that in equal angles and bases, and unequal angles and bases, the
consideration is not like. For the angles and bases being equal, the triangles
also shall of necessity be equal, but the angles and bases being unequal,
the areas shall not of necessity be equal. For the triangles may both be
equal and unequal: and that may be the greater, which has the greater
angle, and the greater base, and it may also be the less. And for that cause
Euclide made no mention of the comparison of the triangles. Whereof this also
might be a cause, for that to the demonstration thereof are required certain
Propositions concerning parallel lines, which we are not as yet come unto.
After the ^^ etc.
Howbeit after the 37^ proposition of his book you shall find the comparison of
the areas of triangles, which have their sides equal, and their bases and
angles at the top unequal.

The 16. Theoreme. The 25. Proposition. If two triangles have two sides of the
one equal to two sides of the other, each to his correspondent side, and if
the base of the one be greater then the base of the other: the angle also of
the same contained under the equal right lines^ shall be greater then the
angle of the other.
SVppose that there be two triangles, A, B, C, and DEF, having two sides of
tb'one, that is, AB, and AC, equal to two sides of the other, that is to DE,
and DF, each to his correspondent side, namely, the side AB to the side DF, and
the side AC to the side DF. But let the base BC be greater then the base OF.
The^ I say, they the angle BAC is greater then the angle EDF. For if not,
Demonstration leading to an absurdi^y.
then is it either equal unto it, or less then it. But the angle BAC is not
equal to the angle EDF: for if it were equal, the base also BC should (by the
4. proposition) be equal to the base OF: but by supposition it is not.
Wherefore the angle BAC is not equal to the angle EDF. Neither also is the
angle BAC less then the angle EDF: for then should the base BC be less the^
the base OF (by the former proposition) But by supposition it is not. Wherefore
y^ angle BAC is not less the^ ye angle EDF. And it is already proved, that it
is not equal unto it: wherefore ye a^gle BAC is greater then the angle EDF. If
therefore two triangles have two sides of the one equal to two sides of the
other, each to his correspondent side, and if the base of the one be greater
then the base of the other, the angle also of the same contained under ye equal
right lines shall be greater the^ the angle of the other: which was required to
be proved.

This proposition is plain opposite to the eight, and is the co^uerse of the
four and twenty which went before. All converses are commonly indirectly
demonstrated.
And it is proved (as commonly all conuerses are) by a reason leading to an
absurdity. But it may after Menelaus Alexandrinus be demonstrated directly, An
other demo^stration after Menelaus Alexandrinus.
after this manner.

Suppose that there be two triangles ABC and DEF: having the two sides AB and
AC equal to the two sides DE and DF, the one to the other: and le^ the base BC
be greater then the base OF. Then ^ say that the angle at the point A, is
greater the^ the angle at the point D. For from the base BC (...) of (by the
third) a line eqnall to the base OF, and let the same be BG. And upon the line
GB and to the point B put (by the 23, proposition) an angle equal to the angle
DEF: which let be GBH: and let the line ^H be equal to the line DE. And draw
a line from H to G, and produce it beyond the point G: which being produce
shall fall either upon the angle A, Diverse cases in this demonstration.
or upon the line AB, or upon the line AC. First let it fall upon the angle A.
First case.
And forasmuch as these two lines BG and BH are equal to these two lines OF
and ED, the one to the other, and they contain equal angles (by construction)
namely, the angles GBH and DEF: therefore (by the 4. proposition) the base GH is
equal to the DF, and the angle BHG to the angle EDF. Again forasmuch as the
line BH is equal to the line BA (for the line AB is supposed to be equal to
the line DE, unto which line the line BH is put equal) therefore (by the 5.
proposition) the angle BHA is equal to the angle BAH: wherefore also the angle
EDF is equal to the angle BAH. But the angle BAC is greater then the angle BAH:
wherefore also the angle BAC is greater then the angle EDF. Second case.


But now let it fall upon the line AB in the point K, and draw a line from A
to H. And forasmuch as these two lines BG and BH are equal to these two lines
OF and ED, the one to the other, and they contain equal angles (by
constuction) namely, the angles GBH and DEF: therefore (by the 4. proposition)
the base GH is equal to the base DF, and the angle BHG to the angle EDF.
Again forasmuch as in the triangle BAH, the side BA is equal to the side BH,
therefore (by the 5. proposition) the angle BAH is equal to the angle BHA. But
the angle BHA is greater then the angle BHG. wherefore also the angle BAH is
greater then the angle BHG. Wherefore the angle BAC is much greater then the
angle BHG. But it is proved that the angle BHG is equal to the angle at the
point D. Wherefore the angle BAC is greater then the angle at the point^ D:
Which was required to be proved.

But now suppose that the line HG being produced do fall upon the line AC,
Third case.
namely, in the point K. And again draw also a line from A to H. And forasmuch
as BG is equal to OF, and BH, to ED, therefore these two lines BG and BH are
equal to these two lines OF, and ED, the one to the other, and (by
construction) they contain equal angles, namely, the angles GBH and FED.
Wherefore (by the fourth proposition) the base GH is equal to the base DF: and
th'angle BHG is equal to th'angle EDF. And forasmuch as GH is equal to DF,
and DF is equal to AC: therefore GH also is equal to AC. Wherefore HK is
greater then AC, wherefore HK is much greater then AK. Wherefore (by the 18.
proposition) the angle KAH is greater then the angle KHA. Again forasmuch as
BH is equal to AB (for BH is put equal to DE, which is by supposition equal to
AB) therefore (by the 5. proposition) the angle BHA is equal to the angle BAH.
Wherefore the whole angle BHK is less then the whole angle BAK. But it has
been pro^ed, that the angle BHK is equal to the angle at the point D, wherefore
the angle BAC is greater then the angle at the point D, which was required to
be proved.

Hero Mechanicus also demonstrateth it an other way, and that by a direct
demonstration.

An other demonstration after Hero Mechanicus.
Suppose that there be two triangles ABC and DEF, having the two sides AB, and
AC, ^quall to the two sides DE, and DF, the one to the other, and let the base
BC, be greater then the base OF. Then I say, that the angle at the point A, is
greater then the angle at the point D. For forasmuch as BC, is greater the^ OF,
produce OF to the point G, and put the line EG, equal to the line BC. Likewise
produce the line DE to the point H, and put the line DH, equal to the line DF.
Wherefore making the center the point D, and the space DF, describe a circle,
and it shall pass also by the point H. Let the same circle be FKH. And
forasmuch as AC and AB are greater the BC (by the 20. proposition) and the
lines AB and AC, ar equal to the line EH, and the line BC is equal to the line
EG. Therefore the line EH is greater then the line EG. Wherefore making the
center the point E and the space EG describe a circle and it shall cut the line
EH. Let the same circle be GK: and from the common sectio^ of the circles,
which let be the point K, draw these right lines KD and KE. And forasmuch as
the point D is the center of the circle HKF, therefore (by the 15. def^nition)
the line DK, is equal to the line DH, that is unto the line AC. Again
forasmuch as E is the center of the circle GK, therefore the line E K is equal
to the line EG, that is, to the line BC. And forasmuch as these two lines AB
and AC, are equal to these two lines DE and DK, and the base BC is equal to
the base E K (for E K is equal to E G (by the 15. definition) and E G is put
to be equal to BC). Wherefore (by the 4. proposition) the angle BAC is equal to
the angle ED K. But the angle E DK is greater then the angle E DF: wherefore
also the angle BAC, i^ greater then the angle EDF: which was required to be
proved.

The 17. Theoreme. The 26. Proposition. If two triangles have two angles of the
one equal to two angles of the other, each to his correspondent angle, and have
also one side of the one equal to one side of the other, either that side
which lies between the equal angles, or that which is subtended under one of
the equal angles: the other sides also of the one, shall be equal to the other
sides of the other, each to his correspondent side, and the other angle of the
one shall be equal to the other angle of the other.
SVppose that there be two triangles AB C, and DEF, having two angles of the
one, that is, the angles ABC, and BCA, equal to two angles of the other, that
is, to the angles DEF, and EFD, each to his correspo^dent angle, that is, the
angle ABC, to the angle DEF, and the angle BCA to the angle EFD, and one side
of the one equal to one side of ye other, first that side which lies between
the equal angles, that is, the side BC, to the OF. The^ I say that the other
sides also of the one shall be equal to the other sides of the other, each to his
correspondent side, that is, that side AB, to the side DE, and the side AC, to
the side DF, and the other angle of the one, to the other angle of the other,
that is, the angle BAC to the angle EDF. For if the side AB be not equal to
the side DE, the one of them is greater. Let the side AB be greater: and (by
the 3. proposition) unto the line DE, put an equal line GB, and draw a right
line from the point G, to the point C. Now forasmuch as the line GB,
Demonstration leading to an absurditis.
is equal to the line DE, and the line BC to the line OF, therefore these two
lines GB and BC, are equal to these two lines DE and OF, the one to the other,
and the angle GBC is (by supposition) equal to the angle DEF. Wherefore (by
the 4. proposytion) the base GC is equal to the base DF, and the triangle GCB
is equal to the triangle DEF, and the angles remay^ing are equal to the
angles remaining under which are subtended equal sides. Wherefore the angle
GCB is equal to the angle DFE. But the angle DFE is supposed to be equal to
the angle BCA. Wherefore (by the first common sentence) the angle BCG is equal
to the angle BCA, the less angle to the greater: which is impossible.
Wherefore the line AB is not unequal to the line DE. Wherefore it is equal
And the the line BC is equal to the line OF: now therefore there are two sides
AB and BC equal to two sides DE and OF, the one to the other, and the angle
ABC, is equal to the angle DEF. Wherefore (by the 4. proposition) the base AC
is equal to the base DF, and the angle remaining BAC is equal to the angle
remaining EDF.

Again suppose that the sides subtending the equal angles be equal the one
to the other, let the side I say AB be equal to the side DE. Then again I
say, that the other sides of the one are equal to the other sides of the
other, each to his correspondent side, that is the side AC to the side DF, and
the side BC to the side OF: and moreover the angle remaining, namely, BAC, is
equal to the angle remaining, that is, to the angle EDF. For if the side BC be
not equal to the side OF, the one of them is greater: let the side BC, if it
be possible, be greater. And (by the third proposytion) unto the line OF, put
an equal line BH, and draw a right line from the point A to the point H. And
forasmuch as the line BH is equal to the line OF, and the line AB to the line
DE, therefore these two sides AB and BH, are equal to these two sides DE and
OF, the one to the other, and they contain equal angles. Wherefore (by the
4. proposition) the base AH is equal to the base DF, and the triangle ABH, is
equal to the triangle DEF, and the angles remaining are equal to the angle^
remaining, under which are subte^ded equal sides. Wherefore the angle BHA is
equal to the angle EFD. But the angle EFD is equal to the angle BCA.
Wherefore the angle BHA is equal to the angle BCA. Wherefore the outward
angle of ye triangle AHC, namely, the angle BHA, is equal to the inward and
opposite angle, namely, to the angle HCA, which (by the 16 proposition) is
impossible. Wherefore the side OF is not unequal to the side BC, wherefore it
is equal. And the side AB is equal to ye side DE: wherefore these two sides
AB and BC, are equal to these two sides DE and OF, the one to the other, and
they contain equal angles: Wherefore (by the 4. proposition) the base AC is
equal to the base DF: and the triangle ABC, is equal to the triangle DEF, and
the angle remaining, namely, the angle BAC is equal to the angle remaining,
that is, to the angle EDF. If therefore two triangles have two angles of the
one equal to two angles of the other, each to his correspondent angle, and have
also one side of the one equal to o^e side of the other, either that side
which lies between the equal angles, or that which is subtended under one of
the equal angles: the other sides also of the one shall be equal to the other
sides of the other, each to his correspondent side, and the other angle of the
one shall be equal to the other angle of the other: which was required to be
proved.

Whereas in this proposition it is said, that triangles are equal, which
having two angles of the one equal to two angles of the other, the one to the
other, have also one side of the one equal to one side of the other, either
that side which lies between the equal angles, or that side which subtendeth
one of the equal angles: this is to be noted that without that caution
touching the equal side, the proposition shall not always be true. As for
example.

Suppose that there be a rectangle triangle ABC, whose right angle let be at
the point B, and let the side BC be greater the^ the side BA: and produce the
line AB, from the point B to the point D. And upon the right line BC and to the
point in it C, make unto the angle BAC an equal angle (by the 23. proposition),
which let be BCD, and let the lines BD and CD, being produced co^curre in the
point D. Now the^ there are two triangles ABC, and BCD, which have two angles
of the one equal to two angles of the other, the one to the other, namely, the
angle ABC to the angle DBC (for they are both right angles), and the angle BAC,
to the angle BCD (by construction) and have also one side of the one equal to
one side of the other, namely, the side BC, which is common to them both. And
yet notwithstanding the triangles are not equal: for the triangle BDC, is
greater then the triangle ABC. For upon the right line BC, and to the point in
it C, describe an angle equal to the angle ACB: which let be FCB (by the 23.
proposition). And forasmuch as the side BC was supposed to be greater then the
side. AB, therefore (by the 18. proposition) the angle BAC is greater then the
angle BCA, wherefore also the angle BCD is greater then the angle BCF.
Wherefore the triangle BCD is greater then the triangle BCF. Again forasmuch
as there are two triangles ABC and BCF; having two angles of the one equal to
two angles of the other^ the one to the other, namely, the angle ABC to the
angle FBC (for they are both right angles) and the angle ACB to the angle FCB
(by construction), and one side of the one is equal to one side of the other,
namely, that side which lies between the equal angles, that is, the side BC
which is common to both triangles. Wherefore (by this proposition) the
triangles ABC and F BC are equal. But the triangle DBC is greater the^ the
triangle F BC. Wherefore also the triangle DBC is greater then the triangle
ABC. Wherefore the triangles ABC and DBC, are not equal: notwithstanding they
have two angles of the one equal to two angles of the other, the one to the
other, and one side of the one equal to one side of the other.

The reason whereof is, for that the equal side in one triangle, subte^deth one
of the equal angles, and in the other lies between the equal angles. So that
you see that it is of necessity that the equal side do in both triangles,
either subtend one of the equal angles, or lie between the equal angles.

Of this proposition was Thales Milesius the inuentor, Thales Milesius the
inuent^r of this proposition.
as witnesses Eudemus in his book of Geometrical enarrations.

The 18. Theoreme. The 27. Proposition. If a right line falling upon two right
lines, do make the alternate angles equal the one to the other: those two
right lines are parallels the one to the other.
SVppose that the right line OF falling upon these two right lines AB and CD,
do make the alternate angles, namely, the angles AEF and EFD equal the one to
the other. Then I say that AB is a parallel line to CD. For if not, then these
lines produced shall mete together, either on the side of B and D, or on the
side of A and C. Demo^stration ^eading to an absurdity.
Let them be produced therefore, and let them mete if it be possible on the side
of B and D, in the point G. Wherefore in the triangle GEF, the outward angle
AEF is equal to the inward and opposite angle EFG, which (by the 16.
proposition) is impossible. Wherefore the lines AB and CD being produced on the
side of B and D, shall not meet. In like sort also may it be proved that they
shall not mete on the side of A and C. But lines which being produced on no
side meet together, are parrallell lines (by the last definition:) wherefore AB
is a parrallel line to CD. If therefore a right line falling upon two right
lines, do make the alternate angles equal the one to the other: those two
right lines are parrallels the one to the other: which was required to be
demonstrated.

^
This word alternate is of Euclide in diverse places diversely taken: sometimes
for a kind of situation in place, and sometime for an order in proportion, in
which signification he uses it in the v. book, and in his books of numbers.
And in the first signification he uses it here in this place, and generally in
all his other books, ^
h^uing to do with lines and figures. And those two angles he calls
alternate, which being both contained within two parallel or equidistant lines
are neither angles in order, nor are on the one and self same side, but are
separated the one from the other by the line which falls on the two lines:
the one angle being above, and the other beneath.

The 19. Theoreme. The 28. Proposition. If a right line falling upon two right
lines, make the outward angle equal to the inward and opposite angle on one
and the same side, or the inward angles on one and the same side, equal to
two right angles: those two right lines shall be parallels the one to the other.
SVppose that the right line OF, falling upon these two right lines AB and CD,
do make the outward angle EGB equal to the inward and opposite angle GHD, or
do make the inward angles on one and the same side, that is, the angles BGH and
GHD equal to two right angles. Then I say that the line AB is a parallel line
to the line CD For forasmuch as the angle EGB is (by supposition) equal to the
angle GHD, Demonstration
and the angle EGB is (by the 15. proposition) equal to the angle AGH:
therefore the angle AGH is equal to the angle GHD: and they are alternate
angles. Wherefore (by the 27. proposition) AB is a parallel line to CD.

Again forasmuch as the angles BGH and GHD are (by supposition) equal to two
right angles, and (by the 13. proposition) the angles AGH and BGH, are also
equal to two right angles, wherefore the angles AGH and BGH, are equal to the
angles BGH and GHD: take away the angle BGH which is common to them both
Wherefore the angle remainyng, namely, AGH is equal to the angle remaining,
namely, to GHD. And they are alternate angles. Wherefore (by the former
proposition) AB is a parallel line to CD. If therefore a right line falling
upon two right lines, do make the outward angle equal to the inward and
opposite angle on one and the same side, or the inward angles on one and the
same side, equal to two right angles, those two right lines shall be parallels
the one to the other: which was required to be proved.

Ptolomeus demonstrateth the second part of this proposition, namely, that the
two inward angles on one and the same side being equal, the right lines are
parellels, after this manner. An other demo^stration of the second part of this
proposition after Ptolome^^


Suppose that there be two right lines AB and CD, and let a certain right line
EFGH cut them in such sort, that it make the angles BFG and FGD equal to
two right angles. Then I say, that these right lines AB and CD are parallel
lines, that is, they shall not concur. For if it be possible, let the lines
BF and GD being produced concur in the point K. Now forasmuch as the right
line OF stands upon the right line AB, therefore (by the 13. proposition) it
makes the angles AFE, and BFE equal to two right angles: likewise forasmuch
as the line FG stands upon the line CD, therefore (by the same proposition) it
makes the angles CGF and DGF equal to two right angles. Wherefore the four
angles BFE, AFE, CGF, and DGF are equal to four right angles: of which the two
angles BFG and FGD are (by supposition) equal to two right angles, wherefore
the angles remaining, namely, AFG and CGF are also equal to two right angles.
If therefore the right lines FB and GD being produced (the inward angles being
equal to two right angles) do concur, then shall the lines FA and GC being
produced concur. For the angles AF G and CGF are equal to two right angles.
For either the right lines shall concur on either side, or else on neither
side. For that on either side the angles are equal to two right angles.
Wherefore let the right lines F A and GC concur in the point L. Wherefore the
two right lines LAFK and LCGK do comprehend a space, which (by the 6. peticion)
is impossible. Wherefore it is not possible that the inward angles being equal
to two right angles, the right lines should concur. Wherefore they are
parallels: which was required to be proved.

The 20. Theoreme. The 29. Proposition. A right line line falling upon two
parallel right lines: makes the alternate angles equal the one to the other:
and also the outward angle equal to the inward and opposite angle on one and
the same side: and moreover the inward angles on one and the same side equal
to two right angles.
SVppose that upon these parallel lines AB and CD do fall the right line OF.
Then I say that the alternate angles which it makes, namely, the angles AGH
and GHD, are equal the one to the other and yt the outward angle EGB is equal
to the inward and opposite angle on the same side, namely, to ye angle GHD:
and yt the inward angles on one and the self same side, that is, the angles
BGH and GHD, are equal to two right angles. For if the angle AGH be not equal
to the angle GHD, Demonstration (...)
the one of them is greater. Let the angle AGH be greater. And forasmuch as the
angle AGH is greater then the angle GHD, put the angle BGH common to the^ both.
Wherefore ye angles AGH and BGH, are greater the^ ye angles BGH and GHD. But by
ye 13. proposition ye angles AGH and BGH are equal to two right angles,
wherefore ye angles BGH and GHD are less the^ two right angles. But (by ye 5.
peticion) if upon two right lines do fall a right line, making ye inward angles
on one and ye same side, less the^ two right angles, those right lines being
infinitely produced must needs at ye length meet on the side wherein are the
angles less the^ two right angles. Wherefore the right lines AB and CD being
infinitely produced will at ye length meet. But they cannot meet, because
they are parallels (by supposition): wherefore the angle AGH is not unequal to
the angle GHD: wherefore it is equal.

And the angle AGH is (by the 15. proposition) equal to the angle EGB. Second
part.
Wherefore (by the first common sentence) the angle EGB is equal to the angle
GHD.

Put the angle BGH common to them both: wherefore the angles EGB and BGH, Third
part.
are equal to the angles BGH and GHD. But the angles EGB and BGH are (by the
13. proposition) equal to two right angles. Wherefore the angles BGH and GHD
are also equal to two right angles. If a line therefore do fall upon two
parallel right lines: it makes the alternate angles equal the one to the
other: and also the outward angle equal to the inward and opposite angle on
one and the same side: and moreover the inward angles on one and the same side
equal to two right angles: which was required to be demonstrated.

This proposition is the converse of the two propositions next going before.
This proposition is the converse of the two former propositio^s.
For, that which in either of them is the thing sought, or conclusion, is in
this the thing given, or supposition. And contrariwise the things which in
them were given or suppositions, are in this proved, and are conclusions.

Pelitarius after this proposition adds this witty conclusion.
If two right lines which cut two parallel lines, An addition of Pelitarius.
do between the said parallel lines concur in a point, and make the
alternate angles equal, or the outward angle equal to the inward and opposite
angle on the same side, or finally the two inward angles on one and the self
same side equal to two right angles: those two right lines are drawn directly
and make one right line.

Suppose that there be two right lines AB and CB, which let cut two parallel
lines DE and FG: and let AB cut the line DE in the point H: and let CB cut the
line FG in the point K: and let the lines AB and CB, concur between the two
parallel lines DE and FG in the point B: and let the angle DHB be equal to the
angle BKG: or let the angle AHD be equal to the angle BKF: or finally let the
angles BHD and BKF be equal to two right angles. The^ I say that the two lines
AB and BC are drawn directly, and do make one right line. For if they be not,
then produce AB until it cut FG in the point L, and let AL be one right line,
Demonstration leading to an absurdity.
and so shall be made the triangle BLK. Now then (by the first part of this 29.
proposition) the angle DHB shall be equal to the alternate angle GLB: First part.
but (by supposition) the angle DHB is equal to the angle BKG. Wherefore the
angle BLG is equal to the angle BKL, namely, the outward angle to the inward
and opposite angle: which (by the 16. proposition) is impossible.

Moreover (by the second part of this 29. proposition) the angle AHD shall be
equal to the angle BLK, Second part.
namely, the outward angle to the inward and opposite angle on one and the same
side. But the same angle AHD is supposed to be equal to the angle BKF:
wherefore the angle BKF is equal to the angle BLK. Which (by the self same
16. proposition) is impossible.

Lastly forasmuch as the angles BHD and BKF are supposed to be equal to two
right angles, Third part.
and the angles BHD and BLK are also by the last part of this 29 proposition
equal to two right angles, therefore the angle BKF shall be equal to the angle
BLK: which again by the self same 16. proposition is impossible.

The 21. Theoreme The 30. Proposition. Right lines which are parallels to one
and the self same right line: are also parrallel lines the one to the other.
SVppose that these right lines AB and CD, be parallel lines to the right line
OF. Then I say, that the line AB is a parallel line to CD. Demonstration.
Let there fall upon these three lines a right line GHK. And forasmuch as the
right line GHK falls upon these parallel right lines AB and OF, therefore
(by the proposition going before) the angle AGH is equal to the angle GHF.
Again forasmuch as the right line GK falls upon these parallel right lines
OF and CD, therefore (by the same) the angle GHF is equal to the angle GKD.
Now then it proved that the angle AGH is equal to ye angle GHF, and yt the
angle GKD is equal to the angle GHF. Wherefore the angle AGK is equal to the
angle GKD. And they are alternate angles: wherefore AB is a parallel line to CD.
Right lines therefore which are parallels to one and the self same right line,
are also parallel lines the one to the other: which was required to be proved.

Euclide in the demonstration of this proposition, sets the two parallel
lines which are compared to one, in the extremes, and the parallel to whom
they are compared, he places in the middle, for the easier demonstration. It
may also be proved even by a principle only. For if they should concur on
any one side, they should concur also with the middle line, and so should
they not be parallels unto it, which yet they are supposed to be.

An other case in (...) Problem^.
But if you will alter their position and placing, and set that line to which
you will compare the other two lines, above, or beneath: you may use the same
demonstration which you had before. As for example.

Suppose that the lines AB and CD be parallels to the line OF: and let both the
lines AB and CD, be above, and let the line OF be beneath, and not in the
midst. Upon which let the right line GHK fall. And forasmuch as either of the
angles KHD and HGB is equal to the angle HKE, (for they are alternate angles)
therefore they are (by the first common sentence) equal the one to the other.
Wherefore (by the 28 proposition) the right lines AB and EF^ are paralles.

An objection.
But here if a man will object that the lines EK and KF, are parallels unto the
line CD, Answer.
and therefore are parallels the one to the other. We will answer that the
lines EK and KF are parts of one parallel line, and are not two parallel
lines. Parallel lines are understood to be produced infinitely.
For parallel lines ar understood to be produced infinitely But EK being
produced falls upon KF. Wherefor^ it is one and the self same with it, and
not an other. Wherefore all the parts of a parrallel line are parallels, both
to the right line unto which the whole parallel line is a parallel, and also to
all the parts of the same right line. As the line EK is a parallel unto HD, and
the line KE to the line CHAPTER For if they be produced infinitely, they will never
concur.

Howbeit there are some which like not, that two distinct parellel lines,
should be taken and counted for one parallel line: for that the continual
quantity, namely, the line is cut asonder, and cesseth to be one. Wherefore
they say, that there ought to be two distinct parallel lines compared to one.
And therefore they add to the proposition a correction, in this manner. Two
lines being parallels to one line: are either parallels the one the other, or
else the one is set directly against the other, so that if they be produced
they should make one right line. As for example.

Suppose that the lines CD and OF be parallels to one and the self same line
AB, and let them not be parallels the one to the other. Then I say, that the
two lines CD and OF, are directly set the one to the other. For for as much as
they are not parallel lines, let them concur in the point G, And from the
point G draw a line cutting the line AB in the point H. Now by the former
proposition the angles AHG and HGC are equal to two right angles, but by the
same proposition, the angle AHG, is equal to the alternate angle HGE.
Wherefore the angles HGC and HGF are equal to two right angles. Wherefore (by
the 14 proposition) the lines CG and FG are drawn directly and make one right
line. Wherefore also the lines CD and OF are set directly the one to the other:
and being produced they will make one right line.

The 10. Problem. The 31. Proposition. By a point given, to draw unto a right
line given, a parallel line.
SVppose that the point given be A, and let the right line given be BC. It is
required by the point given, namely A, to draw vuto the right line BC, a
parallel line. Construction.
Take in the line BC a point at all adventures, and let the same be D. and (by
the first peticio^) draw a right line from the point A, to the point D. And (by
the 23. proposition) upon the right line given AD, and to the point in it given
A, make an angle DAE, equal to the angle given ADC. And (by the 14.
proposition) put unto the line AE the line AF directly, in such sort that they
both make one right line. And forasmuch as the right line AD falling upon the
right lines BC and OF, does make the alternate angles, namely, EAD, and ADC
equal ye one to the other, therefore (by the 27. proposition) OF is a parallel
line to BC. Wherefore by the point given, namely A, is drawn to the right line
given BC a parallel line EAF: which was required to be done.

This proposition is to be understood of a point given without the line
given, and in such sort also, that the same line given being produced, do not
fall upon the point given.

The 22. Theoreme. The 32, Proposition. If one of the sides of any triangle be
produced: the outward angle that it makes, is equal to the two inward and
opposite angles. And the three inward angles of a triangle are equal to two
right angles.
SVppose y^ ABC be a triangle, and produce one of ye sides thereof namely, CB to
the point D. Then I say, that the outward angle ACD is equal to the two
inward and opposite angles CAB and ABC: and yt the three inward angles of the
triangle, that is, the angles ABC, BCA, and CAB are equal to two right angles.
Construction.
For (by the proposition going before) raise up from the point C, a parallel to
the right line AB, and let the same be CE. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as AB is a parallel to CE, and upon them falls the right line
AC: therefore the alternate angles BAC and ACE are equal the one to the other.
Again forasmuch as AB is a parallel unto CE, and upon them falls the right
line BD, therefore the outward angle ECD is (by the 29. proposition) equal to
the inward and opposite angle ABC. And it is proved that the angle ACE is equal
to the angle BAC: wherefore the whole outward angle ACD is equal to the two
inward and opposite angles, that is, to the angles BAC and ABC. Put the angle
ACB common to them both. Wherefore the angles ACD and ACB, are equal to these
three angles ABC, BCA, and BAC. But the angles ACD and ACB are equal to two
right angles (by the 13. proposition): wherefore the angles ACB, CBA, and CAB
are equal to two right angles. If therefore one of the sides of any triangle be
produced, the outward angle that it makes, is equal to the two inward and
opposite angles. And the three inward angles of a triangle are equal to two
right angles: which was required to be demonstrated.

Euclide demonstrateth either part of this composed Theoreme, by drawyng from
one angle of the triangle a parrallel line to one of the sides of the same
triangle, without the triangle. Either part thereof may also be proved without
drawyng of a parallel line without the triangle, only changing the order of
the things required or conclusions. For Euclide first proves that the
outward angle of a triangle (one of his sides being produced) is equal to the
two inward and opposite angles: and by that he proves the second part:
namely, that the 3. inward angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles.
But here it is contrariwise. For first is proved that the three inward angles
of a triangle are equal to two right angles, and by that is proved the other
part of the Theoreme, namely, that one side of a tria^gle being produced, the
outward angle is equal to the two inward and opposite angles. And that after
this manner.

Suppose that there be a triangle ABC^ An other demonstration.
and produce the side BC to the point E. And take in the line BC a point at al
auentures which let be F: and draw a line from A to F. And by the point F draw
unto the line AB a parallel line (by the former proposition) which let be FD.
Now forasmuch as FD is a parallel unto AB, and upon them falls the right
line AF, and also the right line BC, therefore the alternate angles are equal,
and also the outward angle is equal to the inward angle. Wherefore the whole
angle AFC is equal to the angles FAB and ABF. And by the same reason (if by
the point F we draw a parallel line to the line AC) may we prove that the angle
AFB is equal to the angles FAC, and ACF. Wherefore the two angles AFB and AFC
are equal to the three angles of the triangle ABC. But the two angles AFB and
AFC are (by the 13. proposition) equal to two right angles. Wherefore also the
three angles of the triangle ABC are equal to two right angles.

But the angles ACF and ACE are also (by the 13. proposition) equal to two
right angles. Take away the angle ACF which is common, wherefore the angle
remaining, namely, the outward angle ACE is equal to the two angles remaining,
namely, to the two inward and opposite angles ABC and CAB: which was required
to be proved.

Eudemus affirms, that the latter part of this Theoreme, The three angles of
a triangle are equal to two right angles, was first found out by Pithagoras,
The latter part of this Theoreme first ^ound out by Pithagoras.

The demon^tration thereof after him.


whose demonstration thereof is thus.

Suppose that there be a triangle ABC: and by point A, draw (by the former
proposition) unto the line BC, a parallel line, which let be DE. And forasmuch
as the right lines BC and DE are parallels, and upon them falls the right
lines AB and AC, therefore (by the 29. proposition) the alternate angles are
equal. Wherefore the angle DAB is equal to the angle ABC, and the angle EAC
to the angle ACB. Add the angle BAC common. Wherefore the angles DAB, BAC,
CAE, that is, the angles DAB and BAE, namely, two angles equal to two right
angles, are equal to the three angles of the triangle ABC. Wherefore the three
angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles: which was required to be
proved.

The converse of this proposition is thus.
If the outward angle of a triangle be equal to the two inward angles opposit^
against it: one of the sides of the triangles is produced, The converse of this
proposition.
and the line without the triangle, is drawn directly to the side of the
triangle, and makes one right line with it. And if the three inward angles of a
rectiline figure be equal to two right angles, the same rectiline figure is a
triangle.

Demonstration of the first part of the converse.
Suppose that there be a triangle ABC: and let the outward angle ACD be equal to
the two inward and opposite angles ABC and CAB. Then I say that the side BC is
produced to the point D. And that BCD is one right line. For forasmuch as the
angle ACD is equal to the two inward and opposite angles, add the angle ACB
common. Wherefore the angles ACD and ACB are equal to the three angles of the
triangle ABC. But the three angles of the triangle ABC are equal to two right
angles Wherefore also the two angles ACD and ACB are equal to two right
angles. But if unto a right line, and to a point in the same line be drawn two
right lines, not both on one and the same side, making the side angles equal to
two right angles: those two right lines shall be drawn directly, and make one
right line (by the 14. proposition.) Wherefore the right line BC is drawn
directly to the line CD, and so is BCD one right line: which was required to be
proved.

Demonstration of the second part of the converse.
Again suppose that there be a certain rectiline figure ABC, having only
three ang^es, namely, at the points A, B, C: which angles let be equal to two
right angles Then I say that ABC is a triangle. First AC is one right line. For
draw the line BD. And forasmuch as in either of the triangles ABD and DBC, the
three angles are equal to two right angles, of which the angles at the points
A, B, C, are equal to two right angles. Wherefore the angles remaining, namely,
ADB and CDB are equal to two right angles. Wherefore (by the 14. proposition)
the line DC is set directly to the line DA. Wherefore the side AC is one right
line. And in like sort may we prove that the side AB is one right line, and
also that the side BC is one right line. Wherefore the figure ABC is a
triangle: which was required to be proved.

A Corrollary.
By the second part of this 29. proposition, namely, three angles of a triangle
are equal to two right angles, may easily be known, to how many right angles,
the angles within any figure having right lines and many angles are equal. As
are figures of four angles, of five angles, of six angles, and so
consequently: and infinitely, And this is to be noted, that every right lined
figure is resolved into triangle, For that a triangle is the first of all
figures. Every right lined figure is resolved in triangles.

A triangle is the first of all figures.

Into how many triangles a figure may be resolved.


For two lines accomplish no figures VVher^ore how many sides the figure has,
into so many triangles may it be resolved, saving two. As if the figure have
four sides, it is resolved into two triangles, if it have five sides, into 3.
triangles: if 6 sides into 4. triangles, and so consequently, and infinitely.
And it is proved that the three angles of every triangle are equal to two
right angles. Wherefore if you multiply the number of the triangles, into
which the figure is resolved, by two, you shall have the number of right
angles, to which the angles of the figure are equal. So the angles of every
qua^rangled figure are equal to 4. right angles. For it is composed of two
triangles. And the angles of a five angled figure are equal to 6. right angles,
for it is composed of three triangles, and so forth in like order.

The rediest and aptest manner to reduce any rectiline figure into triangles, is
thus. From any one angle of the figure to every other angle (of the same) being
opposite unto it, draw a right line, so shall you have all the triangles of
that figure described. In a quadra^gle, from one angle you can draw but one
line to the opposite angle, by which it is divided into two triangles only. In
a pentagon figure, from one angle you may draw lines to two opposite angles,
and so you shall have three triangles. In an Hexagon, you may from one angle
draw lines to three opposite angles, and so shall you have 4. triangles. In an
heptagon, from one angle may be drawn lines to four opposite angles, and so
shall there be five triangle. And so consequently of the rest. As you see in the
figures here set.

This thing may also be thus expressed. In any figure of many sides, An other
way to know the number of right angles unto which the angles of any figure are
^quall.
the number of the angles of the figure doubled, is the number of the right
angles to which the angles of the figure are equal, saving four, As for
example.

Let there be an hexagon figure ABCDEF, and within it take a point at all
auentures, namely, G. And draw from the same point to every one of the angles a
right line, and so shall there be comprehended in the figure so many triangles,
as there are angles in the same. Wherefore by this 32. proposition all the
angles of these triangles taken together, are equal to double so many right
angles, as there be angles in the figure. Wherefore forasmuch as there are
six triangles, there are twelve right angles. But all the angles at the point
G are equal to 4. right angles by the 13. proposition. Wherefore take away
four out of twelve, and there rest eight. Wherefore the six angles in the
Hexagon figure are equal to eight right angles.

By that which has now been declared, Another expression of the former
Corollary.
it follows that all the angles of any figure having many sides, taken
together, are equal to twice so many right angles, as the figure is in the reaw
or order of figures. A tria^gle is the first figure in order, A triangle the
first figure in order.
and^ his angles are equal to two right angles, which are twice one. A
quadrangle is the second figure in order. A quadrangle the second, and so
consequently. How the order of figures is gathered.
Wherefore his angles are equal to four right angles, which are twice two. The
order of figures is gathered of the sides. For if you take two from the number
of the sides of a figure, the number of the sides remaining, is the number of
the order of the figure. As if you will know, how many in order is a figure of
six sides: from six (which is the number of this sides) take a way two, and
there will remain four. Wherefore a figure of six sides is the fourth figure
in the order of figures. Then double four, so shall you have eight. Wherefore
the angles thereof are equal to eight right angles. And so of all other figures.

An other Corrollary.
Hereby also it is manifest, that the outward angles of any figure of many sides
taken together, are equal to four right angles. For the inward angles
together with the outward angles, are equal to twice so many right angles, as
there be angles in the figure (by the 13. proposition) But the inward angles
are equal to twice so many right angles, as there be angles in the figure,
saving foure^ as it was before declared. Wherefore the outward angles are
always equal to four right angles. As for example.

Suppose that there be a pentagon, ABCDE. And produce the five sides thereof to
the points F, G, H, K, L. Now (by the 13. proposition) the two angles at the
point A shall be equal to two rightangles. And (by the same) the two angles at
the point B shall be also equal to two right angles. And so taking every two
angles, they shall be in all equal to ten right angles. Wherefore taking
away the inward angles, which (as has before been proved) are equal to six
right angles, the outward angles shall be equal to four right angles. And so
of all other figures^

An other Corrollary.
It is also manifest, that every pentago^, which is so described, that each side
thereof deuideth two of the other sides, has his five angles equal to two
right angles.

For suppose that ABCDE: be such a pentagon as is there required so that let
the side AC cut the side BE in the point G: and let the side AD, cut the same
side BE in the point F. Now the^ by this proposition the angle AFG shall be
equal to the two angles at the point B and D: namely, the outward angle to the
two inward and opposite angles. And by the same reason the angle FGA is equal
to the angles at the points C and E which are in the triangle CEG. But the two
angles AFG and FGA, together with the angle at the point A, are equal to two
right angles (by this proposition). Wherefore the four angles at the points,
B, C, D, E, together with the angle at the point A, are equal to two right
angles: which was required to be proved.

An other Corrollary.
By this proposition also it is manifest, that every angle of an equilate
triangle is two third parts of a right angle. And that in a triangle of two
equal sides having a right angle at the top, either of the the two angles at
the base is the half of a right angle. And in a triangle called Sealenum, such
a Scalenu^ (I say) which is made by the drawght of a perpendicular line from
any one of the angles of an equilater tria^gle to the opposite side thereof, one
angle is a right angle, an other is two third parts of a right angle, namely,
that angle which was also an angle of the equilater triangle, wherefore of
necessity the angle remaining is one third part of a right angle. For the three
angles of a tria^gle must be equal to two right angles.

An other Corrallory.
Moreover by this proposition it is manifest, that if there be two triangles,
and if two angles of the one be equal to two angles of the other: the angle
remaining shall also be equal to the angle remaining. For forasmuch as three
angles of any triangle are equal to three angles of any other triangle (for
that in each the three angles are equal to two right angles)^ If from each
triangle be taken away the two equal angles, the angle remaining shall (by the
3. common sentence) be equal to the angle remaining.

And here I think it good to show how to divide a right angle into three
equal parts, for that the demonstration thereof depends of this proposition.

Suppose that there be a right angle ABC, contained of the right lines AB and
BC: How to divide ^ right angle into three equal parts.
and in the line BC, take a point at all adventures, which let be D. An^ upon
the line BD describe (by the first) an equilater triangle BDE. And (by the 9.
proposition) divide the angle DBE into two equal parts by the right line BF.
Then I say that the right angle ABC is divided into three equal parts by the
right lines BE and BF. For forasmuch as EBD is an equilater triangle, therefore
as hath^ before been declared, the angle EBD is two third parts of a right
angle. But the whole angle ABC, is a right angle. Wherefore the angle remaining,
namely, ABE is one third part of a right angle. Again forasmuch as the angle
EBD, is two third parts of a right angle, and it is divided into two equal
parts by the right line BF, therefore either of these two angles EBF and FBD is
one third part of a right angle. Wherefore the three angles ABE, EBF and FBD
are equal the one to the other. Wherefore the right angle ABC is divided into
three equal parts by the right lines BE and BF: which was required to be done.

The 23. Theoreme. The 33. Proposition. Two right lines joining together on one
and the same side, two equal parallel lines: are also them selves equal the
one to the other, and also parallels.
SVppose that AB and CD be right lines equal, and parallels: and let these two
right lines AC and BD join the^ together, the one on the one side, and the
other on ye other side. Then I say that the lines AC and BD are both equal,
and also parallels. Draw (by the first peticion) a right line from the point B
to the point C. D^^on^^ratio^.
And forasmuch as AB is a parallel to CD, and upon them falls the right line
BC, therefore the alternate angles ABC and BCD, are equal the one to the other
(by the 29. proposition). And forasmuch as the line AB is equal to the line
CD, and the line BC is common to them both, therefore these two lines AB and
BC, are equal to these two lines BC and CD, and the angle ABC is equal to the
angle BCD. Wherefore (by the 4. proproposition) the base BD is equal to the
base AC, and the triangle ABC, is equal to the triangle BCD, and the angles
remaining are equal to the angles remaining the one to the other, under which
are subtended equal sides, wherefore the angle ACB is equal to the angle CBD,
and the angle BAC to the angle BDC. And forasmuch as upon these right lines AC
and BD falls the right line BC making the alternate angles, that is the
angles ACB and CBD, equal the one to the other, therefore (by the 27.
proposition) the line AC is a parallel to the line BD. And it is proved that it
is equal unto it. Wherefore two right lines joining together on one and the
same side two equal lines which are parallels, are also themselves equal the
one to the other, and also parallels: which was required to be proved.

The 24. Theoreme. The 34 Proposition. In parallelogrammes, the sides and
angles which are opposite the one to the other, are equal the one to the
other, and their diameter deuideth them into two equal parts.
SVppose that ABCD be a parallelogramme and let the diameter ther^ of be BC.
Then I say that the opposite sides and angles of the parallelogramme ACDB are
equal the one to the other, and yt the diameter BC deuideth it into two equal
parts. Demonstration
For forasmuch as AB is a parallel line unto CD, and upon them falls a right
line BC: therefore (by the 29. proposition) the alternate angles ABC and BCD are
equal the one to the other. Again forasmuch as AC is a parallel line to BD,
and upon them falls the right line BC: therefore (by the same) the alternate
angles, that is, the angles ACB and CBD are equal the one to the other. Now
therefore there are two triangles ABC and BCD, having two angles of the one,
namely, the angles ABC and ACB equal to two angles of the other, that is, to
the angles BCD and CBD, the one to the other, and one side of the one equal to
one side of the other, namely, that side that lies between the equal angles,
which side is common to them both, namely, the side BC. Wherefore (by the 26.
proposition) the other sides remaining are equal to the other sides remaining,
the one to the other, and the angle remaining is equal to the angle remaining.
Wherefore the side AB is equal to the side CD, and the side AC to the side BD,
and the angle BAC is equal to the angle BDC. And for as much as the angle ABC is
equal to the angle BCD, and the angle CBD to the angle ACB: therefore (by the
second common sentence) the whole angle ABD is equal to the whole angle ACD.
And it is proved that the angle BAC is equal to the angle CDB. Wherefore in
parallelogrammes, the sides and angles which are opposite are equal the one to
the other. I say also that the diameter thereof deuideth it into two equal
parts. For forasmuch as AB is equal to CD, and BC is common to them both,
therefore these two AB and BC are equal to these two BC and CD, and the angle
ABC is equal to the angle BCD. Wherefore (by the 4. proposition) the base AC is
equal to the base BD, and the triangle ABC is equal to the triangle BCD.
Wherefore the diameter BC deuideth the parallelogramme ABCD into two equal
parts: which is all that was required to be proved.

In this Theoreme^ are demonstrated three passions or properties of
parallelogrammes. Three passions of parallolegrames demo^strated in this Thoreme.
Namely, that their opposite sides are equal: that their opposite angles are
equal: and that the diameter deuideth the parallelogramme into two equal
parts. Which is true in all kinds of parallelogrammes. There are four
kinds of parallelogrammes, Four kinds of parallelogrammes.
a square, a ^igure of one side longer then the other, a Rhombus, or diamond
figure, and a Rhom^oides or diamondlike figure. And here is to be noted, that
in those parallelogrammes, all whose angles ar right angles (as is a square,
and a figure on the one side longer) the diameters do not only divide the
figure into two equal parts, but also they are equal the one to the other. As
for example.

Suppose that ABCD be a square, or a figure on the one side longer, and draw in
it these diametres AD and BC. And forasmuch as the line AB is equal to the
line CD (by the definition of a square, and of a figure on the also one side
longer) and the line AC is common to the both: therefore two sides of the
triangle ABC are equal to two sides of the triangle ACD, the one to the other,
and the angles which they contain are equal, namely, the angles BAC and ACD,
for they are rightangles. Wherefore the bases namely, the diameters AD and BC,
are (by the 4. proposition) equal.

But in those parallelogrames whose angles are not right angles, as is a
Rhombus, and a ^homboides, the diameters be ever unequal. As for example.

Suppose that ABCD he a Rhombus, or a Rhombaides and draw in it these
diameters AC and BD. And forasmuch as AB is equal to CD and BC is common to
them both, and the angle ABC is not equal to the angle BCD (by the definition
of a Rhombus and also of a Rhombaides) therefore (by the 24. proposition) the
bases also are unequal, namely, the diameters AC and BD.

Again. In parallelogrammes of equal sides, as are a square, and a Rhombus,
the diameters do not only divide the figures into two equal parts, but also
they divide the angles into two equal parts.

For suppose that there be a square or Rhombus ABCD, and draw the diameter AD.
And forasmuch as the sides AB and BD are equal to the sides AC and CD (for the
figures are equilater) and the angles ABD and ACD are equal (for they are
opposite angles) and the base AD is common to both triangles. Therefore (by the
fourth proposition) the angles BAD and CAD are equal, and so also are the
angles BDA and CDA equal. Wh^^fore the angles BAC and CDB are divided into two
equal parts.

But in parallogrammes whose sides are not equal, such as are a figure on the
one side longer, and a Rhomboides it is not so.

For suppose ABCD to be a figure on the one side longer or a Romboides. And
draw the diameter AD. And now if the angles BAC and CDB, be divided into two
equal parts by the diameter AD, then forasmuch as the angle. CAD is (by the
29. proposition) equal to the angle ADB, the angle also BAD shall be equal to
the angle ADB (by the first common sentence). Wherefore also the side AB is
equal to the side BD (by the 6. proposition). But the said sides are unequal:
which is impo^^ible. Wherefore the angles BAC and CDB are not divided into two
equal parts.

The converse of th^^ proposition after Pr^^lus.
The converse of the first and second part of this proposition after Proclus. Is
(...) figure whatsoever have his opposite sides and angles equal: then is a
parallelograms.

For suppose that ABCD be such a figure, namely, which has his opposite sides
and angles equal. And let the diameter thereof be AD. Now forasmuch as the
sides AB and BD are equal to to the sides DC and AC, and the angles which they
co^tayne are equal, and the base AD is common to each triangle, therefore (by
the 4. proposition) the angles remaining are equal to the angles remaining,
under which are subtended equal sides. Wherefore the angle BAD is equal to the
angle ADC, and the angle ADB to the angle CAD. Wherefore (by the 27.
proposition) the line AB is a parallel to the line CD, and the line AC to the
line BD. Wherefore the figure ABCD is a parallogramme: which was required to be
proved.

A Corollary taken out of Flussates.
A Corrollary taken out of Flussates.
A right line cutting a parallelogramme which way soever into two equal
parts, shall also divide the diameter thereof into two equal parts.

For if it be possible let the right line GC divide the parallelogramme AEBD
into two equal parts, but let it divide the diameter DE into two unequal
parts in the point I. And let the part IE be greater then the part ID. And
unto the line ID put the line IO equal (by th3. proposition). Demonstration
leading to (...) absurdi^^e.
And by the point O, draw unto the lines AD and BE a parallel line OF (by the
31. proposition.) Wherefore in the triangles FOI and CDI, two angles of the one
are equal to two angles of the other, namely, the angles IOF and IDC (by the
29. proposition), and the angles FIO and CID (by the 15. proposition), and the
side ID is equal to the side IO. Wherefore (by the 26. proposition) the
triangles are equal. Wherefore the whole triangle EIG is greater then the
triangle DIC. And forasmuch as the trapesium GBDC is supposed to be the half
of the parrallelograme, and the half of the same parallelograme is the
triangle EBD (by this proposition). From the trapesium GBDC and the triangle
EBD which are equal, take away the trapesium GBDI which is common to them
both, and the residue namely, the triangle DIC shall be equal to the residue,
namely, to the tria^gle EIG: but it is also less (as has before ben proved):
which is impossible. Wherefore a right line dividing a parallelogramme into two
equal parts, shall not divide the diameter thereof unequally. Wherefore it
shall divide it equally: which was required to be proved.

An addition of Pelitarius.
Between two right lines being infinite and making an angle given: An addition
o^ Pelitarius.
to place a line equal to a line given, in such sort, that it shall make with
one of those lines an angle equal to an other angle given. Now it behooves
that the two angles given be less then two right angles.

Suppose that there be two lines AB and AC, making an angle given BAC: and let
them be infinite on that side where they open one from the other. And let the
line given be D, and let the other angle given be E. And let the two angles A
and E be less then two right angles (otherwise there could not be made a
triangle, as it is manifest by the 17 proposition). It is required between the
lines AB and AC to place a line equal to the line given D, which with one of
them as for example with the line AC, Construction.
may make an angle equal to the angle given E. Now then upon the line AC and to
the point in it A, make an angle equal to the angle given E (by the 23.
proposition), which let be CAF. And produce the line FA on the other side of
the point A to the point G: and let AG be equal to the line given D (by the 3.
proposition). And by the point G, draw (by the 31. proposition) a parallel line
to the line AC, which let be GH, and produce it until it concur with the line
AB: which concurse let be in the point H. And again by the point H draw the
line HK parallel unto the line GF: which let cut the line AC in the point K.
Then I say that the line HK is placed between the lines AB and AC and is equal
to the line D. And that the angle at the point K is equal to the angle given
E. Demonstration
For forasmuch as (by construction) AGHK is a parallelogramme the line KH is
equal to the line AG (by this proposition). Wherefore also it is equal to the
line D. And forasmuch as the line AK fall^th upon the two parallel lines, FG
and KH, therefore the angle AKH is equal to the angle FAK (by the 29.
proposition) for that they are alternate angles. Wherefore also the same angle
at the point K is equal to the angle given E. Wherefore the line HK being
placed between the two lines AB and AC and being equal to the line D^ makes
the angle at the point K equal to the angle given E: which was required to be
done.

Though this addition of Pelitarius be not so much pertaining to the
proposition: yet because it is witty and seems somewhat difficult, I thought
it good here to anexe it.

The 25. Theoreme. The 35. Proposition. Parallelogrammes consisting upon one
and the same base, and in the self same parallel lines, are equal the one to
the other.
SVppose that these parallelogrammes ABCD and EB CF do consist upon one and the
same base, that is, upon BC, and in the self same parallel lines, that is AF,
and BC. Then I say, that the parallelograme ABCD is equal to the parallelograme
EBCF. Demonstration.
For forasmuch as ABCD is a parallelogramme, therefore (by the 34. proposition)
the side AD, is equal to the side BC, and by the same reason also the side OF
is equal to the side BC, wherefore AD is equal to OF: and DE is common to them
both. Wherefore the whole line AE is equal to the whole line DF. And the side
AB is equal to ye side DC: wherefore these two EA and AB are equal to these
two FD and DC, the one to the other: and ye angle FDC is equal to the angle
EAB, namely, the outward angle to ye inward angle (by ye ^9. proposition):
wherefore (by ye 4 proposition) the base EB is equal to the base FC, and the
triangle EAB is equal to the triangle FDC. Take away the triangle DGE, which
is common to them both. Wherefore the residue, namely, the trapesium ABGD is
equal to the residue, that is, to the trapesium EGCF. Put the triangle GBC
common to them both. Wherefore the whole parallelogramme ABCD is equal to the
whole parallelogramme EBCF. Wherefore parallelogrammes consisting upon one and
the same base, and in the self same parallel lines, are equal the one to the
other: which was required to be demonstrated.

Parallelogrammes are said to be in the self same parallel lines, when their
bases, and the opposite sides unto them, are one and the self same lines with
the parallels.

Three cases in this proposition.

The first case.


In this proposition are three cases. For the line BE may cut the line AF,
either beyond the point D, or in the point D, or on this side the point D. When
it cutteth the line AF beyond the point D the demonstration before put serves.

But if the line BE do cut the line AF in the point D, The second case.
then forasmuch as (by the former proposition) the triangle BCD or BCE is the
half of either of these para^lelogrammes ABCD and EBCF (for in the
parallelogramme ABCD the diameter BD makes the triangle BD C the half of the
same parallelogramme, and in the parallelogramme EBCF the diameter EC or DC
makes the self same triangle BDC the half of the parallelograme EBCF)
therefore (by the 7. common sentence) the parallelogrammes ABCD and EBCF are
equal.

But if the live BE do cut the line AF on this side the point D, The third
case.
then forasmuch as either of the lines AD and OF is equal to the line BC,
therefore by the first common sentence they are equal the one to the other.
Wherefore taking away ED, which is common to both, the residue AE shall be equal
to the residue DF. Again forasmuch as (by the 34. proposition) the line AB is
equal to the line CD, and (by the ^7. proposition) the angle EAB is equal to
the angle FDC: therefore (by the 4. proposition) the triangles EBA and FCD are
equal. Add the trapesium CDEB common to them both: and so (by the second
common sentence) the two parallelogrammes ABCD and EBCF shall be equal: which
was required to be proved.

The 26. Theoreme. The 36. Proposition. Parallelogrammes consisting upon equal
bases, and in the self same parallel lines, are equal the one to the other.
SVppose that these parallelogrammes ABCD and EFGH do consist upon equal
bases, that is, upon BC and FG, and in the self same parallel lines, that is,
AH and BG. Then I say, that the parallelogramme ABCD is equal to the
parallelogramme EFGH. Construction.
Draw a right line from the point B to the point E, and an other from the point
C to the point H. Demonstration
And forasmuch as BC is equal to FG, but FG is equal to EH, therefore BC also
is equal to EH, and they are parallel lines, and the lines BE and CH join
them together: but two right lines ioynyng together two equal right lines
being parallels, are themselves also (by the 33 proposition) equal the one to
the other, and parallels. Wherefore EBCH is a parallelogramme, and is equal to
the parallelograme ABCD for they have both one and ye same base, that is, BC.
And are in ye self same parallel lines, that is, BC and EH. And by ye same
reason also the parallelograme EFGH is equal to the parallelograme EBCH.
Wherefore the parallelograme ABCD is equal to the parallelograme EFGH.
Wherefore parallelogrames consisting upon equal bases, and in the self same
parrallel lines, are equal the one to the other: which was required to be
proved.

Three cases in this proposition.
In this proposition also are three cases. For the equal bases may either be
utterly separated a sonder: or they may touch a^ one of the ends: or they may
have one part common to them both.

The first case.
Euclides demonstration serves when the bases be utterly separated a sonder.
Which yet may happen seven diverse ways. Every case may happen seven diverse
ways.
For the bases being separated a so^der, their opposite sides also may be
utterly separated a sonder beyond the point D, as the sides AD and EH in the
first figure.



both, as in the third figure, the sides AD and EH have the part ED common to
them both.

Or they may justly agree the one with the other, that is, the points A and D

Or the side AD being produced on this side the point A, part of the opposite

Or one end of the side EH may light upon the point A, and the whole side

Or the said side EH may utterly be separated a sonder on this side the point

And the two other cases also may in like manner have seven variet^es: The like
variety in each of the other two cases.
as in the figures here underneath and on the other side of this leaf set it is
manifest. And here is to be noted, that in these three cases and in all their
varieties also, Euclides construction and demostration serves in all these
cases, and in their varities also.
the construction and demonstration put by Euclide (namely, the drawing of
lines from the point B to the point E and from the point C to the point H, and
so proving it by the former proposition) will serve only in the fourth
variety of each case, there needs no farther construction: for that the
conclusion straight way follows by the former proposition.



The 27. Theoreme. The 37. Proposition. Triangles consisting upon one and the
self same base, and in the self same paralles: are equal the one to the
other.
SVppose that these triangles ABC and DBC do consist upon one and the same
base, namely, BC, and in the self same parallel lines, that is, AD and BC.
Then I say, that the triangle ABC is equal to the triangle BDC. Construction.
Produce (by the 2. peticion) the line AD on each side to the points E and F.
And (by the 31. proposition) by the point B, draw unto the line CA a parallel
line BE and (by ye same) by the point C, draw unto the line BD a parallel line
CF. Demonstration.
Wherefore EBCA. and DBCF are parallelogrammes. And the parallelogramme EBCA,
is (by the 35. proposition) equal to the parallelogramme DBCF. For they
consist upon one and the self same base, namely, BC, and are in the self
same parallel lines, that is, BC and OF. But the triangle ABC is (by the 34.
proposition) the half of the parallelogramme EBCA, for the diameter AB
deuideth it into two equal parts: and (by the same) the triangle DBC is the
half of the parallelogramme DBCF, for the diameter DC deuideth it into two
equal parts: but the halues of things equal are also equal the one to the
other (by the 7. common sentence), wherefore ehe triangle ABC is equal to the
triangle DBC Wherefore triangles consisting upon one and the self same base,
and in the self same parallels: are equal the one to the other: which was
required to be demonstrated.

Those triangles are said to be contained within the self same parallel
lines, How triangles are said to be in the self same parallel lines.
which having their bases in one of the parallel lines, have their ^oppes in
the other.

Here as I promised will I show out of Proclus the comparison of two triangles,
which having their sides equal, have the bases and angles at the top
v^equall. Comparison of two triangles whose sides being equal, their bases and
angles at the top are unequal.
And first I say that the unequal angles at the top being equal to two
right angles, the triangles shall be equal. As for example.

Suppose that these two triangles ABC and DEF have two sides of the one,
namely, AB and AC, equal to two sides of the other, namely, to DE and DF, each
to his correspondent side, When the two angles at the tops are equal to two
right angles.
that is, AB to DE, and AC to DF, and let the base BC be greater then the base
OF: and let the angle at the point A be greater then the angle at the point D.
But let the said angles at the points A and D, be equal to two right angles.
Then I say that the triangles ABC and D OF are equal. For forasmuch as the
angle BAC is greater then the angle ED F, upon the line ED, and to the point D
describe (by the 23. proposition) an angle equal to the angle BAC, which let
be EDG: and put the line DG equal to the line AC: and draw a line from E to G,
and an other from F to G: and produce the lines ED and FD beyond the point D to
the points H and K. Now forasmuch as the angle BAC is equal to the angle EDG,
and the angles BAC and EDF are equal to two right angles, therefore the angles
EDG and EDF are equal to two right angles. But the angles EDG and KDG, are
also equal to two right angles: take away the angle FDG common to them both:
wherefore the angle remaining EDF is equal to the angle remaining GDK. But the
angle EDF is equal to the angle HDK (by the 15. proposition) for they are head
angles. Wherefore the angle GDK is equal to the angle HDK. And forasmuch as in
the triangle GDF the outward angle GDH is (by the 32. proposition) equal to the
two inward and opposite angles at the points G and F: which two angles also are
(by the 5. proposition) equal the one to the other: for the line DG is by
construction equal to the line AC, namely, to the line DF. Wherefore the angle
GDH is double both to the angle at the point G, and to the angle at the point
F. But the angle GDH is also double to the angle GDK (for the angle GDK is
proved to be equal to the angle KDH) wherefore the angle at DGF is equal to
the angle GDK: and they are alternate angles. Wherefore (by the 27.
proposition) the line D^ is a parallel to the line FG. Wherefore the triangles
GDE and FDE are upon one and the self same base, namely, DE, and in the self
same parallel lines: DE and GF. Wherefore by this proposition they are equal.
But the triangle GDE is by construction equal to the triangle ABC. Wherefore
also the triangle DEF is equal to the triangle ABC: which was required to be
proved.

But now let the angles BAC and EDF be greater then two right angles: When they
are greater the^ two right angles.
and let the angle at the point A be greater then the angle at the point D, as
it was before. The^ I say that the triangle ABC is le^se then the triangle DEF.
Let the same construction be here that was in the former. And forasmuch as the
angles BAC and EDF, that is, the angles EDG and EDF are greater then two right
angles, but the angles EDG and GDK are equal to two right angles: take away
the angle FDG which is common to them both. Wherefore the angle remaining,
namely, EDF is greater the^ the angle remaining, namely, then GDK: that is, the
angle KDH (which by the 15. proposition is equal to the angle EDF) is greater
then the angle GDK, wherefore the angle GDH is more then double to the angle
GDK: but the angle GDH is double to the angle DGF, as was before proved.
Wherefore the angle GDK is less then the angle DGF. Unto the angle GDK put (by
the 23. proposition) the angle DGL equal: and produce the line GL till it
concur with the line OF in the point L. And draw a line from D to L.
Wherefore (by the 27. proposition) GL is a parallel line to DE, for that the
alternate angles DGL and GDK are equal. Wherefore the triangles GDE and LDE are
(by this proposition) equal (for they consist upon one and the self same base,
namely, DE, and are in the self same parallel lines, namely, ED and GL) But
the triangle LDE is less then the triangle FDE, Wherefore also the triangle GDE
is less the^ the triangle FDE. But the triangle GDE is equal to the triangle
ABC. Wherefore the triangle ABC is less then the triangle DEF: which was
required to be proved.

When they are less then two right angles.
But now let the angles BAC and EDF be less then two right angles: and again
let the angle at the point A be greater then the angle at the point D. Then I
say that the tria^gle ABC is greater then the triangle DEF. Let the same
constructio^ be also here that was in the two former. And forasmuch as the
angles BAC and EDF, that is, the angles EDG and EDF, are less then two right
angles, but the angles EDG and GDK are equal to two right angles, take away the
angle FDG which is common to them both, wherefore the angle remaining, namely,
EDF is less then the angle remaining, namely, then GDK: that is, the angle HDK
(which by the 1^. proposition is equal to the angle ED F) is less then the
angle GDK. Wherefore the whole angle GD H is less then double to the angle GD
K. But it is double to the angle DGF (as before it was proved): wherefore the
angle GD K is greater then the angle DGF. Put the angle DGL equal to the angle
GD K (by the 23. proposition) and produce the line GL till it concur with the
line OF also produced^ and let the concurse be in the point L. And draw a line
from D to L. And for as much as the angle D GL is equal to the angle GD K, and
they are alternate angles, therefore the line GL is a parallel to D E (by the
27. proposition). Wherefore (by this proposition) the triangles GD E and LD E
are equal: but the triangle LDE is greater then the triangle FD E, and the
triangle GD E is equal to the triangle ABC. Wherefore the triangle ABC is
greater then the triangle D OF: which was required to be proved.

The 28. Theoreme. The 38. Proposition. Triangles which consist upon equal
bases, and in the self same parallel lines, are equal the one to the other.
SVppose that these triangles ABC and DEF do consist upon equal bases, that is,
upon BC and OF, and in the self same parallel lines, that is BF and AD. Then I
say that the triangle ABC is equal to the triangle ABC is equal to the
triangle DEF. Construction.
Produce (by the second peticion) the line AD on each side to the points G and
H. And (by the 31. proposition) by the point B draw unto CA a parallel line
BG, and (by the same) by the point F draw unto DE a parallel line FH.
Demonstration.
Wherefore GBCA and DEFH are parallelogrammes. But the parallelograme GBCA is
(by the 36 proposition) equal to the parallelogramme DEFH, for they consist
upon equal bases, that is, BC and OF, and are in the self same parallel
lines, that is, BF and GH. But (by the 34. proposition) the triangle ABC is the
half of the parallelogramme GBCA, for the diameter AB deuideth it into two
equal parts: and the triangle DEF is (by the same) the half of the
parallelogramme DEFH, for the diameter FD deuideth it into two equal parts.
But the halues of things equal are (by the 7. common sentence) equal ^he one
to the other. Wherefore the triangle ABC is equal to the triangle DEF.
Wherefore triangles which consist upon equal bases, and in the self same
parallel lines, are equal the one to the other: which was required to be
proved.

In this proposition are three cases. Three cases in this proposition.
For the bases of the triangles either have one part common to them both or the
base of the one touches the base of the other only in a point: or their bases
are utterly severed a sunder. And each of these cases may also be diversely, Each
of these cases also may be diversely.
as we before have seen in parallelogrammes consisting on equal bases, and
being in the self same parallel lines. So that he which diligently notes the
variety that was there put touching them, may also easily frame the same
variety to each case in this proposition. Wherefore I think it nedeles here
to repeat the same again: for how soever the bases be put, or the tops, the
manner of construction and demonstration here put by Euclide will serve:
namely, to draw parallel lines to the sides.

An addition of Pelitarius.
To divide a triangle given into two equal parts.

Suppose that the triangle given to be divided in to two equal parts be ABC.
An addition of Pelitarius, to divide a triangle into two equal parts.
Divide one of the sides thereof, namely, BC into two equal parts (by the 10.
proposition) in the point D. And draw a line from the point D to the point A.
The^ I say that the two triangles ABD and ACD, are equal, which is easy to
prove (by the 38. proposition) if by the point A we draw unto the line BC a
paral^el line (by the 31. proposition), which let by HK: for so the triangles
AB D and ADC, consisting upon equal bases BD and DC, and being in the self
same parallel lines HK and BC are of necessity equal. The self same thing
also will happen if the side BA be divided into two equal parts in the point E,
and so be drawn a right line from the point E, to the point C. Or if the side
AC be divided into two equal parts in the point F, and so be drawn a right
line from the point F to the point B: which is in like manner proved by drawing
parallel lines by the points B, and C, to the lines BA and AC,

Note.
And so by this you may divide any triangle into so many parts as are signified
by any number that is euenly even: as into 14.16.32.64. etc.

An other addition of Pelitarius. An other addition of Pelitarius.

From any point given in one of the sides of a triangle, to draw a line which
shall divide the triangle into two equal parts.

Let the triangle given be BCD: and let the point given in the side BC be A. It
is required from the point A to draw a line which shall divide the triangle BCD
into two equal parts. Construction.
Divide the side BC into two equal parts in the point E. And draw a right
line from the point A to the point D. And (by the 31. proposition) by the point
E draw unto the line AD a parallel line OF: which let cut the side DC in the
point F. And draw a line from the point A to the point F. Then I say that the
line AF deuideth the triangle BCD into two equal parts: namely, the trapesium
ABDF is equal to the triangle ACF. For draw a line from E to D, Demonstration
cutting the line AF in the point G. Now then it is manifest (by the 38.
proposition) that the two triangles BED and CED are equal (if we understand a
line to be drawn by the point D parallel to the line BC, for the bases BE and
EC are equal). The two triangles also D OF and AEF are (by the 37. proposition)
equal: for they consist upon one and the self same base OF, and are in the
self same parallel lines AD and OF. Wherefore taking away the triangle EFG
which is common to the^ both, the triangle AEG shall be equal to the triangle D
FG: wherefore unto either of the^ add the trapesiu^ CFGE, and the triangle ACF
shall be equal to the triangle DEC. But the triangle DEC is the half part of the
whole triangle BCD wherefore the triangle ACF is the half part of the same
triangle BCD. Wherefore the residue, namely, the trapesium ABFD is the other
half of the same triangle. Wherefore the line AF deuideth the whole triangle
BCD into two equal parts: which was required to be done.

The 29. Theoreme. The 39. Proposition. Equal triangles consisting upon one
and the same base, and on one and the same side: are also in the self same
parallel lines.
SVppose that these two equal triangles ABC and DBC do consist upon one and
the same base, namely, BC and on one and the same side. The^ I say that they
are in the self same parallel lines. Draw a right line from the point A to
the point D. Now I say that AD is a parallel line to BC. For if not, then (by
the 31. proposition) by the point A draw unto the right line BC a parallel
line AE, and draw a right line from the point E to the point C. Wherefore ye
triangle EBC is (by ye 37. proposition) equal to the triangle ABC, for they
consist upon one and the self same base, namely, BC, and are in ye self same
parallels, that is, AE and BC. But the triangle DBC is (by supposition) equal
to the triangle ABC^ Wherefore the triangle DBC is equal to the triangle EBC,
the greater unto the less: which is impossible. Wherefore the line AE, is not
a parallel to the line BC. And in like sort may it be proved that no other
line besides AD is a parallel line to BC, wherefore AD is a parallel line to
BC. Wherefore equal triangles consisting upon one and the same base, and on
one and the same side, are also in the self same parallel lines: which was
required to be proved.

This proposition is the converse of the 37. proposition. This Theoreme the
converse of the 37. proposition.
And here is to be noted that if by the point A, you draw unto the line BC a
parallel line, the same shall of necessity either light upon the point D, or
under it, or above it. If it light upon it, then is that manifest which is
required: but if it light under it, then follows that absurdity which Euclide
puts, namely, that the greater triangle is equal to the less: which self
same absurdity also will follow, if it fall above the point D. As for example.

Suppose that these equal triangles ABC and D BC do consist upon one and the
self same base BC, and on one and the same side. Then I say, that they are in
the self same parallel lines, and that a right line joining together their
tops is a parallel to the base BC. Draw a right line from A to D. Now if this
be not a parallel to the base BC, let AE be a parallel unto it, and let AE fall
without the line AD. And produce the line BD till it concur with the line AE
in the point E and draw a line from E to C. Wherefore the triangle ABC is equal
to the triangle EBC: but the triangle ABC is equal to the triangle DBC:
Wherefore the triangle EBC is equal to the triangle D BC. Namely, the whole to
the part: which is impossible. Wherefore the parallel line falls not without
the line AD. And Euclide has proved that it falls not within. Wherefore the
line AD is a parallel unto the line BC. Wherefore equal triangles which are on
the self same side, and on one and the self same base, are also in the self
same parallel lines: which was required to be proved.

An addition of Flussates.
The self same also follows in parallelogrames. An addition of Fl^ssases.
For if upon the base AB be set on one and the same side these equal
parallelogrames ABCD and ABGE, they shall of necessity be in the self same
parallel lines. For if not, but one of them is set either within or without,
let the parallelograme B^ being equal to the parallelograme ABCD be set within
the same parallel lines: wherefore the same parallelograme BF being equal to
the parallelograme ABCD (by the 35. proposition) shall also be equal to the
other parallelograme ABGE (by the first common sentence) For the parallelograme
ABGE is by supposition equal to the parallelogramme ABCD: whe^fore the
parallelograme BF being equal to the parallelograme ABGE, the part shall be
equal to the whole, which is absurd. The same inconvenience also will follow,
if it fall without. Wherefore it can neither fall within nor without.
Wherefore equal parallelogrames being upon one and the self same base and on
one and the same side, are also in the self same parallel lines.

An addition of Campanus.
An addition of Campanus.
If a right line divide two sides of a triangle into two equal parts: it
shall be equidistant unto the third side.

Suppose that there be a triangle ABC: and let there be a right line DE, which
let divide the two sides AB and BC into two equal parts in the points D and
E Then I say, that the line DE is a parallel to the line A C. Draw these two
lines AE and DC. Now then imagining a line to be drawn by the point E parallel
to the line AB, the triangle BDE shall (by the 38. proposition) be equal to
the triangle DAE (for their two bases AD and DB are put to be equal) And by
the same reason the triangle BDE is equal to the triangle CED. Wherefore (by
the first common sentence) the triangles EAD and ECD are equal, and they are
erected on one and the self same base, namely, DE, and on one and the same
side. Wherefore (by the 39. proposition) they are in the self same parallel
lines, and the line which joins together their tops is a parallel to their
base. Wherefore the lines DE and AC are paralles: which was required to be
proved.

The 30. Theoreme. The 40. Proposition. Equal triangles consisting upon equal
bases, and in one and the same side: are also in the self same parallel lines.
SVppose that these equal triangles ABC and CDE do consist upon equal bases,
that is, upon BC and CE, and on one and the same side, namely, on the side of
A. Then I say that they are in the self same parallel lines. Construction.
Draw by the first peticion a right line from the point A to the point D. Now
I say that AD is a parallel line to BE. For if not, then (by the 31.
proposition) by the point A draw unto the line BE a parallel line AF. And draw
a right line from the point F to the point E. Demonstration leading to an
absurdity.
Wherefore (by the 38. proposition) the triangle BAC is equal to the triangle
CFE^ for they consist upon equal bases, that is BC and CE, and are in the self
same parallel lines, namely, BE and AF. But by supposition the triangle ABC is
equal to the triangle CDE. Wherefore the triangle DCE is equal to the triangle
FCE, namely, the greater unto the less, which is impossible. Wherefore AF is
not a parallel line to BE. And in like sort may we prove that no other line
besides AD is a parallel line to BE. Wherefore AD is a parallel line to BE
Equal triangles therefore consisting upon equal bases, and in one and the
same side: are also in the self same parallel lines: which was required to be
proved.

This proposition is the converse of the 38. proposition. This proposition is
the converse of the 38. propositio^s.
And in this as in the former proposition, if the parallel line drawn by the
point A, should not pass by the point D, it must pass either beneath it, or
above it. Euclide sets forth only the absurdity which should follow if it
pass beneath it: but the self same absurdity also will follow if it should
pass above it: as it is not hard to see by the gathering thereof in the former
proposition. And therefore here I omit it.

The 31. Theoreme. The 41. Proposition. If a parallelograme and a triangle have
one and the self same base, and be in the self same parallel lines: the
parallelograme shall be double to the triangle.
SVppose that the parallelograme ABCD and the triangle EBC have one and the
same base, namely, BC, and let the^ be in the self same parallel lines,
namely, BC and AE. The^ I say, that the parallelograme ABCD is double to the
triangle BEC. Draw (by the first peticion) a right line from the point A to ye
point C. Demonstration.
Wherefore (by the 37. proposition) the triangle ABC is equal to the triangle
EBC^ for they are upon one and the self same base BC, and in the self same
parallel lines BC and EA: but the parallelograme ABCD is double to the
triangle ABC (by the 34. proposition) for the diameter thereof AC deuideth it
into two equal parts: wherefore the parallelogramme ABCD is double to the
triangle EBC. If therefore a parallelogramme and a triangle have one and the
self same base, and be in the self same parallels, the parallelograme shall
be double to the triangle: which was required to be proved.

Two cases in this proposition.
This proposition has two cases. For the base being one, the triangle may have
his top without the parallelograme, or within. The first case is demonstrated
of the author. The second case is thus.

Suppose that there be a parallelograme ABCD, and let the triangle be ECD,
either of which let have one and the self same base, namely, CD, and let them
be in the self same parallel lines CD and AB, and let the top of the
triangle ECD, namely, the point E, be within the parallelograme ABCD. Then I
say that the parallelograme ABCD is double to the triangle ECD. Draw a right
line from the point A to the point D. Now forasmuch as the parallelograme ABCD
is double to the triangle AD (by the 34. proposition): and the triangle ADC is
equal to the triangle EDC (by the 37. proposition). Therefore the
parallelogramme ABCD is double to the triangle ECD: which was required to be
proved.

A corollary.
By this proposition it is manifest that if the base be doubled, the triangle
erected upon it shall be equal to the parallelogramme.

The self same demonstration will serve if the triangle and the
parallelogramme be upon equal bases.
And if the bases of the triangle and of the parallelogramme be equal, the
self same demonstration will serve if you draw the diameter of the
parallelograme. For the triangles being equal, the parallelogramme which is
double to the one, shall also be double to the other. And the triangles must
needs be equal (by the 38. proposition) for that their bases are equal, and
for that they are in the self same parallel lines.

The converse of this proposition is thus.
If a parallelogramme and a triangle have one and the self same base, or
equal bases the one to the other, and be described on one and the same side of
the base: ^f the parallelogramme be double to the triangle, they shall be in the
self same parallel lines.

The converse of this proposition.
For if they be not, the whole shall be equal to his part. For then the top of
the triangle must needs fall either within the parallel lines or without. And
whether of both soever it do, one and the self same impossibility will
follow, if by the top of the triangle be drawn unto the base a parallel line.

An other converse of the same proposition.
If a parallelogramme be the double of a triangle, being both within the self
same parallel lines: An other converse of the same proposition.
then are they upon one and the self same base, or upon equal bases. For if
in that case their bases should be unequal, then might straight way be proved,
that the whole is equal to his part: which is impossible.

A trapesium having two sides only parallel lines, Comparison of a triangle
and a trapesium being upon one and the self same base, and in the self same
parallel lines.
is either more then double, or less then double to a triangle contained
within the self same parallel lines, and having one and the self same base
with the trapesium, or table. ^ust the double it cannot be, for then it should
be a parallelogramme. A trapesium having two sides parallels has of necessity
the one of them longer then the other: for if they were equal then should the
other two sides enclosing them be also equal (by the 33. proposition.) If the
greater side of the trapesium be the base of the triangle, then shall the
trapesium be less then the double of the triangle And if the less side of the
trapesium be the base of the triangle then shall the trapesium be greater then
the triangle.

For suppose that ABCD be a trapesium, When the greater side of the trapesium
is the base of the triangle.
and let two sides thereof, namely, AB and CD be parallel lines, and let the
side AB be less then the side CD, and produce the side AB infinitlye on the
side B to the point F. And let the triangle ECD have one and the self same
base with the trapesium, namely, the line CD. Then I say that the trapesium
ABCD is less the^ the double of the triangle ECD. For put the line AF equal
to the line CD (by the 3. proposition) and draw a line from D to F. Wherefore
ACD F is a parallelogramme (by the 33. proposition). Wherefore (by the 34
proposition) it is double to the triangle ECD. But the trapesium ABCD is a part
of the parallelogramme ACD F. Wherefore the trapesium ABCD is less then the
double of the triangle ECD: which was requi^ed to be proved.

Again let the triangle have to his base the side AB. When the less side is
the base.
Then I say that the trapesium ABCD is greater then the double of the triangle
AEB. For from the side CD cut of the line CF equal to the line AB (by the ^.
proposition). And draw a line from B to F. Wherefore (by the 33. proposition)
ABCF is a parallelogramme: and therefore is (by the 34. proposition) double to
the triangle AEB. Wherefore the trapesium ABCD is more then the double of the
triangle AEB^ which was required to be proved.

The 11. Problem. The 42. proposition. Unto a triangle given, to make a
parallelograme equal, whose angle shall be equal to a rectiline angle given.
SVppose that the triangle given be ABC, and let the rectiline angle given be
D. It is required that unto the triangle ABC there be made a parallelograme
equal, whose angle shall be equal to the rectiline angle given, namely,
Construction.
to the angle D. Divide (by the 10. proposition) the line BC into two equal
parts in the point E. And (by the first peticion) draw a right line from the
point A to the point E. And (by the 23. proposition) upon the right line given
EC, and to the point in it given E, make the angle CEF equal to the angle D.
And (by the 31. proposition) by the point A draw unto the line EC a parallel
line AH: and let the line OF cut the line AH in the point F. and (by the same)
by the point C, draw unto the line OF a parallel line CG. Wherefore FECG is a
parallelograme. Demonstration
And forasmuch as BE is equal to EC, therefore (by the 38. proposition) the
triangle ABE is equal to the triangle AEC, for they consist upon equal bases
that is BE and EC, and are in the self same parallel lines, namely, BC and AH.
Wherefore the triangle ABC is double to the triangle AEC. And the
parallelograme CEFG is also double to the triangle AEC: for they have one and
the self same base, namely, EC: and are in the self same parallel lines, that
is, EC and AH. Wherefore the parallelograme FECG is equal to the triangle ABC,
and has the angle CEF equal to the angle given D. Wherefore unto the
triangle given ABC is made an equal parallelograme, namely, FECG, whose angle
CEF is equal to the angle given D: which was required to be done.

The converse of this proposition after Pelitarius.
Unto a parallelogramme given, ^
to make a triangle equal, hauy^g an angle equal to a rectiline angle given.

Suppose that the parallelograme given be ABCD, and let the angle given be E.
It is required unto the parallelograme ABCD to make a triangle equal having an
angle equal to the angle E. Upon the line CD and to the point in it C,
describe (by the 23. propoposition) an angle equal to the angle E: which let
be DCF: and let the line CF cut the line AB being produced, in the point F: and
produce the line CD (which is parallel to the line AF) to the point G. And put
the line DG equal to the line CD and draw a line from F to G. Then I say that
the triangle CFG is equal to the parallelograme ABCD. For forasmuch as (by the
38. proposition) the whole triangle CFG is double to the triangle CDF. And (by
the 41. proposition) the parallelograme ABCD is double to the same triangle
CDF: therefore the parallelograme ABCD and the triangle CFG are equal the one
to the other: which was required to be done.

The 32. Theoreme. The 43. Proposition. In every parallelograme, the
supplementes of those parallelogrammes which are about the diameter, are equal
the one to the other.
SVppose that ABCD be a parallelograme, and let the diameter thereof be AC: and
about the diameter AC let these parallelogrames EH and GF consist: and let the
supplementes be BK and KD. Then I say that the supplement BK is equal to the
supplement KD. For forasmuch as ABCD is a parallelograme and the diameter
thereof is AC, therefore (by the 34. proposition) the triangle ABC is equal to
the triangle ADC. Again forasmuch as AEKH is a parallelograme, and the
diameter thereof is AK, therefore (by the same) the triangle AEK is equal to the
triangle AHK. And by the same reason also the triangle KFC is equal to the
triangle KGC. And forasmuch as the triangle AEK is equal to the triangle AHK,
and the triangle KFC to the triangle NGC, therefore the triangles AEK and KGC
are equal to the triangles AHK and KFC: and the whole triangle ABC is equal
to the whole triangle AD C: wherefore the residue, namely, the supplement BK is
(by the 3. common sentence) equal to the residue, namely, to the supplement
KD. Wherefore in every parallelogramme, the supplementes of those
parallelogrammes which are about the diameter, are equal the one to the
other: which was required to be proved.

How parallelogrammes are said to consiste about a diameter.
Those parallelogrames are said to consist about a diameter which have to their
diameters part of the diameter of the whole and great parallelograme, as in the
example of Euclide. And such parallelogrames which have not to their diameters
part of the diameter of the greater parallelograme, are said not to consist
about the diameter. For the^ the diameter of the greater parallelograme cutteth
the side of the less contained within it. As in the parallelogramme AB, the
diameter CD, cutteth the side EH of the parallelogramme CE. Wherefore the
parallelogramme CE is not about one and the self same diameter with the
parallelogramme CD.

Supplements and Complementes.
Supplementes or Complementes are those figures which with the two
parallelogrammes accomplish the whole parallelogramme. Although Pel^tarius for
distinction sake puts a difference between Supplementes and Complemente^.
The parallelogrammes about the diameter he calls Complementes, the other ^wo
figures he calls Supplementes.

Three cases in this Theoreme.
This theoreme has three cases only. For the parallelogrammes which consist
about the diameter, either touch the one the other in a point: or by a certain
part of the diameter are severed the one from the other: or else they cut the
one the other. The first case.
For the first case is the example of Euclide before set. The second case is
thus.

The second case.
Suppose that AB be a parallelograme^ whose diameter let be CD: and about the
same diameter let these parallelogrammes CK and DL consist: and between the^
let there be a certain part of the diameter, namely, LK. Then I say that the
two supplementes AGLKE and BFKLH are equal. For we may as before (by the 34.
proposition) prove that the triangle ACD, is equal to the triangle BCD, and
the triangle ECK to the triangle K CF, and also the triangle DGL to the
triangle DHL. Wherefore the residue, namely, the five sided figure AGLKE is
equal to the residue, namely, to the five sided figure, BFKLH: that is, the
one supplement to the other^ which was required to be proved.

The third case.
But now suppose AB to be a parallelogramme, and let the diameter thereof be CD:
and let the one of the parallelogrammes about it be ECFL, and let the other be
DGKH, of which let the one cut the other. Then I say that the supplementes EG
and EH are equal. For forasmuch as the whole triangle DGK is equal to the
whole triangle DHK (by the 34. proposition), and part also of the one, namely,
the triangle K LM is equal to part of the other, namely, to the triangle K LN
(by the same), for LK is a parallelograme: therefore the residue, namely, the
Trapesium DLNH is equal to the residue, namely, to the trapesiu^ DLMG: but the
triangle ADC is equal to the triangle BCD, and in the parallelograme OF, the
triangle FCL, is equal to the triangle ECL, and the trapesium DGML is (as it
has been proved) equal to the trapesium DHNL. Wherefore the residue, namely,
the quadrilater figure GF is equal to the residue, namely, to the quadrilater
figure EH, that is, the one supplement to the other: which was required to be
proved.

This is to be noted that in ^^h of those three cases it may so happen, that
the parallelogrammes about the diameter shall not have one angle common with
the whole parallelogramme, as they have in the former figures. But yet though
they have not, the self same demonstration will serve, as it is plain to see
in the figures here underneath put. For always, if from things equal be
taken away things equal, the residue shall be equal.



This proposition P^litarius calls Gnomicall, and mystical, This proposition
called Gnomical and mistical.
for that of it (says he) spring infinite demonstrations, and uses in
geometry. And he puts the converse thereof after this manner.

If a parallelogramme be divided into two equal supplementes, The converse of
this proposition.
and into two complements whatsoever: the diameter of the two complementes
shall be set directly, and make one diameter of the whole parallelogramme.

Here is to be noted as I before admonished that Pelitarius for distinction
sake puts a difference between supplementes and complementes, which
difference, for that I have before declared, I shall not need here to repete
again.

Suppose that there be a parallelogramme ABCD, whose two equal supplements let
be AEFG and F HDK, and let the two complementes thereof be GFCK and EBFH: whose
diameters let be CF and FB. Then I say that CFB is one right line, and is the
diameter of the whole parallelogramme ABCD: for if it be not, then is there an
other diameter of the whole parrallelogramme, which let be CLB being drawn
under the diameters CF and FB, and cutting the line GH in the in the point L.
And (by the 31. proposition) by the point L, draw unto the line AC a parallel
line MLN. And so are there in the whole parallelogramme ABCD two supplements
AMGL and LHND, which by this proposition shall be equal the one to the other.
For that they are about the diameter CLB. But the supplement AEFG is (by
supposition) equal to the supplement FHDK: and forasmuch as FHDK is greater
then LH DN, AEFG also shall be greater then AMGL, namely, the part greater then
the whole: which is impossible. And by the same reason may it be proved, that
the diameter cannot be drawn above the diameters CF and FB. Wherefore CFB is
one diameter of the whole parallelogramme ABCD: which was required to be proved.

The 12. Problem. The 44. Proposition. Upon a right line given, to apply a
parallelograme equal to a triangle given, and containing an angle equal to a
rectiline angle given.
SVppose that the right line given be AB, and let the triangle given be C, and
let the rectiline angle given be D. It is required upon the right line given
AB, to apply a parallelogramme equal to the triangle given C, Construction.
and containing an angle equal to the rectiline angle given 44. proposition)
ye parallelograme BGEF equal to the triangle C, and having the angle BGF
equal to the angle D. And unto the line EB join the line AB in such sort that
they make both one right line. And extend the line FG beyond the point G to the
point H. And (by the 31. proposition) by the point A draw to either of these
lines BG and OF a parallel line AH. And (by the first peticion) draw a right
line from the point H to the point B. And forasmuch as upon the parallel lines
AH and OF falls a certain right line HF, therefore (by the ^9 proposition)
the angles AHF and HFE are equal to two right angles: wherefore the angles BHG
and GFE are less then two right angles: but if upon two right lines fall a
right line making the inward angles on one and the same side less then two
right angles, those right lines being infinitely produced shall at the length
mete on that side in which are the angles less then two right angles (by the
5. peticion). Wherefore the lines HB and FE being infinitely produced will at
the length mete. Let them be produced, and let them mete in the point K. And
(by the 31 proposition) by the point K draw to either of these lines EA and FH
a parallel line KL. And (by the 2. peticion) extend the lines HA and GB till
they co^curre with the line KL in the points L and M. Demonstration
Wherefore HLKF is a parallelogramme, and the diameter thereof is HK: and
about the diameter HK are the parallelogrammes AG and ME, and the supplementes
are LB and BF: wherefore (by the 43. prop^sition) the supplement LB is equal
to the supplement BF: but by construction the parallelograme BF is equal to
the triangle C: wherefore also the parallelogramme LB is equal to the triangle
C. And forasmuch as the line FH is a parallel to the line KL, and upon them
lights the line GM, therefore (by the 27. proposition) the angle FGB is
equal to the angle BML. But the angle FGB is equal to the angle D, therefore
the angle BML is equal to the angle D. Wherefore upon the right line given AB
is applied the parallelograme LB, equal to the triangle given C, and containing
the angle BML equal to the rectiline angle given D: which was required to be
done.

Applications of spaces or figures to lines with excesses or wantes is (says
Eudemus) an ancient invention of Pithagoras. Applications of spaces with
excesses or wants an ancient invention of Pithagoras.


When the space or figure is joined to the whole line, How a figure is said
to be applied to a line.
the^ is the figure said to be applied to the line. But if the length of the
space be longer then the line, the^ it is said to exceed: and if the length
of the figure be shorter then the line, so that part of the line remains
without the figure described, then is it said to want.

In this problem are three things given. Three things given in this
proposition.
A right line to which the application is made, which here must be the one side
of the parallelogramme applied. A triangle whereunto the parallelogramme
applied must be equal: and an angle whereunto the angle of the parallelograme
applied must be equal. And if the angle given be a right angle, the^ shall the
parallelograme applied be either a square, or a figure on the one side longer.
But if the angle given be an obtuse or an acute angle, then shall the
parallelograme applied be a Rhombus or diamond figure, or else a Rhomboides or
diamondlike figure.

The converse of this proposition after Politarius.
Upon a right line given, to apply unto a parallelograme given an equal
triangle having an angle equal to an angle given. The converse of this
proposition.


Suppose that the right line given be AB, and let the parallelograme given be
CDEF, and let the angle given be G. It is required upon the line AB to describe
a tria^gle equal to the parallelograme CDEF, having an angle equal to the
angle G. Draw the diameter CF and produce CD beyond the point D to the point
H. And put the line DH equal to the line CD. And draw a line from F to H. Now
the^ (by the 41. proposition) the tria^gle CHF is equal to the parallelograme
CD OF. And (by this proposition) upon the line AB describe a parallelograme
ABKL equal to the triangle CHF, having the angle ABL equal to the angle given
G: and produce the line BL beyond the point L to the point M. And put the
line LM equal to the line BL, and draw a line from A to M. Then I say that
upon the line AB is described the triangle ABM, which is such a triangle as is
required. For (by the 41. proposition) the triangle ABM is equal to the
parallelogramme ABKL (for that they are between two parallel lines BM and AK,
and the base of the triangle is double to the base of the parallelogramme): but
ABKL is by construction equal to the triangle CHF: and the triangle CHF is
equal to the parallelograme CDEF. Wherefore (by the first common sentence) the
triangle ABM is equal to the parallelograme given CD OF, and has his angle
ABM equal to the angle given G: which was required to be done.

The 13. Problem. The 45 Proposition. To describe a parallelograme equal to
any rectiline figure given, and containing an angle equal to a rectiline angle
given.
SVppose that the rectiline figure given be ABCD, and let the rectiline angle
given be E. It is required to describe a parallelograme equal to the rectiline
figure given ABCD, and containing an angle equal to the rectiline angle given
E. Construction.
Draw (by the first peticion) a right line from the point D to the point B. And
(by the 42. proposition) unto the triangle ABD describe an equal
parallelograme FH, having his angle FKH equal to the angle E. And (by the 4^.
of the first) upon the right line GH apply the parallelogramme GM equal to the
triangle DBC, having his angle GHM equal to the angle E. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as either of those angles HKF and GHM is equal to the angle E:
therefore the angle HKF is equal to the angle GHM: put the angle KHG common to
them both, wherefore the angles FKH and KHG are equal to the angles KHG and
GHM. but the angles FKH and KHG are (by the 29. proposition) equal to two
right angles. Wherefore the angles KHG and GHM are equal to two right angles.
Now then unto a right line GH, and to a point in the same H, are drawn two
right lines KH and HM not both on one and the same side, making the side angles
equal to two right angles. Wherefore (by the 14. proposition) the lines KH and
HM make directly one right line. And forasmuch as upon the parallel lines. KM
and FG falls the right line HG, therefore the alternate aagles MHG and HGF
are (by the 29 proposition) equal the one to the other: put the angle HGL
common to them both. Wherefore the angles MHG and HGL are equal to the angles
HGF and HGL. But the angles MHG and HGL are equal to two right angles (by ye
29. proposition). Wherefore also the angles HGF and HGL are equal to two right
angles. Wherefore (by the 14. proposition) the lines FG and GL make directly
one right line. And forasmuch as the line KF is (by the 34. proposition) equal
to the line HG, and it is also parallel unto it: and the line HG is (by the
same) equal to the line ML, therefore (by the first common sentence) the line
FK is equal to the line ML, and also a parallel unto it (by the 30.
proposition). But the right lines KM and FL join them together. Wherefore (by
the 33. proposition) the lines KM and FL are equal the on to the other and
parallel lines. Wherefore KFLM is a parallelograme. And forasmuch as the
triangle ABD is eqnal to the parallelograme FH, and the triangle DBC to the
parallelogramme GM^ therefore the whole rectiline figure ABCD is equal to the
whole parallelograme KFLM. Wherefore to the rectiline figure given ABCD is made
an equal parallegrame KFLM, whose angle FKM is equal to the angle given,
namely, to E: which was required to be done.

The rectiline figure given (...) in the example of Euclide is a
parallelograme. But if the rectiline figure be of many sides, as of 5.6. or mo,
the^ must you resolve the figure into his triangles, as has been before taught
in the 32. proposition. And the^ apply a parallelograme equal to every triangle
upon a line given, as before in the example of the author. And the same kind of
reasoning will serve that was before, only by reason of the multitude of
triangles, you shall have need of oftener repeticio^ of the 29. and 14.
propositio^s to prove that the bases of all the parallelogrames made equal to
all the triangles make one right line, and so also of the tops of the said
parallelogrames. Pelitarius adds unto this proposition this Problem
following.

Two unequal rectiline superfici^c^s being given, to find out the exc^sse of
the greater above the less. An addition of Pelitarius.


Suppose that there be two unequal rectiline superficieces A and B of which
let A be the greater. It is required to find out the excess of the
superficies A above the superficieces B. Describe (by the 44. proposition) the
parallelograme CDEF equal to the rectiline figure A, containing a right angle.
And produce the line CD beyond the point D to the point G: and put the line DG
equal to the line CD. And again (by the 44. proposition) upon the line DG
describe the parallelograme DGHK equal to the rectiline figure B, and having
the angle DGK a right angle. And produce the line KH beyond the point H, until
it cut the line CE in the point L. Then I say that HLEF, is the excess of
the rectiline figure A above the rectiline figure B. For first that CGKL is a
parallelogramme it is manifest, neither needs it to be demonstrated. And
forasmuch as the lines CD and DG are by supposition equal and either of them is
a parallel to KL, therefore (by the 36, proposition) the two parallelogrames CH
and DK are equal. And forasmuch as DK is supposed to be equal to the
rectiline figure B, CH also shall be equal to the same rectiline figure B.
Wherefore forasmuch as the whole parallelograme CF is equal to the rectiline
figure A, and LF is the excess of CF above DL or DK, it follows that LF is
the excess of the rectiline figure A above the rectiline figure B: which was
required to be done.

An other more ready way.
Let the parallelograme CDEF remain equal to the rectiline figure A, and
produce the line CD beyond the point D to the point G. And upon the line DG
describe the parallelograme DGHK equal to the rectiline figure B. And produce
the lines EC and HK beyond the points C and K till they concur in the point
L. And by the point D draw the diameter LDM, which let cut the line HG being
produced beyond the point G in the point M, and by the point M draw unto
the line HL a parallel MN cuttyng the line EL in the point N: and by that
means is HLMN a parallelograme. Then I say that NF is the evcesse of the
rectiline figure A above the rectiline figure B. For forasmuch as the
parallelograme HD is equal to the rectiline figure B, and the supplementes HD
and DN ar (by the 43. proposition) equal: therefore DN also is equal to the
rectiline figure B, which rectiline figure DN being taken away from the
parallelograme CF (which is supposed to be equal to the rectiline figure A)
the residue NF shall be the ezcesse of the rectiline figure A above the
rectiline figure B: which was required to be done.

The 14. Problem. The 46. Proposition. Upon a right line given, to describe a
square.
SVppose that the right line given be AB. It is required upon the right line
AB, to describe a square. Upon the right line AB, and from a point in it given,
namely, A, raise up (by the 11 proposition) a perpendiculer line AC. And (by
the 3. proposition) unto AB put an equal line AD. And (by the 31. proposition)
by the point D draw unto AB a parallel line DE. And (by the same) by the point
B draw unto AD a parallel line BE. Wherefore ADEB is a parallelogramme.
Wherefore the line AB is equal to the line DE, and the line AD to the line
BE: but the line AB is equal to the line AD wherefore these four lines BA,
AD, DE, EB, are equal the one to the other. Wherefore the parallelogramme
ADEB consists of equal sides. I say also that it is rectangle. For forasmuch
as upon the parallel lines AB and DE falls a right line AD: therefore (by the
29. proposition) the angle: BAD and ADE are equal to two right angles: but the
angle BAD is a right angle. Wherefore the angle ADE also is a right angle. But
in parallelogrames the sides and angles which are opposite are equal the one
to the other (by the 34 proposition). Wherefore the two opposite angles ABE
and BED are each of them a right angle. Wherefore the parallelograme ABED is
rectangle: and it is also proved that it is equilater. Wherefore it is a
square, and it is described upon the right line given AB: which was required to
be done.

This is to be noted that if you will mechanically and redily, To describe a
square mechanically.
not regarding demo^stration describe a square upon a line given, as upon the
line AB, after that you have erected the perpendiculer line CA upon the line
AB, and put the line AE equal to the line AB: then open your compass to the
wydth of the line AB or AE, and set one foot thereof in the point E, and
describe a piece of the circumference of a circle: and again make the center
the point B, and describe also a piece of the circumference of a circle,
namely, in such sort that the piece of the circumfere^ce of the one may cut the
piece of the circumference of the other, as in the point D: and from the point
of the intersection, draw unto the points E and B right lines: and so shall be
described a square. As in this figure here put, wherein I have not drawn the
lines ED and DB, that the pieces of the circumference cutting the one the other
might the plainlier be seen.

An addition of Proc^us.
If the lines upon which the squares be described be equal, the squares also
are equal.

Suppose that these right lines AB and CD be equal, An addition of Proc^^^.
and upon the line AB describe a square ABEG: and upon the line CD describe a
square CDHF. Then I say that the two squares ABEG and CDHF are equal. For draw
these right lines GB and HD. And for as much as the right lines AB and CD are
equal, and the lines AG and HC are also equal, and they contain eqaul
angles, namely, right angles (by the definition of a square) therefore (by the
4. proposition) the base BG is equal to the base HD. And the triangle ABG is
equal to the triangle CDH. Wherefore the doubles of the said triangles are
equal. Wherefore the square AE is equal to the square CF: which was required
to be proved.

The converse thereof is thus.
If the squares be equal: The converse thereof.
the lines also upon which they are described are equal.

Suppose that there be two equal squares AF and CG described upon the lines AB
and BC. The^ I say, that the lines AB and BC are equal. Put the line AB
directly to the line BC, that they both make on right line. And forasmuch as
the angles are right angles, therefore also (by the 14. proposition) the right
line FB is set directly to the right line BG. Draw these right lines FC, AG,
AF, and CG. Now for as much as the square AF is equal to the square CG, the
triangle also AFB shall be equal to the triangle CBG: put the triangle BCF
common to them both. Wherefore the whole triangle ACF is equal to the whole
triangle CFG. Wherefore the line AG is a parallel unto the line CF (by the 38.
proposition): for the triangles consist upon one and the self same base,
namely CF. Again forasmuch as either of these angles AFG and CBG is the half
of a right angle, therefore (by the 17. proposition) the line AF is a parallel
to the line CG. Wherefore the right line AF is equal to the right line CG (for
the opposite sides of a parallelograme are equal). And forasmuch as there are
two triangles ABF and BCG, whose alternate angles are equal, namely, the angle
AFB to the angle BGC, and the angle BAF to the angle BCG, and one side of the
one is equal to one side of the other, namely, the side which lies between
the equal angles, that is, the side AF to the side CG, therefore (by the 26.
proposition) the side AB is equal to the side BC, and the side BF to the side
BG. Wherefore it is proved that the squares of the lines AF and CG being
equal, their sides also shall be equal: which was required to be proved.

The 33. Theoreme. The 47. Proposition. In rectangle triangles, the square
which is made of the side that subtendeth the right angle, is equal to the
squares which are made of the sides containing the right angle.
SVppose that ABC be a rectangle triangle, having the angle BAC a right angle.
The^ I say yt the square which is made of the line BC is equal to the squares
which are made of ye lines AB and AC. Construction.
Describe (by ye 46. proposition) upon ye line BC a square BDCE, and (by ye
same) upon the lines BA and AC describe the squares ABFG and ACKH. And by the
point A draw (by the 31. proposition) to either of these lines BD and CE a
parallel line AL. And (by the first peticion) draw a right line from the point
A to the point D, and an other from the point C to the point E. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the angles BAC and BAG are right angles, therefore unto a
right line BA, and to a point in it given A, are drawn two right lines AC and
AG, not both on one and the same side, making the two side angles equal to two
right angles: wherefore (by the 14. proposition) the lines AC and AG make
directly one right line. And by the same reason the lines BA and AH make also
directly one right line. And forasmuch as the angle DBC is equal to the angle
FBA (for either of the^ is a right angle) put the angle ABC common to them
both: wherefore the whole angle DBA is equal to the whole angle FBC. And
forasmuch as these two lines AB and BD are equal to these two lines BF and BC,
the one to the other, and the angle DBA is equal to the angle FBC: therefore (by
the 4. proposition) the base AD is equal to the base FC, and the triangle ABD
is equal to the triangle FBC. But (by the 31. proposition^) the
parallelogramme BL is double to the triangle ABD, for they have both one and
the same base, namely, BD, and are in the self same parallel lines, that is,
BD and AL and (by the same) the square GB is double to the triangle FBC, for
they have both one and the self same base, that is, BF, and are in the self
same parallel lines, that is, FB and GC. But the doubles of things equal, are
(by the sixte common sentence) equal the one to the other. Wherefore the
parallelograme BL is equal to the square GB. And in like sort if (by the
first peticion) there be drawn a right line from the point A to the point E,
and an other from the point B to the point K, we may prove yt the
parallelograme CL is equal to the square HC. Wherefore the whole square BDEC is
equal to the two squares GB and HC. But the square BDEC is described upon the
line BC, and the squares GB and HC are described upon the lines BA and AC:
wherefore the square of the side BC, is equal to the squares of the sides BA and
AC. Wherefore in rectangle triangles, the square which is made of the side
that subtendeth the right angle, is equal to the squares which are made of the
sides containing the right angle: which was required to be demonstrated.

This most excellent and notable Theoreme was first invented of the great
philosopher Pithagoras, Pithagoras the first inuenter of this proposition.
who for the exceeding joy conceived of the invention thereof, offered in
sacrifice an Ox, as record Hi^rone, Proclus, Lycius, and Vitruutus. And it
has been commonly called of barbarous writers of the latter time Dulcarnon.

An addition of P^l^tari^^.
An addition of Pelitarius.
To reduce two unequal squares to two equal squares.

Suppose that the squares of the lines AB and AC be unequal. It is required to
reduce them to two equal squares. Join the two lines AB and AC at their ends
in such sort that they make a right angle BAC. And draw a line from B to C.
Then upon the two ends B and C make two angles each of which may be equal to
half a right angle (This is done by erecting upon the line BC perpe^diculer
lines, from the points B and C: and so (by the 9. proposition) dividing ^che
of the right angles into two equal parts): and let the angles BCD and CBD be
either of the^ half of a right angle. And let the lines BD and CD concur in
the point D. Then I say that the two squares of the sides BD and CD, are equal
to the two squares of the sides AB and AC. For (by the 6 proposition) the two
sides DB and DC are equal, and the angle at the point D is (by the 32.
proposition) a right angle. Wherefore the square of the side BC is equal to the
squares of the two sides DB and DC (by the 47. proposition): but it is also
equal to the squares of the two sides AB and AC (by the self same proposition)
wherefore (by the common sentence) the squares of the two sides BD and DC are
equal to the squares of the two sides AB and AC: which was required to be done.

An other addition of Pelitarius.
An other aditio^ of Pelitarius.
If two right angled triangles have equal bases. the squares of the two sides
of the one are equal to the squares of the two sides of the other.

This is manifest by the former construction and demonstration.

An other addition of Pelitarius.
An other addition of Pelitarius.
Two unequal lines being given, to know how much the square of the one is
greater then the square of the other.

Suppose that there be two unequal lines AB and BC: of which let AB be the
greater. It is required to search out how much the square of AB excedeth the
square of BC. That is I will find out the square, which with the square of the
line BC shall be equal to the square of the line AB. Put the lines A B and BC
directly, that they make both one right line: and making the center the point
B, and the space BA describe a circle ADE. And produce the line AC to the
circumference, and let it concur with it in the point E. And upon the line AE
and from the point C erect (by the 11. proposition) a perpendiculer line CD,
which produce till it concur with the circumference in the point D: and draw
a line from B to D. Then I say, that the square of the line CD, is the excess
of the square of the line AB above the square of the line BC. For forasmuch as
in the triangle BCD, the angle at the point C is a right angle, the square of
the base BD is equal to the squares of the two sides BC and CD (by this 47.
proposition). Wherefore also the square of the line AB is equal to the self
same squares of the lines BC and CD. Wherefore the square of the line BC is so
much less then the square of the line AB, as is the square of the line CD:
which was required to search out.

An other addition of Pelitarius. An other aditio^ of Pelitarius.
The diameter of a square being given, to give the square thereof.
This is easy to be done. For if upon the two ends of the line be drawn two
half right angles, and so be made perfect the triangle then shall be described
half of the square: the other half whereof also is after the same manner easy
to be described.

Hereby it is manifest, that the square of the diameter is double to that
square whose diameter it is. A Corrollary.


The 34. Theoreme. The 48. Proposition. If the square which is made of one of
the sides of a triangle, be equal to the squares which are made of the two
other sides of the same triangle: the angle comprehended under those two other
sides is a right angle.
SVppose that ABC be a triangle, and let the square which is made of one of the
sides there, namely, of the side BC, be equal to the squares which are made of
the sides BA and AC. Then I say that the angle BAC is a right angle. Raise up
(by the 11. proposition) from the point A unto the right line AC a
perpendicular line AD. And (by the third proposition) unto the line AB put an
equal line AD. And by the first peticion draw a right line from the point D to
the poin^ C. And forasmuch as the line DA is equal to the line AB, the square
which is made of the line DA is equal to the square which is made of the line
AB Put the square of the line AC, common to them both. Wherefore the squares
of the lines DA and AC are equal to the squares of the lines BA and AC. But (by
the proposition going before) the square of the line DC is equal to ye squares
of the lines. AD and AC. (For the angle DAC is a right angle) and the square of
BC is (by supposition) equal to the squares of AB and AC. Wherefore the
square of DC is equal to the square of BC: wherefore the side DC is equal to
the side BC. And forasmuch as AB is equal to AD and AC is common to them both,
therefore these two sides DA and AC are equal to these two sides BA and AC,
the one to the other, and the base DC is equal to the base BC^ wherefore (by
the 8. proposition) the angle DAC is equal to the angle BAC. But the angle DAC
is a right angle, wherefore also the angle BAC is a right angle. If therefore
the square which is made of one of the sides of a triangle, be equal to the
squares which are made of the two other sides of the same triangle, the angle
comprehended under those two other sides is a right angle. which was required
to be proved.

This proposition is the conue^se of the former.
This proposition is the converse of the former, and is of Pelitarius
demonstrated by an argument leading to an impossibility after this manner.

An other Demonstration after Pelitarius.
Suppose that ABC be a triangle: and let the square of the side AC, be equal to
the squares of the two sides AB and BC. Then I say that the angle at the point
B, which is opposite to the side AC, is a right angle. For if the angle at the
point B be not a right angle, then shall it be either greater or less the^ a
right angle. First let it be is greater. And let the angle DBC be a right
angle, by erecting from the point B a perpendicular line unto the line BC (by
the 11. proposition) which let be BD: and put the line BD equal to the line AB
(by the third proposition). And draw a line from C to D. Now (by the former
proposition) the square of the side CD shall be equal to the squares of the two
sides BD and BC: wherefore also to the squares of the two sides BA and BC.
Wherefore the base CD shall be equal to the base CA, when as their squares are
equal: which is contrary to the 24. proposition. For forasmuch as the angle
ABC is greater then the angle D BC, and the two sides AB and BC are equal to
the two sides DB and BC, the one to the other, the base CA shall be greater
then the base CD. It is also contrary to the 7. proposition, for from the two
ends of one and the same line, namely, from the points B and C should be drawn
on one and the same side two lines BD and DC ending at the point D, equal to
two other lines BA and AC drawn from the same ends and ending at an other
point, namely, at A, which is impossible. By the same reason also may we prove
that the whole angle at the point B is not less then a right angle. Wherefore
it is a right angle: which was required to be proved.

The end of the first book of Euclides Elements.
The second book of Euclides Elements.
IN this second book Euclide shows, The argument of the second book.
what is a Gnomo^, and a right angled parallelogramme. Also in this book are
set forth the powers of lines, divided euenly and unevenly, and of lines added
one to an other. The power of a line, What is the power of a line.
is the square of the same line: that is, a square, every side of which is
equal to the line. So that here are set forth the qualities and proprieties of
the squares and right lined figures, which are made of lines and of their
parts. Many compe^dious rules of reckoning gathered one of this book, and also
many rules of Algebra.
The Arithmetician also our of this book gathers many compendious rules of
reckoning, and many rules also of Algebra, with the equatio^s therein used. The
grounds also of those rules are for the most part by this second book
demonstrated. Two wonderful propositions in this book.
This book moreover contains two wonderful propositions, one of an obtuse
angled triangle, and the other of an acute: which with the aid of the 47.
proposition of the first book of Euclide, which is of a rectangle triangle, of
how great force and profit they are in matters of astronomy, they know which
have trauayled in that art. Wherefore if this book had none other profit be
side, only for these 2. propositions sake it were diligently to be embraced
and studied.

The definitions.
1. Every rectangled parallelogramme, First definition.
is said to be contained under two right lines comprehending a right angle.
A parallelogramme is a figure of four sides, What a parallelogramme is.
whose two opposite or contrary sides are equal the one to the other. There
are of parallelogrammes four kinds, Four kinds of parallelogrammes.
a square, a figure of one side longer, a Rombus or diamond, and a Romboides or
diamond like figure, as before was said in the 33. definition of the first
book. Of these four sorts, the square and the figure of one side longer are
only right angled Parallelogrammes: for that all their angles are right
angles. And either of them is contained (according to this definition) under
two right lines which concur together, and cause the right angle, and
contain the same. Of which two lines the one is the length of the figure, and
the other the breadth. The parallelogramme is imagined to be made by the
draught or motion of one of the lines into the length of the other. As if two
numbers should be multiplied the one into the other. As the figure ABCD is a
parallelograme, and is said to be contained under the two right lines AB and
AC, which contain the right angle BAC, or under the two right lines AC and CD,
for they likewise contain the right angle ACD: of which 2. lines the one,
namely, AB is the length, and the other, namely, AC is the breadth. And if we
imagine the line AC to be drawn or moved directly according to the length of
the line AB, or contrary wise the line AB to be moved directly according to the
length of the line AC, you shall produce the whole rectangle parallelogramme
ABCD which is said to be contained of them: even as one number multiplied by
an other produces a plain and right angled superficial number, as ye see in
the figure here set, where the number of six or six unities, is multiplied by
the number of five or by five unities: of which multiplication are produced 30.
which number being set down and described by his unities represents a plain
and a right angled number. Wherefore even as equal numbers multipled by equal
numbers produce numbers equal the one to the other: so rectangle
parallelogrames which are comprehended under equal lines are equal the one to
the other.

Second defini^ion.
2. In every parallelogramme, one of those parallelogrammes, which soever it
be, which are about the diameter, together with the two supplementes, is called
a Gnomon.
Those particular parallelogrames are said to be about the diameter of the
parallelograme, which have the same diameter which the whole parallelograme
has. And supplementes are such, which are without the diameter of the whole
parallelograme. As of the parallelograme ABCD the partial or particular
parallelogrames GKCF and EBKH are parallelogrames about the diameter, for that
each of them has for his diameter a part of the diameter of the whole
parallelogramme. As CK and KB the particular diameters, are parts of the line
CB, which is the diameter of the whole parallelogramme. And the two
parallelogrammes AEGK and KHFD, are supplementes, because they are without the
diameter of the whole parallelogramme, namely, CB. Now any one of those
partial parallelogrammes about the diameter together with the two supplementes
make a gnomon. As the parallelograme EBKH, with the two supplementes AEGK and
KHFD make the gnomon FGEH. Likewise the parallelogramme GKCF with the same two
supplementes make the gnomon EHFG. And this diffinition of a gnomon extends
it self, and is general to all kinds of parallelogrammes, whether they be
squares or figures of one side longer or Rhombus or Romboides. To be short, if
you take away from the whole parallelogramme one of the partial
parallelogrammes which are about the diameter whether ye will, the rest of the
figure is a gnomon.

Campa^e after the last proposition of the first book adds this proposition.
A proposition added by Campane after the last proposition of the first book.
Two squares being given, to adioyne to one of them a Gnomon equal to the
other square: which, for that as then it was not taught what a Gnomon is, I
there omitted, thinking that it might more aptly be placed here. The doing and
demonstration whereof, is thus.

Suppose that there be two squares AB and CD: unto one of which, namely, unto
AB, it is required to add a Gnomon equal to the other square, namely, to CD.
Produce the side BF of the square AB directly to the point E. and put the line
FE equal to the side of the square CD. And draw a line from E to A. Now then
forasmuch as EFA is a rectangle triangle, therefore (by the 47. of the first)
the square of the line EA is equal to the squares of the lines OF and FA. But
the square of the line OF is equal to the square CD, and the square of the
side FA is the square AB. Wherefore the square of the line AE is equal to the
two squares CD and AB. But the sides OF and FA are (by the 21. of the first)
longer then the side AE, and the side FA is equal to the side FB. Wherefore the
sides OF and FB are longer the^ the side AE. Wherefore the whole line BE is
longer then the line AE. From the line BE cut of a line equal to the line AE,
which let be BC. And (by the 46. proposition) upon the line BC describe a
square, which let be BCGH: which shall be equal to the square of the line AE, but
the square of the line AE is equal to the two squares AB and DC. Wherefore the
square BCGH is equal to the same squares. Wherefore forasmuch as the square BCGH
is composed of the square AB and of the gnomon FGAH, the said gnomon shall be
equal unto the square CD: which was required to be done.

An other more ready way after Pelitarius.
Suppose that there be two squares, whose sides let be AB and BC. It is
required unto the square of the line AB, to add a gnomon equal to the square
of the line BC. Set the lines AB and BC in such sort that they make a right
angle ABC. And draw a line from A to C. And upon the line AB describe a square
which let be ABDE. And produce the line BA to the point F, and put the line BF
equal to the line AC. And upon the line BF describe a square which let be
BFGH: which shall be equal to the square of the line AC, when as the lines BF and
AC are equal: and therefore it is equal to the squares of the two lines AB and
BC. Now forasmuch as the square BFGH is made complete by the square ABDE and by
the gnomon FEGD, the gnomon FEGD shall be equal to the square of the line BC:
which was required to be done.

The 1. Theoreme. The 1. Proposition. If there be two right lines, and if the
one of them be divided into parts how many soever: the rectangle figure
comprehended under the two right lines, is equal to the rectangle figures
which are comprehended under the line undivided, and under every one of the
parts of the other line.
SVppose that there be two right lines A and BC and let one of them, namely, BC
be divided at all adventures in the points D and E. Then I say that the
rectangle figure comprehended under the lines A, and BC, is equal unto the
rectangle figure comprehended under the lines A, and BD, and unto the rectangle
figure which is comprehended under the lines A and DE, and also unto the
rectangle figure which is comprehended under the lines A and EC. Construction.
For from the point Brayse up (by the 11. of the first) unto the right line BC
a perpendiculer line BF, and unto the line A (by the third of the first) put
the line BG equal, and by the point G (by the 31. of the first) draw a
parallel line unto the right line BC and let the same be GM, and (by the self
same) by ye points D, E, and C, draw unto the line BG these parallel lines DK,
Demonstration
EL and CHAPTER Now then the parallelograme BH is equal to these parallelogrammes
BK, DL, and EH. But the parallelograme BH is equal unto that which is
contained under the lines A and BC. (For it is comprehended under the lines GB
and BC, and the line GB is equal unto the line A) And the parallelograme BK is
equal to that which is contained under the lines A and BD: (for it is
comprehended under the line GB and BD, and BG is equal unto A) And the
parallelograme DL is equal to that which is contained under the lines A and DE
(for the line DK, that is, BG is equal unto A) And moreover likewise the
parallelograme EH is equal to that which is contained under the lines A and
EC. Wherefore that which is comprehended under ye lines A and BC is equal to
that which is comprehended under the lines A and BD, and unto yt which is
comprehended under the lines A and DE, and moreover unto that which is
comprehended under the lines A and EC. If therefore there be two right lines,
and if the one of them be divided into parts how many soever, the rectangle
figure comprehended under the two right lines, is equal to the rectangle
figures which are comprehended under the line undivided and under every one of
the parts of the other line: which was required to be demonstrated.

Because that all the Propositions of this second book for the most part are
true both in lines and in numbers, and may be declared by both: therefore have
I have added to every Proposition convenient numbers for the manifestation of
the same. And to the end the studious and diligent reader may the more fully
perceive and understand the agreement of this art of Geometry with the science
of Arithmetique, and how nere and dear sisters they are together, so that the
one cannot without great blemish be without the other, I have here also joined
a little book of Arithmetique written by one Barlaam, a Greek author a man
of great knowledge. In which book are by the author demonstrated many of
the self same proprieties and passions in number, which Euclide in this his
second book has demonstrated in magnitude, namely, the first ten propositions
as they follow in order. Which is undoubtedly great pleasure to consider, also
great increase and furniture of knowledge. Whose Propositio^s are set orderly
after the propositio^s of Euclide, every one of Barlaam correspo^dent to the
same of Euclide. And doubtless it is wonderful to see how these two contrary
kynds of quantity, quantity discrete or number, and quantity continual or
magnitude (which are the subjects or matter^ of Arithmitique and Geometry)
should have in them one and the same proprieties common to them both in very
many points, and affections, although not in all. For a line may in such sort
be divided, that what proportion the whole has to the greater part the same
shall the greater part have to the less. But that can not be in number. For a
number can not so be divided, that the whole number to the greater part
thereof, shall have that proportion which the greater part has to the less,
as Iordane very plainly proves in his book of Arithmetike, which thing
Campane also (as we shall afterward in the 9. book after the 15. proposition
see) proves. And as touching these ten first propositions of the second
book of Euclide, demonstrated by Barlaam in numbers, they are also
demo^strated of Campane after the 15. proposition of the 9. book, whose
demonstrations I mind by Gods help to set forth when I shall come to the
place. They are also demo^strated of Iordane that excellent learned author in
the first book of his Arithmetike. In the mean time I thought it not amiss
here to set forth the demonstrations of Barlaam, for that they give great light
to the second book of Euclide, besides the inestimable pleasure, which they
bring to the studious considerer. And now to declare the first Proposition by
numbers. I have put this example following.

Take two numbers the one undivided as 74. the other divided into what parts
and how many you list, as 37. divided into 20. 10. 5. and 2^ which altogether
make the whole 37. Then if you multiply the number undivided, namely, 74, into
all the parts of the number divided as into 20. 10. 5. and 2. you shall
produce 1480. 740. 370. 148. which added together make 2738: which self number
is also produced if you multiplye the two numbers first given the one into the
other. As you see in the example on the other side set.

^

So by the aid of this Proposition is gotten a compendious way of
multiplication by breaking of one of the numbers into his parts: which
oftentimes serves to great use in working^ chi^^ly in the rule of proportions.
The demonstration of which proposition follows in Barlaam. But first are put
of the author these principles following.

Barlaam.
Principles.
1. A number is s^yd to multiply an other number: when the number multiplied is
so oftentimes added to it self, as there be unities in the number, which
multiplieth: whereby is produced a certain number which the number multiplied
measures by the unities which are in the number which multipli^th.

2. And the number produced of that a multiplication is called a plain or
superficial number.

3. A square number is that which is produced of the multiplicatian of any
number into it self.

4. Every less number compared to a greater is said to be a part of the
greater, whether the less measure the greater, or measure it not.

5. Numbers, whom one and the self same number measures equally, that is, by
one and the self same number are equal the one to the other.

6. Numbers that are equemultipl^ces to one and the self same number, that is,
which contain one and the same number equally and alike, are equal the one to
the other.

The first Proposition.
Two numbers being given, if the one of them be divided into any numbers how
many soever: Barlaam.
the plain or superficial number which is produced of the multiplication of
the two numbers first given the one into the other, shall be equal to the
superficial numbers which are produced of the multiplication of the number not
divided into every part of the number divided.

Suppose that there be two numbers AB and C. And divide the number AB into
certain other numbers how many soever, as into AD, DE, and EB. Then I say that
the superficial number which is produced of the multiplication of the number C
into the number AB is equal to the superficial numbers which are produced of
the multiplication of the number C into the number AD, and of C into DE, and of
C into EB. For let F be the superficial number produced of the multiplication
of the number C into the number AB, and let GH be the superficial number
produced of the multiplication of C into AD: And let HI be produced of the
multiplication of C into DE: and finally of the multiplication of C into EB let
there be produced the number IK. Now forasmuch as AB multiplying the number C
produced the number F: therefore the number C measures the number F by the
unities which are in the number AB. And by the same reason may be proved that
the number C does also measure the number GH, by the unities which are in the
number AD, and that it does measure the number HI by the unities which are in
the number DF and finally that it measures the number IK by the unities which
are in the number EB. Wherefore the number C measures the whole number GK by
the unities which are in the number AB. But it before measured the number F by
the unities which are in the number AB, wherefore either of these numbers F and
GK is equemultiplex to the number C. But numbers which are equemultiplices to
one and the self same numbers are equal the one to the other (by the 6.
definition). Wherefore the number F is equal to the number GK. But the number F
is the superficial number produced of the multiplication of the number C into
the number AB: and the number GK is composed of the superficial numbers
produced of the multiplication of the number C not divided into every one of
the numbers AD, DE, and EB. If therefore there be two numbers given and the one
of them be divided etc. Which was required to be proved.

The 2. Theoreme. The 2. Proposition. If a right line be divided by chance,
the rectangles figures which are comprehended under the whole and every one of
the parts, are equal to the square which is made of the whole.
SVppose that the right line AB be by chaunse denided in the point C. Then I
say that the rectangle figure comprehended under AB and BC together with the
rectangle comprehended under AB and AC is equal unto the square made of AB.
Construction.
Describe (by the 46. of the first) upon AB a square ADEB: and (by the 31 of
the first) by the point C draw a line parallel unto either of these lines AD
and BE, and let the same be C^. Demonstration
Now is the parallelogramme AE equal to the parallelogrammes AF and CE, by the
first of this book. But AE is the square made of AB. And AF is the rectangle
parallelogramme comprehended under the lines BA and AC: for it is comprehended
under the lines DA and AC: but the line AD is equal unto the line AB. And
likewise the parrallelogramme CE is equal to that which is contained under the
lines AB and BC: for the line BE is equal unto the line AB. Wherefore that
which is contained under BA and AC together with that which is contained under
the lines AB and BC, is equal to the square made of the line AB. If therefore
a right line be divided by chance, the recta^gle figures which are
comprehended under the whole, and every one of the parts, are equal to the
square which is made of the whole: which was required to be demonstrated.

An other demonstration of Campane.
Suppose that the line AB be divided into the lines AC, CD, and DB. Then I say
that the square of the whole line AB, which let be AEBF, is equal to the
rectangle figures which are contained under the whole and every one of the
parts: for take the line K, which let be equal to the line A B. Now then by
the first proposition the rectangle figure contained under the lines AB and K,
is equal to the rectangle figures contained under the line K and all the parts
of the line AB. But that which is contained under the lines K and AB is equal
to the square of the line AB, and the rectangle figures contained under the
line K and all the parts of AB, are equal to the rectangle figures contained
under the line AB and all the parts of the line AB: for the lines AB and K are
equal: wherefore that is manifest which was required to be proved.

An example of this Proposition in numbers.
Take a number, as 11. and divide it into two parts, namely, 7. and 4: and
multiply 11. into 7, and then into 4. and there shall be produced 77. and 44:
both which numbers added together make 121. which is equal to the square
number produced of the multiplication of the number 11. into himself, as you
see in the example.

^

The demonstration whereof follows in Barlaam.

The second Proposition.
Barlaam.
If a number given be divided into two other numbers: the superficial numbers,
which are produced of the multiplication of the whole into either part, added
together, are equal to the square number of the whole number given.

Suppose that the number given be AB: and let it be divided into two other
numbers AC and CB. Then I say that the two superficial numbers, which are
produced of the multiplication of AB into AC, and of AB into BC, those two
superficial numbers (I say) being added together, shall be equal to the square
number produced of the multiplicatio^ of the number AB into it self. For let
the number AB multiplying it self produce the number D. Let the number AC also
multiplying the number AB produce the number OF: again let the number CB
multipliing the self same number AB produce the number FG. Now forasmuch as
the number AC multiplying the number AB produced the number OF: therefore the
number AB measures the number OF by the unities which are in AC. Again
forasmuch as the number CB multiplied the number AB and produced the number FG:
therefore the number AB measures the number FG by the unities which are in the
number CB. But the same number AB before measured the number OF by the unities
which are in the number AC. Wherefore the number AB measures the whole number
^G by the unities whcih are in AB. Farther forasmuch as the number AB
multiplying it self produced the number D: therefore the number AB measures
the number D by the unities which are in himself. Wherefore it measures either
of these numbers, namely, the number D, and the number EG, by the unities which
are in himself. Wherefore how multiplex the number D is to the number AB, so
multiplex is the number EG to the same number AB. But numbers which are
equemultiplices to one and the self same number^ are equal the one to the
other. Wherefore the number D is equal to the number EG. And the number D is
the square number made of the number AB, and the number EG is composed of the
two superficial numbers produced of AB into BC, and of BA into AC. Wherefore
the square number produced of the number AB is equal to the superficial
numbers, produced of the number AB into the number BC, and of AB into AC, added
together. If therefore a number be divided into two other numbers etc. which
was required to be proved.

The 3. Theoreme. The 3. Proposition. If a right line be divided by chance:
the rectangle figure comprehended under the whole and one of the parts, is
equal to the rectangle figu^e comprehended under the parts, and unto the
square which is made of the foresaid part.
SVppose that the right line given AB be divided by chance in the point C.
Then I say that the rectangle figure comprehended under the lines AB and BC is
equal unto the rectangle figure comprehended under the lines AC and CB, and
also unto the square which is made of the line BC. Construction.
Describe (by the 46. of the first) upon the line BC^ square CDEB: and (by the
second peticion) extend ED unto F. And by the point A draw (by the 31. of the
first) a line parallel unto either of these lines CD and BE, and let the same
be AF. Now the parallelograme AE is equal unto the parallelogrammes AD and CE.
Demonstration
And AE is the rectangle figure comprehended under the lines AB and BC. For it
is comprehended under the lines AB and BE, which line BE is equal unto the
line BC. And the parallelograme AD is equal to that which is contained under
the lines AC and CB: for the line DC is equal unto the line CB And DB is the
square which is made of the line CB. Wherefore the rectangle figure
comprehended under the lines AB and BC is equal to the rectangle figure
comprehended under the lines AC and CB and also unto the square which is made
of the line BC. If therefore a right line be divided by chance, the rectangle
figure comprehended under the whole and one of the parts, is equal to the
rectangle figure comprehended under the parts, and unto the square which is
made of the foresaid part: which was required to be proved.

An example of this Proposition in numbers.
Suppose a number, namely, 14. to be divided into two parts 8. and 6. The
whole number 14. multiplied into 8. one of his parts, produces 112: the
parts 8. and 6. multiplied the one into the other produce 48, which added to
64 (which is the square of 8. the former part of the number) amounts also to
112: which is equal to the former sum. As you see in the example.

^

The demonstration hereof follows in Barlaam.

The third proposition.
Barlaam.
If a number given be divided into two numbers: the superficial number which
is produced of the multiplication of the whole into one of the parts, is
equal to the superficial number which is produced of the parts the one into
the other, and to the square number produced of the foresaid part.

Suppose that the number given be AB, which let be divided into two numbers AC
and CB. Then I say that the superficial number which is produced of the
multiplication of the number AB into the number BC, is equal to the
superficial number which is produced of the multiplication of the number AC
into the number CB, and to the square number produced of the number CB. For let
the number AB multiplieng the number CB produce the number D. And let the
number AC multiplieng the number CB produce the number OF: and finally let the
number CB multiplieng himself produce the number FG. Now forasmuch as the
number AB multiplieng the (...) (...) was required to be proved.

The 4. Theoreme. The 4. Proposition. If a right line be divided by chance,
the square which is made of the whole line is equal to the squares which are
made of the parts, and unto that rectangle figure which is comprehended under
the parts twice.
SVppose that the right line AB be by chance divided in the point C. Then I
say that the square made of the line AB is equal unto ye squares which are
made of the lines AC and CB, and unto the rectangle figure contained under the
line^ AC and CB ^wise. Construction.
Describe (by ye ^^. of the first) upon the line AB a square ADEB: and draw a
line from B to D, and (by the 31. of the first) by the point C draw a line
parallel unto either of these lines AD and BE c^tting the diameter BD in the
point G, and let the same be CF. And (by the point G (by the self same) draw a
line parallel unto either of these lines AB and DE, and let the same be HK.
Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the line CF is a parallel unto the line AD, and upon them
falls a right line BD: therefore (by the 29. of the first) the outward angle
CGB is equal unto the inward and opposite angle ADB. But the angle ADB is (by
the 5. of the first) equal unto the angle ABD: for the side BA is equal unto
the side AD (by the definition of a square). Wherefore the angle CGB is equal
unto the angle GBC: wherefore (by the 6. of the first) the side BC is equal
unto the side CG. But CB is equal unto GK^ and CG is equal unto KB wherefore
GK is equal unto KB. Wherefore the figure CGKB consists of four equal
sides. I say also that it is a rectangle figure. For forasmuch as CG is a
parallel unto BK and upon the^ falls a right line CB, therefore (by ye 29. of
the 1.) the angles KBC, and GCB are equal unto two right angles. But the angle
KBC is a right angle, wherefore ye angle. BCG is also a right angle. Wherefore
(by the 34. of the first) the angles opposite unto them, namely, CGK, and GKB
are right angles. Wherefore CGKB is a rectangle figure. And it was before
proved that the sides are equal. Wherefore it is a square, and it is described
upon the line B ^. And by the same reason also HF is a square, and is described
upon the line HG, that is, upon the line AC. Wherefore the squares HF and CK
are made of the lines AC and CB. And forasmuch as the parallelograme AG is (by
the 43. of the first) equal unto the parallelogramme GE. And AG is that which
is contained under AC and CB, for CG is equal unto CB, wherefore GE is equal to
that which is contained under AC and CB. Wherefore AG and GE are equal unto
that which is comprehended under AC and CB twice. And the squares HF and CK are
made of the lines AC and CB. Wherefore these four rectangle figures HF, CK,
AG, and GE are equal unto the squares which are made of the lines AC and CB,
and to the rectangle figure which is comprehended under the lines AC and CB
twice. But the rectangle figures HF, CK, AG, and GE are the whole rectangle
figure ADEB which is the square made of the line AB. Wherefore the square which
is made of the line AB is equal to the squares which are made of the lines AC
and CB, and unto the rectangle figure which is comprehended under the lines AC
and CB ^wise. If therefore a right line be divided by chance, the square which
is made of the whole line, is equal to the squares which are made of the
parts, and unto the rectangle figure which is comprehended under the parts
^wise: which was required to be proved.

An other demonstration.
I say that the square of the line AB is equal unto the squares which are
made of the lines AC and CB, and unto the rectangle figure which is
comprehended under the lines AC and CB twice. For the self same description
abiding, forasmuch as the line AB is equal unto ye line AD, ye angle ABD is
(by the 5. of the first) equal unto the angle ADB. And forasmuch as the three
angles of every triangle are equal to two right angles (by the 32. of the
first)^ therefore ye three angles of the triangle ABD, namely, the angles ADB,
DBA, and BAD, are equal to two right angles. But the angle BAD is a right
angle, wherefore the angles remaining ABD, and ADB, are equal unto one right
angle: and they are equal ye one to the other, wherefore either of these angles
ABD, and ADB, is the half of a right angle. And the angle BCG is a right
angle, for it is equal unto the opposite angle at the point A (by the 29. of
the first). Wherefore the angle remaining CGB is the half of a right angle.
Wherefore the angle CGB is equal unto the angle CBG: wherefore also the side
BC is equal unto the side CG. But BC is equal unto GK, and CG is equal unto
BK. Wherefore the figure CK consists of equal sides: and in it is a right
angle CBK. Wherefore CK is a square, and is made of the line BC. And by the
same reason HF is a square, and is equal unto that square which is made of the
line AC. Wherefore CK and HF are squares, and are equal to those squares
which are made of the lines AC and CB. And forasmuch as AG is equal unto EG:
and AG is that which is contained under AC and CB, for GC is equal unto CB:
wherefore EG also is equal to that which is comprehended under AC and CB:
wherefore AG and EG are equal unto that rectangle figure which is comprehended
under AC, and CB twice. And CK, and HF are equal unto the squares which are
made of AC, and CB: wherefore CK, HF, AG, and GE are equal unto those squares
which are made of AC, and CB, and unto that rectangle figure which is
comprehended under AC and CB twice. But CK, HF, AG, and GE are the whole square
AE which is made of AB. Wherefore the square which is made of AB, is equal to
the squares which are made of AC and CB, and unto the rectangle figure which is
comprehended under AC and CB twice: which was required to be demonstrated.

Hereby it is manifest that the parallelogrames which consist about the
diameter of a square must needs be squares. A Corollary.


This proposition is of infinite use chiefly in surde numbers. By help of it
is made in the^ addition and substraction, also multiplicatio^ in Binomials and
residuals. And by help hereofalso is demoustrated that kind of equation,
which is, when there are three denominations in natural order, or equally
distant, and two of the greater denominations are equal to the third being
less On this proposition is grounded the extraction of square roots. And many
other things are also by it demonstrated.

An example of this Proposition in numbers.
Suppose a number namely, 17. to be divided into two parts 9. and 8. The whole
number 17. multiplied into himself, produces 289. The square numbers of 9.
and 8. are 81. and 64: the numbers produced of the multiplication of the parts
the one into the other twice are 72. and 72: which two numbers added to the
square numbers of 9. and 8. namely, to 81. and 64. make also 289. which is
equal to the square number of the whole number 17. As you see in the example.

^

The demonstration whereof follows in Barlaam.

The fourth Proposition.
Barlaam.
If a number given be divided into two numbers: the square number of the whole,
is equal to the square numbers of the parts, and to the superficial number
which is produced of the multiplication of the parts the one into the other
twice.

Suppose that the number given be AB: which let be divided into two numbers AC
and CB. Then I say that the square number of the whole number AB, is equal to
the squares of the parts, that is, to the squares of the numbers AC and CB,
and to the superficial number produced of the multiplication of the numbers AC
and CB the one into the other twice. Let the square number produced of the
multiplication of the whole number AB into himself be D. And let CA multiplied
into himself produce the number OF: And CB multiplied into it self let it
produce GH: and finally of the multiplicatio^ of the numbers AC and CB the one
into the other twice let there be produced either of these superficial numbers
FG and HK. Now forasmuch as the number AC multiplying it self produced the
number OF: therefore the number AC measures the number OF by the unities which
are in it self. And forasmuch as the number CB multiplied the number CA and
produced the number FG: therefore the number AC measures the number FG by the
unities which are in the number CB. But it before also measured the number OF
by the unities which are in it self. Wherefore the number AB multiplying the
number AC produces the number EG. And therefore the number EG is the
superficial number produced of the multiplication of the number BA into the
number AC. And by the same reason may we prove that the number GK is the
superficial number produced of the multiplication of the number AB into the
number BC. Farther the number D is the square of the number AB. But if a number
be divided into two numbers, the square of the whole number is equal to the
two superficial numbers which are produced of the multiplication of the whole
into either the parts (by the 2. Theoreme.) Wherefore the square number D is
equal to the superficial number EK. But the number EK is composed of the
squares of the numbers AC and CB, and of the superficial number which is
produced of the multiplication of the number AC and CB the one into the other
twice: and the number D is the square of the whole number AB. Wherefore the
square number produced of the multiplication of the number AB into himself, is
equal to the square numbers of the parts, that is, to the square numbers of
the numbers AC and CB, and to the superficial number produced of the
multiplication of the numbers AC and CB, the one into the other twice. If
therefore a number given be divided into two numbers etc. Which was required to
be proved.

The 5. Theoreme. The 5. Proposition. If a right line be divided into two
equal parts, and into two unequal parts: the rectangle figures comprehended
under the unequal part^^ of the whole, together with the square of that which
is between the sectio^s, is equal to the square which is made of the half.
SVppose that the right line AB be divided into two equal parts in the point
C, and into two unequal parts in the point D. Then I say that the rectangle
figure comprehended under AD and DB together with the square which is made of
CD, is equal to the square which is made of CB. Construction.
Describe (by the 46. of the first) upon CB a square, and let the same be
CEFB. And (by the first peticion) draw a line from E to B. And by ye point D
draw (by the 3^. of the first) a line parallel unto each of these lines CE and
BF cutting the diameter BE in the point H, and let ye same be DG. And again
(by the self same) by the point H draw a line parallel unto each of these
lines AB and OF, and let the same be KO: and let KO be equal unto AB. And
again (by the self same) by the point A draw a line parallel unto either of
these lines CL and BO, Demonstration
and let the same be AK. And forasmuch as (by the 43. of the first) the
supplement CH is equal to the suppleme^t HF^ put the figure DO common unto
them both. Wherefore the whole figure CO is equal to the whole figure DF. But
the figure CO is equal unto the figure AL, for ye line AC is equal unto the
line CB. Wherefore the figure AL also is equal unto the figure DF. Put the
figure CH common unto them both. Wherefore the whole figure AH is equal unto
the figures DL and DF. But AH is equal to that which is contained under the
lines AD and DB, for DH is equal unto DB. And the figures FD and DL are the
Gnomon MNX. Wherefore ye Gnomon MNX is equal to that which is contained under
AD and DB. Put the figure LG common unto them both, which is equal to the
square which is made of CD. Wherefore the Gnomo^ MNX and the figure LG are
equal to the rectangle figure comprehended under AD and DB and unto the square
which is made of CD. But the Gnomon MNX, and the figure LG are the whole square
CEFB, which is made of BC. Wherefore the rectangle figure comprehended under
AD and DB, together with the square which is made of CD, is equal to the
square which is made of CB. If therefore a right line be divided into two
equal parts, and into two unequal parts, the rectangle figure comprehended
under the unequal parts of the whole, together with the square of that which
is between the sections, is equal to the square which is made of the half:
which was required to be proved.

This Proposition also is of great use in Algebra. By it is demonstrated that
equation wherein the greatest and least karectes or numbers are equal to the
middle.

An example of this proposition in numbers.
Take any number as 20: and divide it into two equal parts 10. and 10. and
then into two unequal parts as 13. and 7. And take the difference of the
half to one of the unequal parts which is 3. And multiply the unequal
parts, that is, 13 and 7. the one into the other, which make 91. take also the
square of 3. which is 9. and add it to the foresaid number 91: and so shall
there be made 100. Then multiply the half of the whole number into himself,
that is, take the square of 10. which is 100. which is equal to the number
before produced of the multiplication of the unequal parts the one into the
other, and of the difference into it self which is also 100. As you se in the
example. ^

The demonstration whereof follows in Barlaam.

The fifth proposition.
If an even number be divided into two equal parts, and again also into two
unequal parts: the superfic^all number which is produced of the
multiplication of the unequal parts the one into the other, together with the
square of the number set between the parts, is equal to the square of half the
number.

Suppose that AB be an even number: which let be divided into two equal
numbers AC and CB, and into two unequal numbers AD and DB. Then I say, that
the square number which is produced of the multiplication of the half number
CB into it self, is equal to the superficial number produced of the
multiplication of the unequal numbers AD and DB the one into the other, and to
the square number produced of the number CD which is set between the said
unequal parts. Let the square number produced of the multiplication of the
half number CB into it self be E. And let the superficial number produced of
the multiplication of the unequal numbers AD and DB the one into the other, be
the number FG: and let the square of the number DC which is set between the
parts be GH. Now forasmuch as the number BC is divided into the numbers BD and
DC, therefore the square of the number BC, that is, the number E, is equal to
the squares of the numbers BD and DC, and to the superficial number which is
composed of the multiplication of the numbers BD and DC the one into the other
twice, (by the 4. proposition of this book) Let the square of the number BD be
the number KL: and let NX be the square of the number DC: and finally of the
multiplication of the numbers BD and DC the one into the other twi^e, let be
produced either of these numbers LM and MN. Wherefore the whole number KX is
equal to the number E^ And forasmuch as the number BD multiplying it self
produced the number KL, therefore it measures it by the unities which are in it
self. More over forasmuch as the number CD multiplying the number BD produced
the number LM, therefore also DB measures LM by the unities which are in the
number CD: but it before measured the number KL by the unities which are in it
self. Wherefore the number DB measures the whole number KM by the unities
which are in CB. But the number CB is equal to the number CA. Wherefore the
number DB measures the number KM by the unities which are in CA. Again
forasmuch as the number CD multipli^ng the number DB produced the number MN:
therefore the number DB measures the number MN by the unities which are in the
number CD: but it before measured the number KM by the unities which are in the
number AC. Wherefore the number BD measures the whole number KN by the unities
which are in the number AD. Wherefore the number FG (...) equal to the number
KN. For numbers which are equemultiplices to one and the self same number, are
equal the one to the other. But the number GH is equal to the number NX: for
either of them is supposed to be the squ^re of the number CD. Wherefore the
whole number KX is equal to the whole number FH. But the number KX is equal
to the number E^ Wherefore also the number FH is equal to the number E. And
the number FH is the superficial number produced of the multiplication of the
numbers AD and DB the one into the other together with the square of the number
DC. And the number E is the square of the number CB. Wherefore the superficial
number produced of the multiplication of the unequal parts AD and DB the one
into the other, together with the square of the number DC which is set between
those unequal parts, is equal to the square of the number CB, which is the
half of the whole number AB. If therefore an even number be divided into two
equal parts, etc. which was required to be proved.

The 6. Theoreme. The 6. Proposition. If a right line be divided into two equal
parts, and if unto it be added an other right line directly, the rectangle
figure contained under the whole line with that which is added, and the line
which is addedt, ogether with the square which is made of the half, is equal
to the square which is made of the half line and of that which is added as of
one line.
SVppose that the right line AB be divided into two equal parts in ye point
C: and let there added unto it an other right line DB directly, that is to say,
which being joined unto AB make both one right line AD. Then I say, that the
rectangle figure comprehended under AD and DB, together with the square which
is made of BC is equal to the square which, is made of DC. Describe (by the
46. of the 1.) upon CD a square CEFD, and (by the first peticion) draw a line
from D to E: and (by the 31. of the first) by ye point B draw a line parallel
unto either of these lines EC and DF, cutting the diameter DE in the point H,
and let the same be BG, and (by the self same) by ye point H draw to either of
these lines AD and OF a parallel line KM: and moreover by the point A draw a
line parallel to either of these lines CL and DM: and let the same be AK. And
forasmuch as AC is equal unto CB, therefore (by the 36. of the first) the
figure AL is equal unto the figure CHAPTER But (by the 43. of the first) CH is
equal vnthe figure HF, wherefore AL is equal unto HF. Put the figure CM common
to them both, wherefore the whole line AM is equal unto the gnomon NXO. But AM
is that which is contained under AD and DB: for DM is equal unto DB: wherefore
the gnomon NXO, is equal unto the rectangle figure contained under AD and DB.
Put the figure LG common to them both, which is equal to the square which is
made of CB. Wherefore the rectangle figure which is contained under AD and DB
together with the square which is made of CB is equal to the gnomon NXO, and
unto LG. But the gnomon NXO and LG are the whole square CEFD which is made of
CD. Wherefore the rectangle figure contained under AD and DB together with the
square which is made of CB is equal to the square which is made of CD. If
therefore a right line be divided into two equal parts, and unto it be added
an other right line directly: the rectangle figure contained under the whole
line with that which is added, and the line which is added, together with the
square which is made of the half, is equal to the square which is made of the
half line and of that which is added as of one line: which was required to be
demonstrated.

By this Proposition (besides many other uses) is in Algebra demonstrated that
equation wherein the two less numbers be equal to the number of the greatest
denomination.

An example of this proposition in numbers.
Take any even number as 18. and add unto it any other number as 3. which make
in all 21. And multiply 21. into the number added, namely, into 3. which makes
63. Take also the half of the whole even number, that is, of 18. which is 9.
And multiply 9. into it self which makes 81. which add unto 63. (the number
produced of the whole even number, and the number added into the number added)
and you shall make 144. Then add 9. the half of the whole even number unto 3.
the number added which makes 12. And multiply 12. into it self, that is, take
the square of 12. which is 144. which is equal to the number composed of the
multiplication of the whole number and the number added into the number added,
and of the square of the number added, which is also 144. As you see in the
example.

^

The demonstration whereof follows in Barlaam.

The sixth Proposition.
If an even number be divided into two equal numbers, and unto it be added
some other number^ the superficial number which is made of the multiplication
of the number composed of the whole number and the number added, into the
number added, together with the square of the half number, is equal to the
square of the number composed of the half and the number added.

Suppose that AB be an even number, and let it be divided into two equal
numbers AC and CB: and unto it let there be added an other number BD. Then I
say that the super^iciall number produced of the multiplication of the number
AD into the number DB is equal to the square of the number CD. For let the
square number of the number CD^ be the number E, and let the superficial number
produced of the multiplication of the number AD into the number DB be the
number FG: and finally let the square number of CB be the number GH. And
forasmuch as the square of the number CD is (by the 4. proposition) equal to
the squares of the numbers DB and BC together with the superficial number
which is produced of the multiplication of the numbers DB and BC the one into
the other twice. Let the square of the number BD be the number KL: and let the
superficial numbers produced of the multiplication o^ the numbers DB and BC
the one into the other twice be either of these number^ LM and MN^ and finally
let the square of the number BC be the number NX. Wherefore the whole number KX
shall be equal to the square of the number CD. But the square of the number CD
is ^he ^^mber E. Whe^fore the number KX is equal to the number E. And
forasmuch as the number BD multiplieng it self produced the number KL:
therefore the number BD measures the number KL, by the unities which are in it
self, but it also measures the number LM by the unities which are in the
number CB. Wherefore the number DB measures the whole number KM by the unities
which are in the number CD. The number DB also measures the number MN by the
unities which are in the number CB: and the number CB is equal to the number
CA by supposition. Wherefore the number DB measures the whole number KN by the
unities which are in the number AD. But the number DB does also measure the
number FG by the unities which are in the number AD: for by supposition the
number FG is the superficial number produced of the multipli^ation of the
numbers AD and DB the one into the other. Wherefore the number FG is equal to
the number KN. But the number HG is equal to the number NX: for either of them
is the square number of the number CB. Wherefore the whole number FH is equal
to the number KX: and the number KX is proved to be equal to the number E.
Wherefore the number FH shall also be equal to the number E. And the number FH
is the superficial number produced of the multipli^ation of the numbers AD and
DB the one into the other, together with the square of the number CB: and the
number E is the square of the number CD. Wher^ore the superficial number
produced of the mul^^plication of the numbers AD and DB the one into the other,
together with the square of the number CB; is equal to the square of the
number CD. If therefore an even number etc.

The 7. Theoreme. The 7. Proposition. If a right line be divided by chance,
the square which is made of the whole together with the square which is made
of one of the parts, is equal to the rectangle figure which is contained
under the whole and the said part twice, and to the square which is made of
the other part.
SVppose that the right line AB be divided by chance in the point C. Then I
say that the square which is made of AB, together with the square which is made
of BC, is equal unto the rectangle figure which is contained under the lines AB
and BC twice, and unto the square which is made of AC. Describe (by the 46. of
the first) upon AB a square ADEB, and make complete the figure. And forasmuch
as (by the 43. of the first) the ^igure AG is equal unto the figure GE. Put
the figure CF common to the^ both: wherefore the whole figure AF is equal to
the whole figure CE. Wherefore the figures AF and CE are double to the figure
AF. But the figures AF and CE are the gnomon KLM, and the square CF: wherefore
the gnomon KLM, and the square CF is double to the figure AF. But the double to
AF is that which is contained under AB and BC twice, for BF is equal unto BC.
Wherefore the gnomon KLM and the square CF is equal unto the rectangle figure
contained under AB and BC twice. Put the figure DG common unto them both, which
is the square made of AC. Wherefore the gnomon KLM and the squares BG and GD
are equal unto the rectangle figure which is contained under AB and BC twice,
and unto the square which is made of AC. But the gnomon KLM, and the squares
BG, and DG are ye whole square BADE, and ye part or square CF, which squares
are made of the lines AB and of BC, therefore ye squares which are made of AB
and BC are equal unto the rectangle figure which is contained under AB and BC
twice, and also unto the square of AC. If therefore a right line be divided by
chance: the square which is made of the whole together with the square which
is made of one of the parts, is equal to the rectangle figure which is
contained under the whole and the said part twice, and to the square which is
made of the other part: which was required to be demonstrated.

Flussates adds unto this Proposition this Corollary.
The squares of two unequal lines do exceed the rectangle figures contained
under the said lines by the square of the excess whereby the greater line
excedeth the less.

For if the line AB be the greater, and the line BC the less, it is manifest
that the squares of AB and BC are equal to the rectangle figure contained
under the lines AB and BC twice, and moreover to the square of the line AC,
whereby the line AB excedeth the line BC.

By this proposition most wonderfully was found out the extraction of root
squares in irrational numbers, beside many other strange things.

An example of this proposition in numbers.
Take any number as 13. and divide it into two parts as into 4. and 9. Take
the square of 13. which is 169. take also the square of 4. which is 16. and
add these two squares together which make 185. Then multiply the whole number
13. into 4. the foresaid part twice, and you shall produce 52. and 52^ take
also the square of the other part, that is, of 9. which is 81. And add it to
the productes of 13. into 4. twice, that is, unto 52. and 52. and those three
numbers added together shall make 185. which is equal to the number composed
of the squares of the whole and of one of the parts, which is also 185. As you
see in the example.

^

The demonstration whereof follows in Barlaam.

The seventh proposition.
If a number be divided into two numbers: the square of the whole number
together with the square of one of the parts, is equal to the superficial
number produced of the multiplication of the whole number into the foresaid
part twice, together with the square of the other part.

Suppose that the number AB be divided into the numbers AC and CB. Then I say
that the square numbers of the numbers BA and AC are equal to the superficial
number produced of the multiplicatio^ of the number BA into the number AC
twice, together with the square o^ the number BC. For forasmuch as (by the 4.
of this book) the square of the number AB is equal to the squares of the
numbers BC and CA, and to the superficial number produced of the
multiplication of the numbers BC and CA the one into the other twice: add the
square of the number AC common to them both. Wherefore the square of the number
AB together with the square of the number AC is equal to two squares of the
number AC and to one square of the number CB, and also to the superficial
number produced of the multiplication of the numbers BC and CA the one into the
other twice. And forasmuch as the superficial number produced of the
multiplication of the numbers BA and CA the one into the other once, is equal
to the superficial number produced of the multiplication of BC into CA once,
and to the square of the number CA (by the third of this book)^ therefore the
number produced of the multiplication of BA into AC twice is equal to the
number produced of the multiplication of BC into CA twice, and also to two
squares of the number CA. Add the square number of BC common to them both.
Wherefore two squares of the number AC and one square of the number CB together
with the superficial number produced of the multiplication of BC into CA twice
are equal to the superficial number produced of the multiplication of the
number BA into the number AC twice together with the square of the number CB.
Wherefore the square of the number AB together with the square of the number AC
is equal to the super^icial number produced of the multiplication of the number
BA into the number AC twice, together with the square of the number CB. If
therefore a number be divided into two numbers etc. which was required to be
demonstrated.

^

The 8. Theoreme. The 8. Proposition. If a right line be divided by chance,
the rectangle figure comprehended under the whole and one of the parts four
times, together with the square which is made of the other part, is equal to
the square which is made of the whole and the foresaid part as of one line.
SVppose that there be a certain right line AB, and let it be divided by
chance in the point C. Then I say that the rectangle figure comprehended under
AB and BC four times, together with the square which is made of AC is equal
to the square made of AB and BC as of one line. Extend the line AB (by the
second peticion). And (by the third of the first) unto CB put an equal line
BD. And (by the 46. of the first) describe upon AD a square AEFD. And describe
a double figure. And forasmuch as CB is equal unto BD, but CB is equal unto
GK (by the 34. of the first) and likewise BD is equal unto KN, wherefore GK
also is equal unto KN: and by the same reason also PR, is equal unto TO. And
forasmuch as BC is equal unto BD, and GK unto KN, therefore (by the 36. of the
first) the figure CK is equal unto the figure KD, and the figure GR is equal
unto the figure RN. But (by ye 43. of ye 1.) the figure CK is equal unto the
figure RN: for they are the supplementes of the parallelograme CO. Wherefore
the figure KD also is equal unto the figure NR. Wherefore these figures DK,
CK, GR, RN, are equal the one to the other. Wherefore those four are
quadruple to the figure CK. Again forasmuch as CB is equal unto BD, but BD is
equal unto BK, that is, unto CG. And CB is equal unto GK that is unto GP:
therefore CG is equal unto GP. And forasmuch as CG is equal unto GP, and PR is
equal unto TO, therefore the figure AG is equal unto the figure MP, and the
figure PL is equal unto the figure RF. But the figure MP is (by the 43. of the
first) equal unto the figure PL, for they are the supplementes of the
parallelogramme ML: wherefore the figure also AG is equal unto the figure RF.
Wherefore these four figures AG, MP, PL, and RF are equal the one to the
other: wherefore those four are quadruple to the figure AG. And it is proved,
that these four figures CK, KDGR, RN, are quadruple to the figure CK.
Wherefore the eight figures which contain the gnomon STV, are quadruple to the
figure AK. And forasmuch as the figure AK, is that which is contained under the
lines AB and BD, for the line BK is equal unto the line BD: therefore that
which is contained under the lines AB and BD four times is quadruple unto the
figure AK. And it is proved that the gnomon STV is quadruple to AK^ Wherefore
that which is contained under the lines AB and BD four times is equal unto
the gnomo^ STV. Put the figure XH which is equal to the square made of AC
common unto them both. Wherefore the rectangle figure comprehended under the
lines AB and BD four times together with the square which is made of the line
AC, is equal to the gnomon STV, and unto the figure XH. But the gnomon STV:
and the figure XH are the whole square AEFD, which is made of AD: wherefore that
which is contained under the lines AB and BD four times together with the
square which is made of AC, is equal to the square which is made of AD. But BD
is equal unto BC. Wherefore the rectangle figure contained four times under
AB and BC together with the square which is made of AC, is equal unto the
square which is made of AD, that is, unto that which is made of AB and BC as
of ou^ line. If therefore a right line be divided by chance, the rectangle
figure comprehended under the whole and one of the parts four times, together
with the square which is made on the other part, is equal to the square which
is made of the whole and the foresaid part, as of one line, which was required
to be demonstrated.

An example of this Proposition in numbers.
Take any number as 17. and divide it into two parts, as into 6. and 11. And
multiply 17. into 6. namely one of the parts four times, and (...) produce
102. 102. 102. and 102. Take also the square of 11. the other part, which is
121: and add it unto the four numbers produced of the whole 17. into the part
6. four times, and you shall make 529. Then add the whole number 17. to the
foresaid part 6. which make 23. and take the square of 23. which is 529. which
is equal to the number composed of the whole into the said part four times,
and of the square of the other part, which number composed is also 529. As you
see in the example.

^

The demonstration whereof follows in Barlaam.

The eight proposition.
If a number be divided into two numbers, the superficial number produced of
the multiplication of the whole into one of the parts four times, together
with the square of the other part, is equal to the square of the number
composed of the whole number and the foresaid part.

Suppose that the number AB be divided into two numbers AC and CB. Then I say
that the superficial number produced of the multiplication of the number AB in
to the number CB four times together with the square of the number AC, is
equal to the square of the number composed of the numbers AB and CB. For unto
the number BC let the number BD be equal. Now forasmuch as the square of the
number AD is equal to the squares of the numbers AB and BD, and to the
superficial number produced of the multiplication of the numbers AB and BD the
one into the other twice (by the 4. of this book) And the number BD is equal
to the number BC: therefore the square of the number AD is equal to the
squares of the numbers AB and BC, and to the superficial number produced of
the multiplication of the numbers AB and BC the one into the other twice. But
the squares of the numbers AB and BC are equal unto the superficial number
produced of the multiplication of the numbers AB and BC the one into the other
twice, and to the square of AC (by the former proposition) Wherefore the square
of the number AD is equal to the superficial number produced of the
multiplication of the numbers AB and BC the one into the other four times, and
to the square of the number AC. But the square of the number AD is the square
of the number composed of the numbers AB and BC: for the number BD is equal to
the number BC. Wherefore the square of the number composed of the numbers AB and
BC is equal to the superficial number produced of the multiplication of the
numbers AB and BC the one into the other four times, and to the square of the
number AC. If therefore a number be divided into two numbers, etc.

^

The 9. Theoreme. The 9. Proposition. If a right line be divided into two
equal parts, and into two unequal parts, the squares which are made of the
unequal parts of the whole, are double to the squares, which are made of the
half line, and of that line which is between the sections.
SVppose that a certain right line AB be divided into two equal parts in the
point C, and into two unequal parts in the point D. Then I say that the
squares which are made of the lines AD and DB, are double to the squares which
are made of the lines AC and CD. Constr^ction.
For (by the 11. of the first) erect from ye point C to the right line AB a
perpendiculer line CE. And let CE (by the 3. of the first) be put equal unto
either of these lines AC and CB: and (by the first peticio^) draw lines from A
to E, and from E to B. And (by the 31. of the first) by the point D draw unto
the line EC a parallel line, and let the same be DF: and (by the self same) by
the point F draw unto AB a line parallel, and let the same be FG. And (by the
first peticion) draw a line from A to F. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as AC is equal unto CE, therefore (by the 5. of the first) the
angle EAC is equal unto the angle CEA. And forasmuch as the angle at the point
C is a right angle: therefore the angles remaining EAC, and AEC, are equal unto
one right angle, wherefore each of these angles EAC and AEC is the half of a
right angle. And by the same reason also each of these angles EBC and CEB is
the half of a rig^t angle. Wherefore the whole angle AEB is a right angle. And
forasmuch as the angle GEF is the half of a right angle, but EGF is a right
angle. For (by the 29 of the first) it is equal unto the inward and opposite
angle, that is, unto ECB: wherefore the angle remaining EFG is the half of a
right angle. Wherefore (by the 6. common sentence) the angle GEF is equal
unto the angle EFG. Wherefore also (by the 6. of the first) the side EG is
equal unto the side FG. Again ^orasmuch as the angle at the point B is the
half of a right angle, but the angle FDB is a right angle, for it also (by the
29. of the first) is equal unto the inward and opposite angle ECB. Wherefore
the angle remaining BFD is the half of a right angle. Wherefore the angle at
the point B is equal unto the angle DFB. Wherefore (by the 6. of the first)
the side DF is equal unto the side DB. And forasmuch as AC is equal unto CE,
therefore the square which is made of AC is equal unto the square which is made
of CE. Wherefore the squares which are made of CA and CE are double to the
square which is made of AC. But (by the 47. of the first) the square which is
made of EA is equal to the squares which are made of AC and CE (For the angle
ACE is a right angle) wherefore the square of AE is double to the square of AC.
Again forasmuch as EG, is equal unto GF, the square therefore which is made of
EG is equal to the square which is made of GF. Wherefore the squares which are
made of GE and GF are double to the square which is made of GF. But (by the 47.
of the first) the square which is made of OF is equal to the squares which are
made of EG and GF. Wherefore the square which is made of OF is double to the
square which is made of GF. But GF is equal unto CD. Wherefore the square
which is made of OF is double to the square which is made of CD. And the square
which is made of AE is double to the square which is made of AC. Wherefore
the squares which are made of AE and OF are double to ye squares which are made
of AC and CD. But (by the 47. of the first) the square which is made of AF is
equal to the squares which are made of AE and OF (For ye angle AEF is a right
angle). Wherefore the square which is made of AF is double to the squares which
are made of AC and CD. But (by the 47. of the first) ye squares which are made
of AD and DF are equal to ye square which is made of AF. For ye angle ot ye
point D is a right angle. Wherefore the squares which are made of AD and DF are
double to ye squares which are made of AC and CD. But DF is equal unto DB.
Wherefore the squares which are made of AD and DB, are double to the squares
which are made of AC and CD. If therefore a right line be divided into two
equal parts and into two unequal parts, the squares which are made of the
unequal parts of the whole, are double to the squares which are made of the
half line, and of that line which is between the sections: which was required
to be proved.

An example of this proposition in numbers.
Take any even number as 12. And divide it first equally as into 6. and 6. and
then unequally as into 8. and 4. And take the difference of the half to one of
the unequal parts which is 2. And take the square numbers of the unequal
parts 8, and 4, which are 6^^ and 16: and add them together, which make 80.
Then take the squares of the half 6. and of the difference 2: which are 36,
and 4: which added together make 40. Unto which number, the number composed of
the squares of the unequal parts, which i^ 80, i^ double. As you see in the
example.

^

The demonstration whereof follows in Barlaam.

The ninth Proposition.
If a number be divided into two equal numbers, and again be divided into two
inequall parts: the square numbers of the unequal numbers, are double to the
square which is made of the multiplication of the half number into it self,
together with the square which is made of the number set between them.

For let the number AB being an even number be divided into two equal numbers
AC and CB: and into two unequal numbers AD and DB. Then I say that the square
numbers of AD and DB, are double to the squares which are made of the
multiplication of the numbers AC and CD into themselves. For forasmuch as the
number AB is an even number, and is divided also into two equal numbers AC and
CB, and afterward into two unequal numbers AD and DB: therefore the superficial
number produced of the multiplicatio^ of the numbers AD and DB, the one into the
other, together with the square of the number DC, is equal to the square of the
number AC (by the fifth proposition) Wherefore the superficial number produced
of the multiplication of the numbers AD and DB the one into the other twice,
together with two squares of the number CD, is double to the square of the
number AC. Forasmuch as also the number AB is divided into two equal numbers AC
and CB, therefore the square number of AB is quadruple to the square number
produced of the multiplication of the number AC into it self (by the 4.
proposition). Moreover forasmuch as the superficial number produced of the
multiplication of the numbers AD and DB the one into the other twice together,
with two squares of the number DC, is double to the square number of CA^ and
forasmuch as there are two numbers, of which the one is quadruple to one and
the self same number, and the other is double to the same number: therefore
that number which is quadruple shall be double to that number which is
double. Wherefore the square of the number AB is double to the number produced
of the multiplicatio^ of the numbers AD and DB the one into the other twice
together with the two squares of the number DC. Wherefore the number which is
produced of the multiplication of the numbers AD and DB the one into the other
twice, is less the^ half of the square of the number AB by the two squares of
the numbers DC. And forasmuch as the number produced of the multiplication of
the numbers AD and DB the one into the other twice, together with the number
composed of the squares of the numbers AD and DB is (by the 4. proposition)
equal to the square of the number AB^ therefore the number composed of the
squares of the numbers AD and DB is greater then the half of the square number
of AB, by the two squares of the number DC. And the square of the number AB is
quadruple to the square of the number AC. Wherefore the number composed of the
squares of the numbers AD and DB is greater then the double of the square of
the number AC by two squares of the number DC. Wherefore the said number is
double to the squares of the numbers AC and CD. If therefore a number be
divided etc. which was required to be demonstrated.

^

The 10. Theoreme. The 10. Proposition. If a right line be divided into two
equal parts, and unto it be added an other right line directly: the square
which is made of the whole and that which is added as of one line, together
with the square which is made of the line which is added, these two squares
(I say) are double to these squares, namely, to the square which is made of the
half line, and to the square which is made of the other half line and that
which is added, as of one line.
SVppose that a certain right line AB be divided into two equal parts in the
point C. And unto it let there be added an other right line directly, namely,
BD. The^ I say, that the squares which are made of the lines AD and DB are
double to the squares which are made of the lines AC and CD. Construction.
Raise up (by the 11. of the first) from the point C unto the right line ACD a
perpendiculer line, and let the same be CE. And let CE (by the 3. of the first)
be made equal unto either of these lines AC and CB. And (by the first
petition) draw right lines from E to A, and from E to B. And (by the 31. of the
first) by the point E, draw a line parallel unto CD, and let the same be OF.
And (by ye self same) by the point D draw a line parallel unto CE and let the
same be DF. And forasmuch as upon these parallel lines CE and DF lights a
certain right line OF, therefore (by the 29. of the first) the angles CEF and
EFD are equal unto two right angles. Wherefore the angles FEB, and EFD are
less then two right angles. But lines produced from angles less then two
right angles (by the fifth peticion) at the length meet together. Wherefore
the lines EB and FD being produced on that side that the line BD is, will at
the length meet together. Produce them and let them meet together in the
point G. And (by the first peticion) draw a line from A to G. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the line AC is equal unto the line CE, the angle also AEC is
(by the 5. of the first) equal unto the angle EAC. And the angle at ye point C
is a right angle. Wherefore each of these angles EAC and and AEC is the half
of a right angle. And by the same reason each of these angles CEB, and EBC is
the half of a right angle: Wherefore the angle AEB is a right angle. And
forasmuch as the angle EBC is the half of a right angle, therefore (by the 15.
of the first) the angle DBC is the half of a right angle. But ye angle BD^ is a
right angle (for it is equal unto the angle DCE, for they are alternate angles)
Wherefore the angle remaining DGB is the half of a right angle. Wherefore (by
the 6 common sentence of the first) the angle DGB is equal to the angle DBG.
Wherefore (by the 6. of the first) the side BD is equal unto the side GD.
Again forasmuch as the angle EGF is the half of a right angle: and the angle
at the point F is a right angle: for (by the 34. of the first) it is equal
unto the opposite angle ECD. Wherefore the angle remaining FEG is the half of
a right angle. Wherefore the angle EGF is equal to the angle FEG. Wherefore
(by the 6. of the first the side, FE is equal unto the side FG. And forasmuch
as EC is equal unto CA, the square also which is made of EC is equal to the
square which is made of CA. Wherefore the squares which are made of CE and CA
are double to the square which is made of AC. But the square which is made of
EA is (by the 47. of the first) equal unto the squares which are made of EC
and CA. Wherefore the square which is made of EA is double to the square which
is made of AC^ Again forasmuch as GF is equal unto OF, the square also which
is made of GF is equal to the square which is made of FE. Wherefore the
squares which are made of GF and OF are double to the square which is made of
OF. But (by the 47. of the first) the square which is made of EG is equal to
the squares which are made of GF and OF. Wherefore the square which is made of
EG is double to the square which is made of OF. But OF is equal unto CD,
wherefore ye square which is made of EG is double to the square which is made of
CD. And it is proved the square which is made of EA is double to the square
which is made of AC. Wherefore the squares which are made of AE and EG are
double to the squares which are made of AC and CD. But (by the 47. of ths
first) the square which is made of AG is equal to the squares which are made
of AE and EG. Wherefore the square which is made of AG is double to the
squares which are made of AC and CD. But unto the square which is made of AG
are equal the squares which are made of AD and DG. Wherefore the squares which
are made of AD and DG are double to the squares which are made of AC and DC.
But DG is equal unto DB. Wherefore the squares which are made of AD and DB are
double to the squares which are made of AC and DC. If therefore a right line be
divided into two equal parts, and unto it be added an other line directly,
the square which is made of the whole and that which is added, as of one line,
together with the square which is made of the line which is added, these two
squares (I say) are double to these squares, namely, to the square which is
made of the half line, and to the square which is made of the other half line
and that which is added, as of one line: which was required to be proved.

An other demonstration after Pelitarius.
Suppose that the line AB be divided into two equal parts in the point C.
And unto it let there be added an other right line directly, namely, BD. Then I
say that the square of AD together with the square of BD is double to the
squares of AC and CD.

Upon the whole line AD describe a square ADEF. And upon the half line AC
describe the square ACGH. And produce the sides GH and CH till they cut the
sides OF and DF, whereby shall be described the figure HLKF, which shall be the
square of the line CD: as (by the Corollary of the 4. of this book, and by the
34. Proposition of the 1.) it is manifest if we draw the diameter CD. For the
line KF is equal to the line CD. And making also the lines HM and HN equal to
either of these lines AC and CB, draw the lines MO and NP cutting the one the
other right angled wise in the point Q. Either of which lines let cut the sides
of the square AD: OF in the points O and P. Now it needs not to prove that
the figure HQ is the square of the line AC, seeing that it is the square of the
line CB: as the figure QF is the square of the line BD: neither also needs it
to prove that the parallelograme HP is equal to either of the supplementes EH
and HD: nor that the supplementes NO and QL are equal. For all this is
manifest eue^ by the form of the figure, for that all the angles about the
diameter are half right angles, and the sides are equal. Wherefore if we
diligently mark of what parts the square HF which is the square of CD, is
composed, we may thus reason. Forasmuch as the whole square ED is composed of
the two squares AH and HF and of the two supplementes EH and HD, we must prove
that these supplementes with the square QF (which is the square of the line BD)
are equal to the two squares AH and HF. For then shall we prove that these two
squares AH and HF taken twice are equal to the whole square DE together with
the square of QF, which thing we took first in hand to prove. And thus do I
prove it.

The Supplement EH is equal to the parallelograme HP. And the square AH
together with the lesser suppleme^t, NO, is equal to the other suppleme^t HD
(by the first common sentence so oftentimes repeted as is need) wherefore the
two supplementes EH and HD are equal to the square AH and to the Gnomon
KHLPQO. If therefore unto either of them be added the square QF: the two
supplementes EH and HD together with the square of QF shall be equal to the
square AH, and to the Gnomon KHLPQO and to the square QF. But these three
figures do make the two squares AH and HF. Wherefore the two supplementes EH and
HD together with the square QF are equal to the two squares AH and HF, which
was the second thing to be proved. Wherefore the two squares AH and HF being
taken twice are equal to the whole square DE together with the square of QF.
Wherefore the square DE together with the square QF is double to the squares AH
and HF: which was required to be proved.

An example of this Proposition in numbers.
Take any even number as 18: and take the half of it which is 9. and unto 18.
the whole, add any other number as 3. which makes 21. Take the square number
of 21. (the whole number and the number added) which makes 441. Take also the
square of 3 (the number added) which is 9. which two squares added together
make 450. Then add the half number 9. to the number added 3. which makes 12.
And take the square of 9. the half number and of 12. the half number and the
number added which squares are 81. and 144. and which two squares also added
together make 225: unto which sum the foresaid number 450. is double. As you
see in the example.

^

The demonstration whereof follows in Barlaam.

The tenth Proposition.
If an even number be divided into two equal nombers, and unto it be added any
other number: the square number of the whole number composed of the number and
of that which is added, and the square number of the number added: these two
square no^bers (I say) added together, are double to these square nombers,
namely, to the square of the half number, and to the square of the number
composed of the half number and of the number added.

Suppose that the number AB being an even number be divided into two equal
nombers AC and CB: and unto it let be added an other number BD. Then I say,
that the square nombers of the nombers AD and DB are double to the square
nombers of AC and CD. For forasmuch as the number AD is divided into the
nombers AB and BD: therefore the square nombers of the nombers AD and DB are
equal to the superficial number produced of the multiplication of the nombers
AD and DB the on into the other twice, together with the square of the number
AB (by the 7 proposition) But the square of the number AB is equal to four
squares of either of the nombers AC or CB (for AC is equal to the number CB):
wherefore also the squares of the nombers AD and DB are equal to the
superficial number produced of the multiplication of the nombers AD and DB the
one into the other twice, and to four squares of the number BC or CA. And
forasmuch as the superficial number produced of the multiplication of the
nombers AD and DB the one into the other, together with the square of the
number CB, is equal to square of the number CD (by the 6 proposition): therefore
the number produced of the multiplication of the nomber^ AD and DB the one into
the other twice together with two squares of the number CB, is equal to two
squares of the number CD. Wherefore the squares of the nombers AD and DB are
equal to two squares of the number CD, and to two squares of the number AC.
Wherefore they are double to the squares of the numbers AC and CD. And the
square of the number AD is the square of the whole and of the number added. And
the square of DB is the square of the number added: the square also of the
number CD is the square of the number composed of the half and of the number
added: If therefore an even number be divided. etc. Which was required to be
proved.

^

The 1. Problem. The 11. Proposition. To divide a right line given in such
sort, that the rectangle figure comprehended under the whole, and one of the
parts, shall be equal unto the square made of the other part.
SVppose that the right line given be AB. Now it is required to divide the line
AB in such sort, that the rectangle figure contained under the whole and one of
the parts, shall be equal unto the square which is made of the other part.
Describe (by the 46. of the first) upon AB a square ABCD. Construction.
And (by the 10. of the first) divide the line AC into two equal parts in the
point E, and draw a line from B to E. And (by the second petition) extend CA
unto the point F. And (by the 3. of the first) put the line OF equal unto ye
line BE. And (by the 46. of the first) upon the line AF describe a square FGAH.
And (by the 2. petition) extend GH unto the point K. Then I say that the line
AB is divided in the point H in such sort, that the rectangle figure which is
comprehended under AB and BH is equal to the square which is made of AH.
Demonstration
For forasmuch as the right line AC is divided into two equal parts in the
point E, and unto it is added an other right line AF. Therefore (by the 6. of
the second) the rectangle figure contained under CF and FA together with the
square which is made of AE is equal to ye square which is made of OF. But OF
is equal unto EB. Wherefore the rectangle figure contained under CF, and FA
together with the square which is made of EA is equal to the square which is
made of EB. But (by 47. of the first) unto the square which is made of EB are
equal the squares which are made of BA and AE. For the angle at the point A is
a right angle. Wherefore that which is contained under CF and FA, together
with the square which is made of AE, is equal to the squares which are made of
BA and AE. Take away the square which is made of AE which is common, to them
both: Wherefore the rectangle figure remaining contained under CF and FA is
equal unto the square which is made of AB. And that which is contained under
the lines CF and FA is the figure FK. For the line FA is equal unto the line
FG. And the square which is made of AB is the figure AD. Wherefore the figure
FK is equal unto the figure AD. Take away the figure AK which is common, to
them both. Wherefore the residue, namely, the figure FH is equal unto the
residue, namely, unto the figure HD. But the figure HD is that, which is
contained under the lines AB and BH, for AB is equal unto BD. And the figure
FH is the square which is made of AH. Wherefore the rectangle figure
comprehended under the lines AB and BH is equal to the square which is made of
the line HA. Wherefore the right line given AB is divided in the point H, in
such sort that the rectangle figure contained under AB and BH is equal to the
square which is made of AH: which was required to be done.

This proposition has many singular uses. Upon it depends the demonstration
of that worthy Problem the 10. Proposition of the 4. book: Many and singular
uses of this proposition.
which teaches to describe an Isosceles triangle, in which either of the
angles at the base shall be double to the angle at the top. Many and diverse
uses of a line so divided shall you find in the 13. book of Euclide.

This is to be noted that this Proposition can not as the former Propositions
of this second book be reduced unto numbers. This proposition can not be
reduced unto numbers.
For the line EB has unto the line AE no proportion that can be named, and
therefore it can not be expressed by numbers. For forasmuch as the square of EB
is equal to the two squares of AB and AE (by the 47. of the first) and AE is
the half of AB, therefore the line BE is irrational. For even as two equal
square numbers joined together can not make a square number: so also two square
numbers, of which the one is the square of the half root of the other, can
not make a square number. As by an example. Take the square of 8. which is 64.
which doubled, that is, 128. makes not a square number. So take the half of
8. which is 4. And the squares of 8. and 4. which are 64. and 16. added
together likewise make not a square number. For they make 80. who has no root
square. Which thing must of necessity be if this Problem should have place in
numbers.

But in Irrational numbers it is true, and may by this example be declared.

Let 8. be so divided, that that which is produced of the whole into one of his
parts shall be equal to the square number produced of the other part.
Multiply 8. into him self and there shall be produced 64. that is, the square
ABCD. Divide 8. into two equal parts, that is, into 4, and 4. as the line AE
or EC. And multiply 4. into him self, and there is produced 16, which add
unto 64, and there shall be produced 80: whose root is ^ 80: which is the line
EB or the line OF by the 47. of the first. And forasmuch as the line OF is ^
80. and the line EA is 4. therefore the line AF is ^ 80 -- 4. And so much shall
the line AH be. And the line BH shall be 8 -- ^ 80 -- 4, that is, 12 -- ^ 80.
Now the^ 12 -- ^ 80 multiplied into 8 shall be as much as ^ 80 -- 4. multiplied
into it self. For of either of them is produced 96 -- 5120.

The 11. Theoreme. The 12. Proposition. In obtuseangle triangles, the square
which is made of the side subtending the obtuse angle, is greater then the
squares which are made of the sides which comprehend the obtuse angle, by the
rectangle figure, which is comprehended twice under one of those sides which
are about the obtuse angle, upon which being produced falls a perpendicular
line, and that which is outwardly taken between the perpendicular line and the
obtuse angle.
SVppose that ABC be an obtuseangle triangle having the angle BAC obtuse, and
from the point B (by the 12. of the first) draw a perpendicular line unto CA
produced and let the same be BD. Then I say that the square which is made of
the side BC, is greater then the squares which are made of the sides BA and AC,
by the rectangle figure comprehended under the lines CA and AD twice.
Demonstration.
For forasmuch as the right line CD is by chance divided in the point A,
therefore (by the 4. of the second) the square which is made of CD is equal to
the squares which are made of CA and AD, and unto the rectangle figure
contained under CA and AD twice. Put the square which is made of DB common unto
them both. Wherefore the squares which are made of CD and DB are equal to the
squares which are made of the lines CA, AD, and DB, and unto the rectangle
figure contained under the lines CA and AD twice. But (by the 47. of the first)
the square which is made of CB is equal to the squares which are made of the
lines CD and DB. For the angle at the point D is a right angle. And unto the
squares which are made of AD and DB (by the self same) is equal the square
which is m^de of AB. Wherefore the square which is made of CB, is equal to the
squares which are made of CA and AB and unto the rectangle figure contained
under the lines CA and AD twice. Wherefore ye square which is made of CB, is
greater then the squares which are made of CA and AB by the rectangle figure
contained under the lines CA and AD twice. In obtuseangle triangles therefore,
the square which is made of the side subtending the obtuse angle, is greater
then the squares which are made of the sides which comprehend the obtuse
angle, by the rectangle figure which is comprehended twice under one of those
sides which are about the obtuse angle, upon which being produced falls a
perpendiculer line, and that which is outwardly taken between the perpendiculer
line and the obtuse angle: which was required to be demonstrated.

Of what force this Proposition^ and the Proposition following, touching the
measuring of the obtuseangle triangle and the acuteangle triangle, with the
aid of the 47. Proposition of the first book touching the rightangle
triangle, he shall well perceive, which shall at any time need the art of
triangles in which by three things known is ever searched out three other
things unknown, by help of the table of arkes and cords.

The 12. Theoreme. The 13. Proposition. In acuteangle triangles, the square
which is made of the side that subtendeth the acute angle, is less then the
squares which are made of the sides which comprehend the acute angle, by the
rectangle figure which is comprehended twice under one of those sides which are
about the acuteangle, upon which falls a perpendiculer line, and that which
is inwardly taken between the perpendiculer line and the acute angle.
SVppose that ABC be an acuteangle triangle having the angle at ye point B
acute, and (by the 12. of the first) from the point A draw unto the line BC a
perpendiculer line AD. Then I say that the square which is made of the line AC
is less then the squares which are made of the line CB and BA, by the
rectangle figure contained under the lines CB and BD twice. Demonstration
For forasmuch as the right line BC is by chance divided in the point D,
therefore (by the 7. of the second) the squares which are made of the lines CB
and BD are equal to the rectangle figure contained under the lines CB and DB
twice and unto the square which is made of line CD. Put the square which is
made of the line DA common unto them both. Wherefore the squares which are made
of the lines CB, BD, and DA, are equal unto the rectangle figure contained
under the lines CB and BD twice, and unto the squares which are made of AD and
DC. But to the squares which are made of the lines BD and DA is equal ye
square which is made of the line AB: for th'angle at ye point D is a right
angle. And unto the squares which are made of the lines AD and DC is equal
the square which is made of the line AC (by the 47. of ye first): wherefore the
squares which are made of the lines CB and BA are equal to the square which is
made of the line AC, and to that which is contained under the lines CB and BD
twice. Wherefore the square which is made of the line AC being taken alone, is
less then the squares which are made of the lines CB and BA by the rectangle
figure, which is contained under the lines CB and BD twice. In rectangle
triangles therefore the square which is made of the side that subtendeth the
acute angle, is less then the squares which are made of the sides which
comprehend the acute angle, by the rectangle figure which is comprehended twice
under one of those sides which are about the acute angle, upon which falls a
perpendicular line, and that which is inwardly taken between the perpendicular
line and the acute angle: which was required to be proved.

A Corollary added by Orontius.
A Corollary.
Hereby is easily gathered, that such a perpendicular line in rectangle
triangles falls of necessity upon the side of the triangle, that is, neither
within the triangle, nor without. But in obtuseangle triangles it falls
without, and in acuteangle triangles within. For the perpendicular line in
obtuseangle triangles, and acuteangle triangles can not exactly agree with the
side of the triangle: for then an obtuse and an acuteangle should be equal to a
right angle, contrary to the eleventh and twelfth definitions of the first
book. Likewise in obtuseangle triangles it can not fall within, nor in
acuteangle triangles without: for then the outward angle of a triangle should
be less then the inward and opposite angle, which is contrary to the 16. of
the first.

This Proposition true in all kinds of triangles.
And this is to be noted, that although properly an acuteangle triangle, by the
definition thereof given in the first book, be that triangle, whose angles be
all acute: yet forasmuch as there is no triangle, but that it has an acute
angle, this proposition is to be understood, and is true generally in all
kinds of triangles whatsoever, and may be declared by them, as you may easily
prove.

The 2. Problem. The 14. Proposition. Unto a rectiline figure given, to make a
square equal.
SVppose that the rectiline figure given be A. It is required to make a square
equal unto the rectiline figure A. Construction.
Make (by the 45. of ye first) unto the rectiline figure A an equal rectangle
parallelogramme BCDE. Now if ye line BE be equal unto the line ED, then is ye
thing done which was required: for unto the rectiline figure A is made an
equal square BD. But if not, one of these lines BE and is ED the greater. Let
BE be the greater, and let it be produced unto ye point F. And (by the 3. of
the first) put unto ED an equal line OF. And (by the 10. of the first) divide
the line BF into two equal parts in the point G. And making the center the
point G, and the space GB or GF describe a semicircle BHF. And (by the 2.
peticion) extend the line DE unto ye point H. Demonstration
And (by the 1. peticion) draw a line from G to H. And forasmuch as the right
line FB is divided into two equal parts in the point G, and into two unequal
parts in the point E, therefore (by the 5. of the second) the rectangle figure
comprehended under the lines BE and OF together with the square which is made
of the line EG, is equal to the square which is made of the line GF. But the
line GF is equal unto the line GH. Wherefore the rectangle figure comprehended
under the lines BE and OF together with the square which is made of the line GE
is equal to square which is made of the line GH. But unto the square which is
made of the line GH are equal the squares which are made of the lines HE and
GE (by the 47. of the first.) Wherefore yt which is contained under ye lines BE
and OF together with ye square which is made of GE is equal to ye squares
which are made of HE and GE. Take away the square of the line EG common to them
both. Wherefore the rectangle figure contained under the lines BE and OF is
equal to the square which is made of the line EH. But that which is contained
under the lines BE and OF is the parallelogramme BD, for the line OF is equal
unto the line ED. Wherefore the parallelogramme BD is equal to ye square
which is made of the line HE. But the parallelograme BD is equal unto the
rectiline figure A. Wherefore ye rectiline figure A is equal to the square
which is made of ye line HE. Wherefore unto the rectiline figure given A, is
made an equal square described of the line EH: which was required to be done.

The end of the second Book of Euclides Elements.
The third book of Euclides Elements.
The argument of this book.
THis third book of Euclide entreats of the most perfect figure, which is a
circle. Wherefore it is much more to be esteemed then the two books going
before, in which he did set forth the most simple proprieties of rightlined
figures. For sciences take their dignities of the worthynes of the matter that
they entreat of. But of al figures the circle is of most absolute perfection,
whose proprieties and passions are here set forth, and most certainly
demo^strated. Here also is entreated of right lines subtended to arkes in
circles: also of angles set both at the circumference and at the center of a
circle, and of the variety and differences of them. Wherefore the readyng of
this book, is very profitable to the attayning to the knowledge of chordes and
arkes. It teaches moreover which are circles continge^t, and which are cutting
the one the other: and also that the angle of contingence is the least of all
acute rightlined angles: and that the diameter in a circle is the longest line
that can be drawn in a circle. Farther in it may we learn how, three points
being given how soever (so that they be not set in a right line), may be drawn
a circle passing by them all three. Again, how in a solid body, as in a
Sphere, Cube, or such like, may be found the two opposite points. Which is a
thing very necessary and commodious: chiefly for those that shall make
instruments seruyng to Astronomy, and other arts.

Definitions. The first definition.
Equal circles are such, whose diameters are equal, or whose lines drawn from
the centres are equal.
The circles A and B are equal, if their diameters, namely, OF and CD be
equal: or if their semidiameters, which are lines drawn from the center to
the circumference^ namely AF and BD be equal.

Why circles take their equality of their diameters or semidiameters.
The reason why circles take their equality, of the equality of their
diameters or semidiameters is, for that a circle is described by one revolution
or turnyng about of the semidiameter, having one of his ends fixed. As if you
imagine the line AE to have his one point namely A fastened, and the other end
namely E to move round till it come to the place where it began to move, it
shall fully describ^ the whole circle. Wherefore if the semidiameters be
equal, the circles of necessitye must also be equal: and also the diameters.

By this also is known the definition of unequal circles. Definition of
unequal circles.


Circles whose diameters or semidiameters are unequal, are also unequal. And
that circl^ which has the greater diameter or semidiameter, is the greater
circle: and that circle which has the less diameter or semidiameter, is the
less circle.

As the circle LM is greater then the circle IK, for that the diameter LM is
greater then the diameter IK: or for that the semidiameter GL is greater then
the semidiameter HI.

A right line is said to touch a circle, Second definition.
which touching the circle and being produced cutteth it not.
As the right line OF drawn from the point E, and passing by a point of the
circle, namely, by the point G to the point F only touches the circle GH, and
cutteth it not, nor enters within it. For a right line entryng within a
circle, cutteth and deuideth the circle. As the right line KL deuideth and
cutteth the circle KLM, and enters within it: and therefore touches it in two
places. But a right line touching a circle, which is commonly called a
co^tingent line, A contigent line.
touches the circle only in one point.

Circles are said to touch the one the other, Third defini^ion.
which touching the one the other, cut not the one the other.
As the two circles AB and BC touch the one the other. For their circumferences
touch together in the point B. But neither of them cutteth or deuideth, the
other. Neither does any part of the one enter within the other. The touch of
circles is (...) in one po^^^ only.
And such a touch of circles is ever in one point only: which point only is
common to them both. As the point B is in the conference of the circle AB, and
also (...) the ^^^^^ference of the circle BC.

Circles may touch together two ma^^^ of ways.
Circles may touch together two manner of ways, either outwardly the one wholly
without the other: or else the one being contained within the other.

As the circles DE and DF: of which the one DE contains the other, namely DF:
and touch the one the other in the point D: and that only point is common to
them both: neither does the one enter into the other. If any part of the one
enter into any part of the other, then the one cutteth and deuideth the other,
and touches the one the other not in one point only as in the other before,
but in two point^s, and have also a superficies common to them both. As the
circles GHK and HLK cut the one the other in two points H and K: and the one
enters into the other: Also the superficies HK is common to them both: For it
is a part of the circle GHK, and also it is a part of the circle HLK.

Fourth definition.
Right lines in a circle are said to be equally distant from the center, when
perpendicular lines drawn from the center unto those lines are equal. And
that line is said to be more distant, upon whom falls the greater
perpendicular line.
As in the circle ABCD whose center is E, the two lines AB and CD have equal
distance from the center E: because that the line OF drawn from the center E
perpendicularly upon the line AB, and the line EG drawn likewise perpendilarly
from the center E upon the line CD are equal the one to the other. But in the
circle HKLM whose center is N the line HK has greater distance from the center
N then has the line LM: for that the line ON drawn from the center N
perpendicularly upon the line HK is greater then the line NP which is drawn
from the center N perpendicularly upon the line LM.

So likewise in the other figure the lines AB and DC in the circle ABCD are
equidist^nt from the center G^ because the lines OG and GP perpendicularly
drawn from the center G upon the said lines AB and DC are equal. And the
line AB has greater distance from the center G then has the the line OF,
because the line OG perpendicul^rly dr^wen from the center G to the line AB is
gre^ter then the line HG which is perpendicularly drawn from the c^^tre G to
the line OF.

Fifth definition.
A section or segment of a circle, is a figure comprehended under a right line
and a portion of the circumference of a circle.
As the figure ABC is a section of a circle because it is comprehended under
the right line AC and the circumference of a circle ABC. Likewise the figure
DEF is a section of a circle, for that it is comprehended under the right line
DF, and the circu^ference DEF. And the figure ABC for that it contains within
it the center of the circle is called the greater section of a circle: and the
figure DEF is the less section of a circle, because it is wholly without the
center of the circle as it was noted in the 16. Definition of the first book.

An angle of a section or segment, is that angle which is contained under a
right line and the circu^ference of the circle. Sixth definition.

As the angle ABC in the section ABC is an angle of a section, because it is
contained of the circumference BAC and the right line BC. Likewise the angle
CBD is an angle of the section BDC because it is contained under the
circumference BDC, and the right line BC. And these angles are commonly called
mixte angles, Mixed angles.
because they are contained under a right line and a crooked. And these
portions of circumferences are commonly called arkes, Arkes.
and the right lines are called chordes, Chordes.
or right lines subtended. And the greater section has ever the greater angle,
and the less section the less angle.

An angle is said to be in a section, Seventh definition.
when in the circumference is taken any point, and from that point are drawn
right lines to the ends of the right line which is the base of the segment,
the angle which is contained under the right lines drawn from the point, is (I
say) said to be an angle in a section.
As the angle ABC is an angle is the section ABC, because from the point B
being a point in the circumference ABC are drawn two right lines BC and BA to
the ends of the line AC which is the base of the section ABC. Likewise the
angle ADC is an angle in the section ADC, because from the point D being in the
circu^ference ADC are drawn two right lines, namely, DC and DA to the ends of
the right line AC which is also the base to the said section ADC. So you see,
it is not all one to say, Difference of an angle of a Section, and of an angle
in a Section.
an angle of a section, and an angle in a section. An angle of a section
consists of the touch of a right line and a crooked. And an angle in a
section is placed on the circumference, and is contained of two right lines.
Also the greater section has in it the less angle, and the less section has
in it the greater angle.

But when the right lines which comprehend the angle do receive any
circumference of a circle, Eight definition.
then that angle is said to be correspondent, and to pertain to that
circumference.
As the right lines BA and BC which contain the angle AB C, and receive the
circumference ADC therefore the angle ABC is said to subtend and to pertain to
the circu^ference ADC. And if the right lines which cause the angle, concur
in the center of a circle: then the angle is said to be in the center of a
circle. As the angle EFD is said to be in the center of a circle, for that it
is comprehended of two right lines FE and FD: which concur and touch in the
center F. And this angle likewise subtendeth the circumference EGD: which
circumference also, is the measure of the greatness of the angle EFD.

A Sector of a circle is (an angle being set at the center of a circle) a
figure contained under the right lines which make that angle, Ninth definition.
and the part of the circumference received of them.
As the figure ABC is a sector of a circle, for that it has an angle at the
center, namely the angle BAC, and is contained of the two right lines AB and AC
(which contain that angle and the circumference received by them.

Tenth definition.
Like segmentes or sections of a circle are those, which have equal angles, or
in whom are equal angles.
Two definitions.
Here are set two definitions of like sections of a circle. The one pertains
to the angles which are set in the center of the circle and receive the
circumfere^ce of the said sections: First.
the other pertains to the angle in the section, which as before was said is
ever in the circumference. As if the angle BAC, being in the center A and
received of the circumference BLC be equal to the angle FEG being also in the
center E and received of the circumference FKG, then are the two sections BCL
and FGK like by the first definition. By the same definition also are the other
two sections like, namely BCD, and FGH, for that the angle BAC is equal to the
angle FEG.

Second.
Also by the second definition if B AC being an angle placed in the
circumference of the section BCA be e-angle EDF being an angle in the section
EFD placed in the circumference, there are the two sections BCA, and EFD like
the one to the other. Likewise also if the angle BGC being in the section BCG
be equal to the angle EHF being in the sectio^ EHF the two sections BCG and
EFH are like. And so is it of angles being equal in any point of the
circumference.

Euclide defines not equal Sections: Why Euclide defines not equal Sections.
for they may infinite ways be described. For there may upon unequal right
lines be set equal Sections (but yet in unequal circles) For from any circle
being the greater, may be cut of a portion equal to a portion of an other
circle being the less. But when the Sections are equal, and are set upon
equal right lines, their circumferences also shall be equal. And right lines
being divided into two equal parts, perpendicular lines drawn from the
points of the division to the circumfere^ces shall be equal. As if the two
sections ABC and DEF, being set upon equal right lines AC and DF, be equal:
then if each of the two lines AC and DF be divided into two equal parts in the
points G and H, and from the said points be drawn to the circumferences two
perpendicular lines BG and EH, the said perpendicular lines shall be equal.

The 1. Problem. The 1. Proposition. To find out the center of a circle given.
SVppose that there be a circle given ABC. It is required to find out the
center of the circle ABC. Draw in it a right line at all adventures, and let
the same be AB. Constuction.
And (by the 10. of the first) divide the line AB into two equal parts in the
point D. And (by the 11. of the same) from the point D raise up unto AB a
perpendicular line DC, and (by the second petition) extend DC unto ye point E.
And (by the 10. of the first) divide the line CE into two equal parts in the
point F. Then I say that the point F is the center of the circle ABC.
Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
For if it be not, let some other point, namely G, be the center. And (by the
first petition) draw these right lines GA, GD, and GB. And for as much as AD is
equal unto DB, and DG is common unto the^ both, therefore these two lines AD
and DG are equal to these two lines GD and DB, the one to the other, and (by
the 15. definition of the first) the base GA is equal to the base GB. For they
are both drawn from the center G to the circumference: therefore (by the 8. of
the first) the angle ADG is equal to the angle BDG. But when a right line
standing upon a right line makes the angles on each side equal the one to the
other, either of those angles (by the 10. definition of the first) is a right
angle. Wherefore the angle BDG is a right angle: but ye angle FDB is also a
right angle by construction. Wherefore (by the 4. petition) the angle FDB is
equal to the angle BDG, the greater to the less, which is impossible.
Wherefore the point G is not the center of the circle ABC. In like wise may we
prove that no other point besides F is the center of the circle ABC. Wherefore
the point F is the center of the circle ABC: which was required to be done.

Correlary.
Correlary.
Hereby it is manifest, that if in a circle a right line do divide a right line
into two equal parts, and make right angles on each side: in that right line
which deuideth the other line into two equal parts is the center of the
circle.

The 1. Theoreme. The 2. Proposition. If in the circu^ference of a circle be
taken two points at all adventures: a right line drawn from the one point to
the other shall fall within the circle.
SVppose that there be a circle ABC. And in the circumference thereof, let there
be taken at all adventures these two points A and B. Then I say that a right
line drawn from A to B shall fall within the circle ABC. Demonstration leading
to an impossibility.
For if it do not, let it fall without the circle, as the line AEB does, which
if it be possible imagine to be a right line. And (by the Proposition going
before) take the center of the circle, and let the same be D. And (by the first
petition) draw lines from D to A, and from D to B. And extend DF to E. And for
as much as (by the 15. definition of ye first) DA is equal unto DB. Therefore
the angle DAE is equal to the angle DBE. And for as much as one of the sides of
the triangle DAE, namely the side AEB is produced, therefore (by the 16. of the
first) the angle DEB, is greater then the angle DAE. But the angle DAE is
equal unto the angle DBE. Wherefore the angle DEB is greater then the angle
DBE. But (by the 18. of the first) unto the greater angle is subtended the
greater side. Wherefore the side DB is greater then the side DE. But (by the
15. definition of the first) the line DB is equal unto the line DF. Wherefore
the line DF is greater then the line DE, namely, the less greater then the
greater: which is impossible. Wherefore a right line drawn from A to B falls
not without the circle. In like sort also may we prove that it falls not in
the circumference. Wherefore it falls within the circle. If therefore in the
circumference of a circle be taken two points at all adventures: a right line
drawn from the one point to the other shall fall within the circle: which was
required to be proved.

The 2. Theoreme. The 3. Proposition. If in a circle a right line passing by
the center do divide an other right line not passing by the ce^tre into two
equal parts: it shall divide it by right angles. And if it divide the line by
right angles, it shall also divide the same line into two equal parts.
SVppose that there be a circle ABC, The first para of this Proposition.
and let there be in it drawn a right line passing by the center, and let the
same be CD, dividing an other right line AB not passing by ye center into two
equal parts in the point F. Then I say that the angles at the point of the
division are right angles. Construction.
Take (by ye first of the third) the center of the circle ABC, and let the same
be E. And (by the first petition) draw lines from E to A and from E to B.
Demonstration.
And for as much as the line AF is equal unto the line FB, and the line FE is
common to them both, therefore these two lines OF and FA are equal unto these
two lines OF and FB. And the base EA is equal unto the base EB (by the 15.
definition of the first). Wherefore (by the 8. of the first) the angle AFE is
equal to the angle BFE. But when a right line standing upon a right line does
make the angles on each side equal the one to the other, either of those
angles is (by the 10. definition of the first) a right angle. Wherefore either
of these angles AFE, and BFE is a right angle. Wherefore the line CD passing
by the center, and dividing the line AB not passing by the center into two
equal parts, makes at the point of the division right angles.

But now suppose that the line CD do divide the line AB in such sort that it
makes right angles. The second part conuerst of the first.
Then I say that it deuideth it into two equal parts, that is, yt the line AF
is equal unto the line FB. Demonstration.
For the same order of construction remaining, for as much as the line EA is
equal unto the line EB (by the 15. definition of the first). Therefore the
angle EAF is equal unto the angle EBF (by the 5. of the first). And the right
angle AFE is (by the 4. petition) equal to the right angle BFE. Wherefore
there are two triangles EAF, and EBF having two angles equal to two angles,
and one side equal to one side, namely the side OF which is common to them
both, and subtendeth one of the equal angles, wherefore (by the 26. of the
first) the sides remaining of the one, are equal unto the sides remaining of
the other. Wherefore the line AF is equal unto the line FB. If therefore in a
circle a right line passing by the center do divide an other right line not
passing by the center into two equal parts, it shall divide it by right
angles. And if it divide the line by right angles it shall also divide the same
line into two equal parts: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 3. Theoreme. The 4. Proposition. If in a circle two right lines not
passing by the center, divide the one the other: they shall not divide each one
the other into two equal parts.
SVppose that there be a circle ABCD, and let there be in it drawn two right
lines not passing by the center and dividing the one the other, and let the
same be AC and BD, which let divide the one the other in the point E. Then I
say that they divide not each the one the other into two equal parts.
Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
For if it be possible let them divide each the one the other into two equal
parts, so that let AE be equal unto EC, and BE unto ED. And take the center
of the circle ABCD, which let be F. And (by the first petition) draw a line
from F to E. Now for as much as a certain right line FE passing by the center
deuideth an other line AC not passing by the center into two equal parts, it
makes where the division is right angles (by the 3. of the third). Wherefore
the angle FEA is a right angle. Again for as much as the right line FE, passing
by the center, deuideth the right line BD not passing by the center into two
equal parts, therefore (by the same) it makes where ye division is right
angles. Wherefore the angle FEB is a right angle. And it is proved that the
angle FEA is a right angle. Wherefore (by the 4. petition) the angle FEA is
equal unto the angle FEB, namely the less angle unto the greater: which is
impossible. Wherefore the right lines AC and BD divide not each one the other
into two equal parts. If therefore in a circle two right lines not passing by
the center, divide the one the other, they shall not divide each one the other
into two equal parts: which was required to be demonstrated.

In this Proposition are two cases. Two cases in this Proposition.
For the lines cutting the one the other, do either, neither of them pass by
the center, or the one of them does pass by the center, and the other not. The
first is declared by the author. The second is thus proved.

Suppose that in the circle ABCD the line BD passing by the center do cut the
line AC not passing by the center. Construction for the second case.
Then I say that the lines AC and BD do not divide the one the other into two
equal parts. For by the former Proposition the line BD passing by the center
and dividing the line AC into two equal parts, Demonstration.
it shall also divide it perpendicularly. And for as much as the line AC
deuideth the line BD into two equal parts and right angled wise: therefore by
the Correllary of the first of this book, the line AC passes by the center of
the circle: which is contrary to the supposition. Wherefore the lines AC and BD
do not divide the one the other into two equal parts: which was required to
be proved.

The 4. Theoreme. The 5. Proposition. If two circles cut the one the other,
they have not one and the same center.
SVppose that these two circles ABC, Construction.
and CBG do cut the one the other in the points C and B. Then I say that they
have not one and the same center. Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
For if it be possible let E be center to them both. And (by the first
petition) draw a line from E to C. And draw an other right line EFG at all
adventures. And for as much as the point E is the center of the circle ABC,
therefore (by the 15. definition of the first) the line EC is equal unto the
line OF. Again for as much as the point E is the center of the circle CBG,
therefore (by the same definition) the line EC is equal unto the line EG. And
it is proved that the line EC is equal unto the line OF: wherefore the line OF
also is equal unto the line EG, namely the less unto the greater: which is
impossible. Wherefore the point E is not the center of both the circles ABC,
and CBG. I^ like sort also may we prove that no other point is the center of
both the said circles. If therefore two circles cut the one the other, they
have not one and the same center: which was required to be proved.

The 5. Theoreme. The 6. Proposition. If two circles touch the one the other,
they have not one and the same center.
SVppose that these two circles ABC, and CDE do touch the one the other in the
point C. Demonstrat^on leading to an impossibility.
Then I say that they have not one and the same center. For if it be possible
let the point F be center unto them both. And (by the first petition) draw a
line from F to C: and draw the line FEB at all adventures. And for as much as
the point F is the center of the circle ABC, therefore (by the 15. definition of
the first) the line FC is equal unto the line FB. Again forasmuch as the
point F is the center of ye circle CDE, therefore (by the same definition) the
line FC is equal unto the line FE. And it is proved, that the line FC is
equal unto the line FB, wherefore the line FE also is equal unto the line FB,
namely the less unto ye greater: which is impossible. Wherefore the point F is
not the center of both the circles ABC and CDE. In like sort also may we prove
that no other point is the center of both the said circles. If therefore two
circles touch the one the other: they have not one and the same center: which
was required to be demonstrated.

Two case^ in this Proposition.
In this Proposition are two cases: for the circles touching the one the other,
may touch either within or without. If they touch the one the other within,
then is it by the former demonstration manifest, that they have not both one
and the self same center. It is also manifest if they touch the one the other
without: for that every center is in the midst of his circle.

The 6. Theoreme. The 7. Proposition. If in the diameter of a circle be taken
any point, which is not the center of the circle, and from that point be drawn
unto the circumference certain right lines: the greatest of those lines shall
be that line wherein is the center, and the lest shall be the residue of the
same line. And of all the other lines, that which is nigher to the line which
passes by the center is greater then that which is more distant. And from that
point can fall within the circle on each side of the least line only two equal
right lines.
SVppose that there be a circle ABCD: and let the diameter thereof be AD. And
take in it any point besides the center of the circle, and let the same be F.
Construction.
And let the center of the circle (by the 1. of ye third) be the point E. And
from the point F let there be drawn unto the circumference ABCD these right
lines FD, FC, and FG. Then I say that the line FA is the greatest: and the line
FD is the lest. And of the other lines, the line FB is greater then the line
FC, and the line FC is greater then the line FG. The first part of this
Proposition.
Draw (by the first petition) these right lines BE, CE, and GE. And for as much
as (by the 20. of the first) in every triangle two sides are greater then the
third, Demonstration.
therefore ye lines EB and OF are greater then the residue, namely then the
line FB. But the line AE is equal unto the line BE (by the 15. definition of
the first). Wherefore the lines BE and OF are equal unto the line AF.
Wherefore the line AF is greater then then the line BF. Again for as much as
the line BE is equal unto CE (by the 15. definition of the first) and the line
FE is common unto them both, therefore these two lines BE and OF are equal
unto these two CE and OF. But the angle BEF is greater then the angle CEF.
Wherefore (by the 24. of the first) the base BF is greater then the base CF:
and by the same reason the line CF is greater then the line FG. Again for
as much as the lines GF and FE are greater then the line EG (by the 20. of the
first). Second part.
But (by the 15. definition of the first) the line EG is equal unto the line
ED: Wherefore the lines GF and FE are greater then the line ED, take away OF,
which is common to the^ both, wherefore ye residue GF is greater then the
residue FD. Wherefore the line FA is the greatest, and the line FD is the
lest, and the line FB is greater then the line FC, and the line FC is greater
then the line FG. Third part.
Now also I say that from the point F there can be drawn only two equal
right lines into the circle ABCD on each side of the least line, namely FD. For
(by the 23. of the first) upon the right line given OF and to the point in it,
namely E, make unto the angle GEF an equal angle FEH: and (by the first
petition) draw a line from F to H. Now for as much as (by the 15. definition of
the first) the line EG is equal unto the line EH, and the line OF is common
unto them both, therefore these two lines GE and OF are equal unto these two
lines HE and OF, and (by construction) the angle GEF is equal unto the angle
HEF. Wherefore (by the 4. of ye first) the base FG is equal unto the base FH.
This demon^^rated by an argument leading to an impossibilie.
I say moreover that from the point F can be drawn into the circle no other
right line equal unto the line FG. For if it possible let the line^ FK be
equal unto the line FG. And for as much as FK is equal unto FG. But the line
FH is equal unto the line FG, therefore the line FK is equal unto the line
FH. Wherefore the line which is nigher to the line which passes by the center
is equal to that which is farther of, which we have before proved to be
impossible.

An other demonstration of the latter part of the Proposition leading also to
an impossibility.
Or else it may thus be demonstrated. Draw (by the first petition) a line from E
to K: and for as much as (by ye 15. definition of ye first) ye line GE is equal
unto ye line EK, and the line FE is common to them both, and the base GF is
equal unto the base FK, therefore (by the 8. of the first) the angle GEF is
equal to the angle KEF. But the angle GEF is equal to the angle HEF.
Wherefore (by the first common sentence) the angle HEF is equal to the angle
KEF the less unto the greater: which is impossible. Wherefore from the point
F there can be drawn into the circle no other right line equal unto the line
GF. Wherefore but one only. If therefore in the diameter of a circle be taken
any point, which is not the center of the circle, and from that point be drawn
unto the circumference certain right lines: the greatest of those right lines
shall be that wherein is the center: and the least shall be the residue. And of
all the other lines, that which is nigher to the line which passes by the
center is greater then that which is more distant. And from that point can fall
within the circle on each side of the least line only two equal right lines:
which was required to be proved.

A Corollary.
A Corollary.
Hereby it is manifest, that two right lines being drawn from any one point of
the diameter, the one of one side, and the other of the other side, if with the
diameter they make equal angles, the said two right lines are equal. As in
this place are the two lines FG and FH.

The 7. Theoreme. The 8. Proposition. If without a circle be taken any point,
and from that point be drawn into the circle unto the circumference certain
right lines, of which let one be drawn by the center and let the rest be
drawn at all adventures: the greatest of those lines which fall in the
concauitie or hollownes of the circumference of the circle, is that which
passes by the center: and of all the other lines that line which is nigher to
the line which passes by the center is greater then that which is more
distant. But of those right lines which end in the conuexe part of the
circumference, that is the least which is drawn from the point to the
diameter: and of the other lines that which is nigher to the least is always
less then that which is more distant. And from that point can be drawn unto
the circumference on each side of the least only two equal right lines.
SVppose yt the circle given be ABC, and without ye circle ABC, take the point
D: and from ye same point draw certain right lines into ye circle unto the
circumference, and let the^ be DA, DE, DF, and DC: and let ye line DA pass by
ye center. Then I say, of ye right lines which fall in the concauitie of ye
circumference AEFC, yt is, within ye circle, ye greatest is yt which passes by
ye center, that is, DA. And of those lines which fall upon ye conuex part of ye
circumference, ye lest is yt which is drawn from ye point D unto ye end of ye
diameter AG. And of the right lines falling wtin the circumfere^ce, the line DE
is greater then ye line DF, and the line DF is greater then ye line DC. And of
the right lines which end in ye conuex part of the circumference, yt is,
without ye circle, that (which is nigher unto DG ye lest, is always less then
yt which is more dista^t, that is, the line DK is less then the line DL, and
the line DL is less then the line DH. Take (by the first of the third) the
center of the circle ABC, Construction.
and let the same be M: The first part of this Proposition.
and (by the first petition) draw these right lines ME, MF, MC, MH, ML, and
MK. And for as much as (by the 15. definition of the first) the line AM is
equal unto the line EM, put the line MD common to them both. Wherefore the
line AD is equal unto the lines EM and MD. But the lines EM and MD are (by the
20. of the first) greater then the line ED. Wherefore the line AD also is
greater then the line ED. Again for as much as (by the 15. definition of the
first) the line ME is equal unto the line MF, put the line MD common to them
both: Wherefore the lines EM and MD are equal to the lines FM and MD, and the
angle EMD is greater then the angle FMD: Wherefore (by the 19. of the first)
the base ED is greater then the base FD. In like sort also may we prove that
the line FD is greater then the line CD. Wherefore the line DA is the
greatest, and the line DE is greater then the line DF, and the line DF is
greater then the line DC.

Second part.
And for as much as (by the 20. of the first) ^^e lines MK and KD are greater
then the line MD. But (by the 15. definition of the first) the line MG is
equal unto the line MK. Wherefore the residue KD is greater then ye residue
GD. Wherefore the line GD is less then the line KD. And for as much as from the
ends of one of the sides of the triangle MLD, namely, MD are drawn two right
lines MK and KD meeting within the triangle, therefore (by the 21. of the first)
the lines MK and KD are less then the lines ML and LD, of which the line MK is
equal unto the line ML. Wherefore the residue DK is less then the residue
DL. In like sort also may we prove that the line DL is less then the line DH.
Wherefore the line DG is the lest, and the line DK is less then the line DL,
and the line DL is less then the line DH.

Third part.
Now also I say that from the point D can be drawn unto the circumference on
each side of DG the least only two equal right lines. Upon the right line MD,
and unto the point in it M make (by the 23. of the first) unto the angle KMD an
equal angle DMB. And (by the first petition) draw a line from D to B. And for
as much as (by the 15. definition of the first) the line MB is equal unto the
line MK put the line MD common to the both, wherefore these two lines MK and MD
are equal to these two lines BM and MD the one to the other, and the angle KMD
is (by the 23. of the first) equal to the angle BMD: VVhere^ore (by the 4. of
the first) the base DK is equal to the base DB.

Now I say that from the point D on that side that the line DB is, This is
demo^strated by an argument leading to an absurdity.
can not be drawn unto the circumference any other line besides DB equal unto
the right line DK. For if it be possible let there be drawn an other line
besides DB, and let the same be DN. And for as much as the line DK is equal
unto the line DN. But unto the line DK is equal the line DB. Therefore (by the
first common sentence) the line DB is equal unto the line DN. Wherefore that
which is nigher unto DG the least, is equal to ye which is more distant^
Which we have before proved to be impossible.

Or it may thus be demonstrated. An other demonstration of the latter part,
leading also to an impossibility.
Draw (by the first petition) a line from M to N. And for as much as (by the 15.
definition of the first) the line KM is equal unto the line MN, and the line
MD is common to them both. And the base KD is equal to the base DN (by
supposition) therefore (by the 8. of the first) the angle KMD is equal to the
angle DMN. But the angle KMD is equal to the angle BMD. Wherefore the angle BMD
is equal to the angle NMD, the less unto the greater: which is impossible.
Wherefore from the point D can not be drawn unto the circumference ABC on each
side of DG the lest, more then two equal right lines. If therefore without a
circle be taken any point and from that point be drawn into the circle unto
the circumference certain right lines, of which let one be drawn by the
center, and let the rest be drawn at all adventures: the greatest of those
right lines which fall in ye concauitie or hollownes of the circumference of
the circle is that which passes by the center. And of all the other lines,
that line which is nigher to the line which passes by the center, is greater
then that which is more distant. But of those right lines which end in the
conuexe part of the circumference, that line is the lest which is drawn from
the point to the dimetient: and of the other lines that which is nigher to the
least is always less then that which is more distant. And from that point can
be drawn unto the circumference on each side of the lest only two equal right
lines: which was required to be proved.

This Proposition is called commonly in old books amongst the barbarous,
Ca^d^ Panonis, This Proposion is commonly called Ca^d^ Panonis.
that is, the Peacockes tail.

A Corollary.
Hereby it is manifest, A Corollary.
that the right lines, which being drawn from the point given without the
circle, and fall within the circle, are equally distant from the least, or from
the greatest (which is drawn by the center) are equal the one to the other:
but contrarywyse if they be unequally distant, whether they light upon the
concaue or conuexe circumference of the circle, they are unequal.

The 8. Theoreme. The 9. Proposition. If within a circle be taken a point, and
from that point be drawn unto the circumference more then two equal right
lines, the point taken is the center of the circle.
SVppose that the circle be ABC, and within it let there be taken the point D.
And from D let there be drawn unto the circumference ABC more then two equal
right lines, Construction.
that is, DA, DB, and DC. Then I say that the point D is the center of the
circle ABC. Draw (by the first petition) these right lines AB and BC:
Demonstration.
and (by the 10. of the first) divide the^ into two equal parts in the
points E and F: namely, the line AB in the point E, and the line BC in the
point F. And draw ye lines ED and FD, and (by the second petition) extend the
lines ED and FD on each side to the points K, G, and H, L. And for as much as
the line AE is equal unto the line EB, and the line ED is common to them both,
therefore these two sides AE and ED are equal unto these two sides BE, and ED:
and (by supposition) the base DA is equal to the base DB. Wherefore (by the 8.
of the first) the angle AED is equal to the angle BED. Wherefore either of
these angles AED and BED is a right angle. Wherefore the line GK deuideth ye
line AB into two equal parts and makes right angles. And for as much as, if
in a circle a right line divide an other right line into two equal parts in
such sort that it makes also right angles, in ye line that deuideth is the
center of the circle (by the Correllary of the first of the third). Therefore
(by the same Correllary) in the line GK is the center of the circle ABC. And
(by the same reason) may we prove that in ye line HL is the center of the
circle ABC, and the right lines GK, and HL have no other point common to them
both besides the point D. Wherefore the point D is the center of the circle
ABC. If therefore within a circle be taken a point, and from that point be
drawn unto the circumference more then two equal right lines, the point taken
is the center of the circle: which was required to be proved.

An other demonstration.
Let there be taken within the circle ABC the point D. An other demonstration
of the same leading also to an impossibility.
And from the point D let there be drawn unto the circumference more then two
equal right lines, namely, DA, DB, and DC. Then I say that the point D is the
center of the circle. For if not, then if it be possible let the point E be the
center: and draw a line from D to E, and extend DE to the points F and G.
Wherefore the line FG is the diameter of the circle ABC. And for as much as in
FG the diameter of the circle ABC is taken a point, namely D, which is not the
center of that circle, therefore (by the 7. of the third) the line DG is ye
greatest, and the line DC is greater then the line DB, and the line DB is
greate^ then the line DA. But the lines DC, DB, DA, are also equal (by
supposition): which is impossible. Wherefore the point E is not the center of
the circle ABC. And in like sort may we prove that no other point besides D.
Wherefore the point D is the center of the circle ABC: which was required to be
proved.

The 9. Theoreme. The 10. Proposition. A circle cutteth not a circle in more
points then two.
FOr if it be possible let the circle ABC cut the circle DEF in mo points then
two, Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
that is, in B, G, H, and F. And draw lines from B to G, and from B to H. And
(by ye 10. of the first) divide either of the lines BG and BH into two equal
parts, in ye points K and L. And (by the 11. of the first) from the point K
raise up unto ye line BH a perpendicular line KC, and likewise from the point L
raise up unto ye line BG a perpendicular line LM, and extend the line CK to the
point A, and LNM to the points X and E. And for as much as in the circle ABC,
the right line AC deuideth the right line BH into two equal parts and makes
right angles, therefore (by the 3. of the third) in the line AC is the center of
the circle ABC. Again, for as much as in the self same circle ABC the right
line NX, that is, the line ME deuideth the right line BG into two equal parts
and makes right angles, therefore (by the third of the third) in the line NX
is the center of the circle ABC. And it is proved that it is also in the line
AC. And these two right lines AC and NX meet together in no other point
besides O. Wherefore the point O is the center of the circle ABC. And in like
sort may we prove that the point O is the center of the circle DEF. Wherefore
the two circles ABC and DEF dividing the one the other have one and the same
center: which (by the 5. of the third) is impossible. A circle therefore cutteth
not a circle in more points then two: which was required to be proved.

An other demonstration to prove the same.
Suppose that the circle ABC do cut the circle DGF in mo points then two, An
other demonstration of the same leading also to an impossibility.
that is, in B, G, F, and H. And (by the first of the third) take the center of
the circle ABC and let the same be the point K. And draw these right lines KB,
KG, and KF. Now for as much as within the circle DEF is taken a certain point
K, and from that point are drawn unto the circumference more then two equal
right lines, namely, KB, KG, and KF: therefore (by the 9. of the third) K is
the center of the circle DEF. And the point K is the center of the circle ABC.
Wherefore two circles cutting the one the other have one and the same center:
which (by the 5. of the third) is impossible. A circle therefore cutteth not a
circle in more points then two: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 10. Theoreme. The 11. Proposition. If two circles touch the one the other
inwardly, their centres being given: a right line joining together their
centres and produced, will fall upon the touch of the circles.
SVppose that these two circles ABC, and ADE do touch the one the other in the
point A. Construction.
And (by the first of the third) take the center of the circle ABC, and let the
same be F: and likewise ye center of the circle ADE, and let the same be G.
Then I say that a right line drawn from F to G and being produced, will fall
upon the point A. For if not, Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
then if it be possible let it fall as the line FGDH does. And draw these right
lines AF, and AG. Now for as much as the lines AG and GF are (by the 20. of the
first) greater then the line FA, that is, then the line FH, take away the line
GF which is common to them both. Wherefore the residue AG is greater then the
residue GH. But the line DG is equal unto the line GA (by the 15. definition
of the first). Wherefore the line GD is greater then ye line GH: the less then
the greater: which is impossible. Wherefore a right line drawn from the point F
to the point G and produced, falls not besides the point A, which is ye point
of the touch. Wherefore it fallet^ upon the touch. If therefore two circles
touch the one ye other inwardly, their centres being given, a right line
joining together their centres and produced, will fall upon the touch of the
circles: which was required to be proved.

An other demonstration to prove the same.
But now let it fall as GFC falls, and extend ye line GFC to the point H: An
other demonstration of the same leading also to an impossibility.
and draw these right lines AG and AF. And for as much as the lines AG and GF
are (by the 20. of the first) greater then the line AF. But the line AF is
equal unto the line CF, that is, unto the line FH. Take away the line FG
common to them both. Wherefore the residue AG is greater then ye residue GH,
that is, the line GD is greater then the line GH: the less greater then ye
greater: which is impossible.

Which thing may also be proved by the 7. Proposition of this book. For for
as much as the line HC is the diameter of the circle ABC, The same ^gaine
demonstrated by an ^rgument leading to an absurdititie.
and in it is taken a point which is not the center, namely, the point G,
therefore the line GA is greater then the line GH by the said 7. Proposition.
But the line GD is equal to the line GA (by the definition of a circle).
Wherefore the line GD is greater then the line GH, namely, the part gr^ater
then the whole: which is impossible.

The 11. Theoreme. The 12. Proposition. If two circles touch the one the other
outwardly, a right line drawn by their centres shall pass by the touch.
SVppose that these two circles ABC and ADE do touch the one the other
outwardly in the point A. And (by the third of the third) take the center of
the circle ABC, Demonstrati^ leading to an impossibili^ie.
and let the same be the point F: and likewise the center of the circle ADE,
and let the same be the point G. Then I say that a right line drawn from the
point F to the point G shall pass by the point of the touch, namely, by the
point A. For if not, then if it be possible, let it pass as the right line
FCDG does. And draw these right lines AF and AG. And for as much as the point F
is the center of ye circle ABC, therefore the line FA is equal unto the line
FC. Again for as much as the point G is the center of the circle ADE, therefore
the line GA is equal to the line GD. And And it is proved that the line FA is
equal to the line FC. Wherefore the lines FA and AG are equal unto the lines
FC and GD: Wherefore the whole line FG is greater then the lines FA and AG. But
it is also less (by the 20. of the first): which is impossible. Wherefore a
right line drawn from the point F to the point G shall pass by the point of
the touch, namely, by the point A. If therefore two circles touch the one the
other outwardly, a right line drawn by their centres, shall pass by the
touch: which was required to be demonstrated.

An other demonstration after Pelitarius.
An other demonstration after Pelitarius leading also to an absurdity.
Suppose that the two circles ABC and DEF do touch the one the other outwardly
in the point A: And let G be the center of the circle ABC: From which point
produce by the touch of the circles the line GA to the point F of the
circumference DEF. Which for as much as it passes not by the center of the
circle DEF (as the adversary affirms) draw from the same center G an other
right line GK, which if it be possible let pass by the center of the circle
DEF, namely, by the point H: cutting the circumference ABC in the point B, and
the circu^ference DEF in the point D, and let the opposite point thereof be in
the point K. And for as much as from the point G taken without the circle DEF is
drawn the line GK passing by the center H, and from the same point is^ drawn
also an other line not passing by the contre, namely, the line GF. Therefore
(by the 8. of this book) the outward part GD. of the line GK shall be less
then the outward part GA of the line GF^ But the line GA is equal to the line
GB. Wherefore the line GD is less then the line GB^ namely, the whole less
then the part^ which is absurd.

The 12. Theoreme. The 13. Proposition. A circle can not touch an other circle
in more points then one, whether they touch within or without.
FOr if it be possible, let the circle ABCD touch ye circle EBFD first inwardly
in more points then one, that is, in D and B. Of circles which touch the one
the other inwardly.
Take (by the first of the third) the center of the circle ABCD, and let the
same be ye point G: and likewise ye center of the circle EBFD, and let the same
be ye point H. Wherefore (by the 11. of the same) a right line drawn from the
point G to the point H and produced, will fall upon the points B and D: let it
so fall as the line BGHD does. And for as much as the point G is the center of
the circle ABCD, therefore (by the 15. definition of the first) the line BG is
equal to the line DG. Wherefore the line BG is greater then then the line HD:
Wherefore the line BH is much greater then the line HD. Again for as much as the
point H is the center of the circle EBFD, therefore (by the same definition)
the line BH is equal to the line HD: and it is proved that it is much greater
then it: which is impossible. A circle therefore can not touch a circle
inwardly in more points then one.

Now I say that neither outwardly also a circle touches a circle in more
points then one. Of circles which touch the one the other outwardly.
For if it be possible, let the circle ACK touch ye circle ABCD outwardly in
more points the^ one, that is, in A and C: And (by the first petition) draw a
line from the point A to the point C. Now for as much as in ye circumference of
either of the circles ABCD, and ACK, are taken two points at all adventures,
namely, A and C, therefore (by the second of the third) a right line joining
together those points shall fall within both the circles. But it falls
within the circle ABCD, and without the circle ACK: which is absurd. Wherefore
a circle shall not touch a circle outwardly in more points then one, and it is
proved yt neither also inwardly. Wherefore a circle can not touch an other
circle in more points then one, whether they touch within or without: which was
required to be demonstrated.

An other demonstration after Pelitarius and Flussates.
An other demonstration after Pelitarius and Flussates, of circles which tooch
the one the other outwardly.
Suppose that there be two circles ABG and ADG, which if it be possible, let
touch the one the other outwardly in more points then one, namely, in A and G.
Let the center of the circle ABG be the point I, and let the center of the
circle ADG be the point K. And draw a right line from the point I to the point
K, which (by the 12. of this book) shall pass both by the point A and by the
point G: which is not possible: for then two right lines should include a
superficies, contrary to the last common sentence. It may also be thus
demonstrated. Draw a line from the center I to the center K, which shall pass
by one of the touches, as for example by the point A. And draw these right
lines GK and GI, and so shall be made a triangle, whose two sides GK and GI
shall not be greater then the side IK: which i^ contrary to the 20. of the
first.

But now if it be possible, let the foresaid circle ADG touch the circle ABC
inwardly in more points then one, Of circles which tooch the one the other
inwardly.
namely, in the points A and G: and let the center of the circle ABC be the
point I, as before: and let the center of the circle ADG be the point K, as
also before. And extend a line from the point I to the point K, which shall
fall upon the touch (by the 11. of this book). Draw also these lines KG, and
IG. And for as much as the line KG is equal to the line KA (by the 15.
definition of the first) add the line KI common to them both. Wherefore the
whole line AI is equal to the two lines KG and KI: but unto the line AI is
equal the line IG (by the definition of a circle). Wherefore in the triangle
IKG the side IG is not less then the two sides IK and KG: which is contrary to
the 20. of the first.

The 13. Theoreme. The 14. Proposition. In a circle, equal right lines, are
equally distant from the ce^tre. And lines equally distant from the center, are
equal the one to the other.
The first part of this Theoreme.
SVppose that there be a circle ABCD, and let there be in it drawn these equal
right lines AB and CD. Then I say that they are equally distant from the
center. Construction.
Take (by the first of the third) the center of the circle ABCD, and let the
same be ye point E. And (by the 12. of the first) from the point E draw unto
the lines AB and CD perpendicular lines OF and EG. And (by the first petition)
draw these right lines AE and CE. Demonstration.
Now for as much as a certain right line OF drawn by the center cutteth a
certain other right line AB not drawn by the center, in such sort that it
makes right angles, therefore (by the third of the third) it deuideth it into
two equal parts. Wherefore the line AF is equal to the line FB. Wherefore the
line AB is double to the line AF: and by the same reason also the line CD is
double to the line CG. But the line AB is equal to the line CD. Wherefore the
line AF is also equal to the line CG. And for as much as (by the 15. definition
of the first) the line AE is equal to the line EC, therefore the square of the
line EC is equal to the square of the line AE. But unto the square of the line
AE, are equal (by the 47. of the first) the squares of the lines AF and FE:
for the angle at the point F is a right angle. And (by ye self same) to the
square of the line EC are equal the squares of the lines EG and GC: for the
angle at the point G is a right angle. Wherefore the squares of the lines AF
and FE are equal to the squares of the lines CG and GE: of which the square of
the line AF is equal to the square of the line CG: for the line AF is equal
to the line CG. Wherefore (by the third common sentence) the square remaining,
namely, the square of the line FE, is equal to the square remaining, namely,
to the square of the line EG. Wherefore the line OF is equal to the line EG.
Demonstration.
But right lines are said to be equally distant from ye center, when
perpendicular lines drawn from the center to those lines, are equal (by the
4. definition of the third). Wherefore the lines AB and CD are equally distant
from the center.

But now suppose that the right lines AB and CD be equally distant from the
center, The second part which is the converse of the first.
that is, let the perpendicular line OF be equal to the perpendicular line EG.
Then I say that the line AB is equal to the line CD. For the same order of
construction remaining, we may in like sort prove that the line AB is double to
the line AF, and that the line CD is double to the line CG. And for as much as
the line AE is equal to the line CE, for they are drawn from ye center to the
circumference, therefore the square of the line AE is equal to ye square of the
line CE. But (by the 47. of the first) to the square of the line AE are equal
the squares of the lines OF and FA. And (by the self same) to ye square of the
line CE are equal the squares of the lines EG and GC. Wherefore the squares of
the lines OF and FA are equal to the squares of the lines EG and GC. Of which
the square of the line EG is equal to the square of the line OF, for the line
OF is equal to the line EG. Wherefore (by the third common sentence) the
square remaining, namely, the square of the line AF, is equal to the square of
the line CG. Wherefore the line AC is equal unto the line CG. But the line AB
is double to the line AF, and the line CD is double to the line CG. Wherefore
the line AB is equal to the line CD. Wherefore in a circle equal right lines
are equally distant from the center. And lines equally distant from the center,
are equal the one to ye other: which was required to be proved.

An other demonstration for the first part after Campane.
An other demonstration of the first part after Campane.
Suppose that there be a circle ABDC, whose center let be the point E. And draw
in it two equal lines AB and CD. Then I say that they are equally distant from
the center. Draw from the center unto the lines AB and CD, these perpendicular
lines OF and EG. And (by the 2. part of the 3. of this book) the line AB shall
be equally divided in the point F. and the line CD shall be equally divided in
the point G. And draw these right lines EA, EB, EC, and ED. And for as much as
in the triangle AEB the two sides AB and AE are equal to the two sides CD and
CE of the triangle CED, and the base EB is equal to the base ED. therefore (by
the 8. of the first) the angle at the point A shall be equal to the angle at
the point C. And for as much as in the triangle AEF the two sides AE and AF are
equal to the two sides CE and CG of the triangle CEG, and the angle EAF is
equal to the angle CEG, therefore (by the 4. of the first) the base OF i^
equal to the base EG: which for as much as they are perpendicular lines,
therefore the lines AB and CD are equally distant from the center, by the 4.
definition of this book.

The 14. Theoreme. The 15. Proposition. In a circle, the greatest line is the
diameter, and of all other lines that line which is nigher to the center is
always greater then that line which is more distant.
SVppose that there be a circle ABCD, and let the diameter thereof be the line
AD, and let the center thereof be the point E. And unto the diameter. AD let
the line BC be nigher then the line FG. Then I say that the line AD is the
greatest, and the line BC is greater then ye line FG. Draw (by the 12. of the
first) from the center E to the lines BC and FG perpendicular lines EH and EK.
Construction.
And for as much as the line BC is nigher unto the center then the line FG,
therefore (by the 4. definition of the third) the line EK is greater then the
line EH. And (by the third of the first) put unto the line EH an equal line
EL. And (by the 11. of the first) from the point L raise up unto the line EK a
perpendicular line LM: and extend the line LM to the point N. And (by the first
petition) draw these right lines, EM, EN, OF, and EG. And for as much as the
line EH is equal to the line EL, therefore (by the 14. of the third,
Demonstration.
and by the 4. definition of the same) the line BC is equal to the line MN.
Again for as much as the line AE is equal to the line EM, and the line ED to
the line EN, therefore the line AD is equal to the lines ME and EN. But the
lines ME and EN are (by the 20. of the first) greater then the line MN.
Wherefore the line AD is greater then the line MN. And for as much as these two
lines ME and EN are equal to these two lines FE and EG (by the 15. definition
of the first) for they are drawn from the center to the circumference, and the
angle MEN is greater then the angle FEG, therefore (by the 24. of the first)
the base MN is greater then the base FG. But it is proved that the line MN is
equal to the line BC: Wherefore the line BC also is greater then the line FG.
Wherefore the diameter AD is the greatest, and the line BC is greater then the
line FG. Wherefore in a circle, the greatest line is the diameter, and of all
the other lines, that line which is nigher to ye center is always greater then
that line which is more distant: which was required to be proved.

An other demonstration after Campane.
In the circle ABCD, whose center let be the point E, draw these lines, AB, AC,
AD, FG, and HK, of which let the line AD be the diameter of the circle. An
other demonstration after Campane.
Then I say that the line AD is the greatest of all the lines. And the other
lines each of the one is so much greater then each of the other, how much nigher
it is unto the center. Join together the ends of all these lines with the
center, by drawing these right lines EB, EC, EG, EK, EH, and OF. And (by the
20. of the first) the two sides OF and EG of the triangle EFG, shall be greater
then the third side FG. And for as much as the said sides OF and EG are equal
to the line AD (by the definition of a circle) therefore the line AD is greater
then the line FG. And by the same reason it is greater then every one of the
rest of the lines, if they be put to be bases of triangles: for that every two
sides drawn from the center are equal to the line AD. Which is the first part
of the Proposition. Again, for as much as the two sides OF and EG of the
triangle EFG, are equal to the two sides EH and EK of the triangle EHK, and
the angle FEG is greater then the angle HEK, therefore (by the 24. of the first)
the base FG is greater then the base HK. And by the same reason may it be
proved, that the line AC is greater then the line AB. And so is manifest the
whole Proposition.

The 15. Theoreme. The 16. Proposition. If from the end of the diameter of a
circle be drawn a right line making right angles: it shall fall without the
circle: and between that right line and the circumference can not be drawn an
other right line: and the angle of the semicircle is greater then any acute
angle made of right lines, but the other angle is less then any acute angle
made of right lines.
SVppose that there be a circle ABC: whose center let be the point D, and let
the diameter thereof be AB. Then I say yt a right line drawn from the point A,
making with the diameter AB right angles, shall fall without the circle. The
first part of this Theoreme.
For if it do not, then if it be possible, let it fall within the circle as the
line AC does, and draw a line from the point D to the point C. Demonstration
leading to an absurdity.
And for as much as (by the 15. definition of the first) the line DA is equal
to the line DC, for they are drawn from the center to the circumference,
therefore the angle DAC is equal to the angle ACD. But the angle DAC is (by
supposition) a right angle: Wherefore also the angle ACD is a right angle.
Wherefore the angles DAC and ACD, are equal to two right angles: which (by the
17. of the first) is impossible. Wherefore a right line drawn from the point
A, making with the diameter AB right angles, shall not fall within ye circle.
In like sort also may we prove, that it falls not in the circumference.
Wherefore it falls without, as the line AE does.

I say also, Second part.
that between the right line AE, and the circumference ACB, can not be drawn
an other right line. For if it be possible, let the line AF so be drawn. And
(by the 12. of the first) from the point D draw unto the line FA a
perpendicular line DG: And for as much as AGD is a right angle, but DAG is less
then a right angle, therefore (by the 19. of the first) the side AD is greater
then the side DG. But the line DA is equal to the line DH, for they are drawn
from the center to the circumference. Wherefore the line DH is greater then the
line DG: namely, the less greater then the greater: which is impossible.
Wherefore between the right line AE and the circumference ACB, can not be
drawn an other right line.

I say moreover, Third part.
that the angle of the semicircle contained under ye right line AB and the
circu^ference CHA, is greater then any acute angle made of right lines. And the
angle remaining contained under ye circumference CHA and the right line AE, is
less then any acute angle made of right lines. For if there be any angle made
of right lines greater then that angle which is contained under the right line
BA and the circumference CHA, or less then that which is contained under the
circumference CHA and the right line AE, then between the circumference CHA and
the right line AE, there shall fall a right line, which makes the angle
contained under the right lines, greater then that angle which is contained
under the right line BA and the circumference CHA, and less then the angle
which is contained under the circumference CHA and the right line AE. But there
can fall no such line, as it has before been proved. Wherefore no acute angle
contained under right lines, is greater then the angle contained under the
right line BA and the circumference CHA, nor also less then the angle
contained under the circumference CHA and the line AE.

Correlary.
Hereby it is manifest that a perpendicular line drawn from the end of the
diameter of a circle touches the circle: and that a right line touches a
circle in one point only. For it was proved (by the 2. of the third) that a
right line drawn from two points taken in the circumference of a circle,
shall fall within the circle. Which was required to be demonstrated.

The 2. Problem. The 17. Proposition. From a point given, to draw a right line
which shall touch a circle given.
Construction.
SVppose that the point given be A, and let the circle given be BCD. It is
required from the point A to draw a right line which shall touch the circle
BCD. Take (by the first of the third) the center of the circle, and let the
same be E. And (by the first petition) draw the right line ADE. And making the
center E, and the space AE, describe (by ye third petition) a circle AFG. And
from the point D raise up (by the 11. of the first) unto the line EA a
perpendicular line DF. And (by the first petition) draw these lines EBF and
AB. Then I say, that from the point A is drawn to the circle BCD a touch line
AB. Demonstration.
For for as much as the point E is the center of the circle BCD, and also of the
circle AFG, therefore the line EA is equal to the line OF, and the line ED to
ye line EB, for they are drawn from the center to the circumference. Wherefore
to these two lines AE and EB, are equal these two lines OF and ED, and the
angle at the point E is common to them both: Wherefore (by the 4. of the first)
the base DF is equal to the base AB, and ye triangle DEF is equal to the
triangle EBA, and the rest of the angles remaining to the rest of the angles
remaining. Wherefore the angle EDF is equal to ye angle EBA. But the angle EDF
is a right angle: Wherefore also the angle EBA is a right angle, and the line EB
is drawn from the center. But a perpendicular line drawn from the end of the
diameter of a circle, touches the circle (by ye Corellary of the 16. of the
third). Wherefore the line AB touches the circle BCD. Wherefore from the point
given, namely, A, is drawn unto ye circle given BCD, a touch line AB: which
was required to be done.

An addition of Pelitarius.
An addition of Pelitarius.
Unto a right line which cutteth a circle, to draw a parallel line which shall
touch the circle.

S^ppose that the right line AB do out the circle ABC in the points A and B.
It is required to draw unto the line AB a parallel line which shall touch the
circle. Let the center of the circle be the point D. And divide the line AB
into two equal parts in the point E. And by the point E and by the center D,
draw the diameter CDEF. And from the point F (which is the end of the
diameter) raise up (by the 11. of the first) unto the diameter CF a
perpendicular line GFH. Then I say that the line GFH (which by the correllary
of the 16. of this book touches the circle) is a parallel unto the line AB.
This Problem commodious for the inscribing and circumscribing of figures in or
about circles.
For forasmuch as the right line CF falling upon either of these lines AB and
GH makes all the angles at the point ^ right angles (by the 3. of this book)
and the two angles at the point Fare supposed to be right angles: therefore (by
the 29. of the first) the lines AB and GH are parallels: which was required to
be done. And this Problem is very commodious for the inscribing or
circumscribing of figures in or about circles.

The 16. Theoreme. The 18. Proposition. If a right line touch a circle, and
from the center to the touch be drawn a right line, that right line so drawn
shall be a perpendicular line to the touch line.
SVppose that the right line DE do touch the circle ABC in the point C. And
take the center of the circle ABC, and let the same be F. Demonstration leading
to an impossibility.
And (by the first petition) from the point F to the point C draw a right line
FC. Then I say, that CF is a perpendicular line to DE. For if not, draw (by the
12. of the first) from the point F to the line DE a perpendicular line FG. And
for as much as the angle FGC is a right angle, therefore the angle GCF is an
acute angle: Wherefore the angle FGC is greater then ye angle FCG, but unto the
greater angle is subtended the greater side (by the 19. of the first).
Wherefore the line FC is greater then the line FG. But the line FC is equal to
the line FB, for they are drawn from the center to the circumference: Wherefore
the line FB also is greater then the line FG, namely, the less then the
greater: which is impossible. Wherefore the line FG is not a perpendicular line
unto the line DE. And in like sort may we prove, that no other line is a
perpendicular line unto ye line DE besides the line FC: Wherefore the line FC is
a perpendicular line to DE. If therefore a right line touch a circle, and from
y^ center to ye touch be drawn a right line, yt right line so drawn shall be
a perpendicular line to ye touch line: which was required to be proved.

An other demonstration after Orontius.
Suppose that the circle given be ABC, which let the right line DE touch in the
point C. An other de^onstration after Orontius.
And let the center of the circle be the point F. And draw a right line from F
to C. Then I say that the line FC is perpendicular unto the line DE. For if the
line FC be not a perpe^diculer unto the line DE, then, by the converse of the
x. definition of the first book, the angles DCF and FCE shall be unequal: and
therefore the one is greater then a right angle, and the other is less then a
right angle. (For the angles DCF and FCE are by the 13. of the first equal to
two right angles) Let the angle FCE, if it be possible, be greater then a right
angle, that is, let it be an obtuse angle. Wherefore the angle DCF ^hal be an
acute angle. And forasmuch as by suppositio^ the right line DE touche^h the
circle ABC, therefore it cutteth not the circle. Wherefore the circumference BC
falls between the right lines DC and CF: and therefore the acute and rectiline
angle DCF shall be greater then the angle of the semicircle BCF which is
contained under the circumfere^ce BC and the right line CF. And so shall there
be given a rectiline and acute angle greater then the angle of a semicircle:
which is contrary to the 16. proposition of this book. Wherefore the angle DCF
is not less then a right angle. In like sort also may we prove that it is not
greater then a right angle. Wherefore it is a right angle, and therefore also the
angle FCE is a right angle. Wherefore the right line FC is a perpendicular unto
the right line DE by the 10. definition of the first^ which was required to be
proved.

The 17. Theoreme. The 19. Proposition. If a right line do touch a circle,
and from the point of the touch be raised up unto the touch line a
perpendicular line, in that line so raised up is the center of the circle.
SVppose that the right line DE do touch the circle ABC in the point C. And
from C raise up (by ye 11. of the first) unto the line DE a perpendicular line
CA. Then I say, that in the line CA is the center of the circle. For if not,
then if it be possible, let ye center be without the line CA, as in ye point F.
And (by the first petition) draw a right line from C to F. Demonstration
leading to an impossibility.
And for as much as a certain right line DE touches the circle ABC, and from
the center to the touch is drawn a right line CF, therefore (by the 18. of the
third) FC is a perpendicular line to DE. Wherefore the angle FCE is a right
angle. But the angle ACE is also a right angle: Wherefore the angle FCE is
equal to the angle ACE, namely, the less unto the greater: which is
impossible^ Wherefore the point F is not the center of the circle ABC. And in
like sort may we prove, yt it is no other where but in the line AC. If
therefore a right line do touch a circle, and from the point of the touch be
raised up unto the touch line a perpendicular line, in that line so raised up
is the center of the circle: which was required to be proved.

The 18. Theoreme. The 20. Proposition. In a circle an angle set at the center,
is double to an angle set at the circumference, so that both the angles have to
their base one and the same circumference.
SVppose that there be a circle ABC, and at the center thereof, Two cases in
this Proposition the one when the angle set at the circumference includes the
center.
namely, the point E, let ye angle BEC be set, and at the circumference let
there be set the angle BAC, and let them both have one and the same base,
namely, the circumference BC. Then I say, that the angle BEC is double to the
angle BAC. Draw ye right line AE, and (by the second petition) extend it to the
point F. Now for as much as the line AE is equal to the line EB, Demonstration.
for they are drawn from the center unto the circumference, the angle EAB is
equal to the angle EBA (by the 5. of the first). Wherefore the angles EAB and
EBA are double to the angle EAB. But (by the 32. of the same) the angle BEF is
equal to the angles EAB and EBA: Wherefore the angle BEF is double to the
angle EAB. And by the same reason the angle FEC is double to the angle EAC.
Wherefore the whole angle BEC is double to the whole angle BAC.

Again, suppose that there be set an other angle at the circumference, The
other when the same angle set at the circumference includes not the center.
and let the same be BDC. And (by the first petition) draw a line from D to E.
And (by the second petition) extend the line DE unto the point G. And in like
sort may we prove, that the angle GEC is double to the angle EDC. Of which the
angle GEB is double to the angle EDB. Wherefore the angle remaining BEC is
double to the angle remaining BDC. Wherefore in a circle an angle set at the
center, is double to an angle set at the circumference, so that both the angles
have to their base one and the same circumference: which was required to be
demonstrated.

The 19. Theoreme. The 21. Proposition. In a circle the angles which consist in
one and the self same section or segment, are equal the one to the other.
SVppose yt there be a circle ABCD, and in the segment thereof BAED, let there
consist these angles BAD and BED. Then I say, that the angles BAD and BED are
equal the one to the other. Take (by the first of the third) the center of the
circle ABCD, Construction.
and let the same be the point F. And (by the first petition) draw these lines
BF and FD. Demonstration.
Now for as much as the angle BFD is set at the center, and the angle BAD at the
circumference, and they have both one and ye same base, namely, the
circumference BCD, therefore the angle BFD is (by the Proposition going before)
double to the angle BAD: and by the same reason the angle BFD is also double to
the angle BED. Wherefore (by the 7. common sentence) the angle BAD is equal to
the angle BED. Wherefore in a circle the angles which consiste in one and the
self same segment, are equal the one to the other: which was required to be
proved.

Three cases in this Proposition.

The first case.

The second case.


In this proposition are three cases. For the angles consisting in one and the
self same segment, the segment may either be greater the^ a semicircle, or
less then a semicircle, or else just a semicircle. For the first case the
demonstration before put serves.

But now suppose that the angles BAD and BED do consist in the sectio^ BAD,
which let be less then a semicircle. Even in this case also I say that the
angles BAD and BED are equal. For draw a right line from A to E. And let the
lines AD and BE cut the one the other in the point G, wherefore the segment
ACE is greater then a semicircle. And therefore by the first part of this
proposition the angles which are in it, namely, the angles ABE and EDA are
equal the one to the other. And forasmuch as in the triangle ABG the inward
and opposite angles ABG and GAB are equal to the outward angle BGD, and by
the same reason the two angles EDG and GED of the triangle DEGREES are equal to
the self same outward angle BGD. Wherefore the two angles ABG and GAB are
equal to the two angles EDG and GED by the first common senten^^. From which
^f there be taken equal angles, namely, ABG, and EDG, the angl^ remainyng BAG
shall be equal to the angle remaining DEGREES, that is, the angle BAD to the angle
DEB (by the third common sentence) which was required to be proved.

The self same construction and demonstration will also serve, The third case.
if the angles were set in a semicircle as it is pla^ne to see, in the figure
here set.

The 20. Theoreme. The 22. Proposition. If within a circle be described a
figure of four sides, the angles thereof which are opposite the one to the
other, are equal to two right angles.
SVppose that there be a circle ABCD, and let there be described in it a figure
of four sides, namely, ABCD. Then I say, that the angles thereof which are
opposite the one to the other, are equal to two right angles. Draw (by the
first petition) these right lines AC and BD. Construction.
Now for as much as (by the 32. of the first) the three angles of every triangle
are equal to two right angles: therefore y^ three angles of the triangle ABC,
namely, Demonstration.
CAB, ABC, and BCA, are equal to two right angles. But (by the 21. of the
third) the angle CAB is equal to the angle BDC, for they consist in one and
the self same segme^t, namely, BADC. And (by the same Proposition) the angle
ACB is equal to the angle ADB, for they consist in one and the same segment
ADCB. Wherefore the whol^ angle ADC is equal to ye angles BAC and ACB: put the
angle ABC common to them both. Wherefore the angles ABC, BAC, and ACB, are
equal to the angles ABC and ADC. But the angles ABC, BAC, and ACB, are equal
to two right angles. Wherefore the angles ABC and ADC are equal to two right
angles. And in like sort also may we prove, that the angles BAD and DCB are
equal to two right angles. If therefore within a circle be described a figure
of four sides, the angles thereof which are opposite the one to ye other, are
equal to two right angles^ which was required to be proved.

The 21. Theoreme. The 23. Proposition. Upon one and the self same right line
can not be described two like and unequal segmentes of circles, falling both
on one and the self same side of the line.
Demons^ration leading to an impossibility.
FOr if it be possible, let there be described upon the right line AB two like
and unequal sections of circles, namely, ACB and ADB, falling both on one and
the self same side of the line AB. And (by the first petition) draw the right
line ACD, and (by the third petition) draw right lines from C to B, and from D
to B. And for as much as the segment ACB is like to the segment ADB: and like
segme^tes of circles are they which have equal angles (by the 10. definition
of the third). Where^ore the angle ACB is equal to the angle ADB, namely, the
outward angle of ye triangle CDB to the inward angle: which (by the 16. of the
first) is impossible. Wherefore upon one and the self same right line can not be
described two like and unequal segmentes of circles, falling both on one and
the self same side of the line: which was required to be demonstrated.

An ad^ition of Campane d^mo^strated by Pelitari^s.
Here Campane adds that upon one and the self same right line cannot be
described two like and unequal sections neither on one and the self same side
of the line, nor on the opposite side. That they can not be described on one
and the self same side, has been before demonstrated, and that neither also
on the opposite side, Pelitarius thus demonstrateth.

Let the section ABC be set upon the line AC, and upon the other side let be
set the section ADC upon the self same line AC, and let the section ADC be
like unto the section ABC. Then I say that the sections ABC and ADC being thus
set are not unequal. For if it be possible let the section ADC be the greater.
And divide the line AC into two equal parts in the point E. And draw the right
line BED dividing the line AC right angled wise. And draw these right lines AB,
CB, AD and CD. Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
And forasmuch as the section ADC is greater then the section ABC, the
perpendicular line also ED shall be greater then the perpendicular line EB: as
is before declared in the end of the definitions of this third book. Wherefore
from the line ED ^ut of a ly^e equal to the line EB: which (...) be OF. And
draw these right lines AF and CF. Now then (by the 4. of the first) the
triangle AEB shall be equal to the triangle AEF^ and the angle EBA shall be
equal to the angle EFA. And by the same reason the angle EBC shall be equal
to the angle EFC. Wherefore the whole angle ABC is equal to the whole angle
AFC. But by the 21. of the first, the angle AFC is greater then the angle ADC.
Wherefore also the angle ABC is greater then the angle ADC. Wherefore by the
definition the sections ABC and ADC are not like, which is contrary to the
supposition. Wherefore they are not like and unequal: which was required to be
proved.

The 22. Theorme. The 24. Proposition. Like segmentes of circles described
upon equal right lines, are equal the one to the other.
SVppose that upon these equal right lines AB and CD be described these like
segmentes of circles, namely, AEB and CFD. Then I say, that the segment AEB is
equal to the segment CFD. For putting the segment AEB upon the segment CFD,
and the point A upon ye point C, and the right line AB upon the right line CD,
the point B also shall fall upon the point D, for ye line AB is equal to the
line CD. And the right line AB exactly agreing with the right line CD, y^
segment also AEB shall exactly agree with the segment CFD. Demonstration
leading to an impossibility.
For if the right line AB do exactly agree with the right line CD, and the
segment AEB do not exactly agree with the segment CFD, but differs as the
segment CGD does: Now (by the 13. of the third) a circle cutteth not a circle
in more points then two, but the circle CGD cutteth ye circle CFD in more
points the^ two, that is, in the points C, G, and D: which is (by the same)
impossible. Wherefore the right line AB exactly agreing with the right line CD,
the segment AEB shall not but exactly agree with the segment CFD: Wherefore it
exactly agrees with it, and is equal unto it. Wherefore like segmentes of
circles described upon equal right lines, are equal the one to the other:
which was required to be proved.

This Proposition may also be demonstrated by the former proposition For if the
sections AEB and CFD being like and set upon equal right lines AB and CD, An
other demonstration.
should be unequal, then the one being put upon the other, the great^r shall
exceed the less: but the line AB is one line with the line CD: so that thereby
shall follow the contrary of the former Proposition.

Suppose that there be two right lines AB and CD which let be equal: and upon
the^ let there be set these like sections ABK, and CDE. An other demo^stratio^
after Pelitarius.
Then I say that the said sections are equal. For if not, then let CED be the
greater section. And divide the two lines AB and CD into two equal parts, the
line AB in the point F, and the line CD in the point G. And erect two
perpendicular lines FK and GE. And draw these right lines AK and KB: EC, ED.
And forasmuch as the section CED is the greater, therefore the perpendicular
line GE is greater then the perpendicular FK: From the line GE cut of a line
equal to the line FK, which let be GH: and draw these right lines CH and HD.
And forasmuch as in the triangle AKF the two sides AF and FK are equal to the
two sides CG and GH of the triangle CHG, and the angles at the points F and G
are equal (for that they are right angles) therefore (by the 4. of the first)
the base A K is equal to the base CH, and the angle AKF to the angle CHG. And
by the same reason the angle BKF is equal to the angle DHG. Wherefore the whole
angle AKB is equal to the whole angle CHD. But the angle CHD is greater then
the angle CED by the 21. of the first. Wherefore also the angle AKD is greater
then the angle CED. Wherefore the sections are not like, which is contrary to
the supposition.

The 3. Problem. The 25. Proposition. A segment of a circle being given to
describe the whole circle of the same segment.
SVppose that ye segment given be ABC. It is required to describe the whole
circle of the same segment ABC. Construction.
Divide (by the 10. of the first) the line AC into two equal parts in the
point D. And (by the 11. of the same) from the point D raise up unto the line
AC a perpendicular line BD. And (by the first petition) draw a right line from
A to B. Now then the angle ABD being compared to ye angle BAD, is either
greater then it, or equal unto it, or less then it.

Three cases in this Proposition.

The first case.


First let it be greater. And (by the 23. of the same) upon the right line BA,
and unto the point in it A, make unto the angle ABD an equal angle BAE. And
(by the second petition) extend the line BD unto the point E. And (by the first
petition) draw a line from E to C. Now for as much as the angle ABE is equal to
the angle BAE, Demonstration.
therefore (by the 6. of the first) the right line EB is equal to the right
line AE. And for as much as the line AD is equal to ye line DC, and the line DE
is common to them both: therefore these two lines AD and DE, are equal to
these t^o lines CD and DE the one to the other. And the angle ADE ^^ (by the 4.
petition) equal to the angle CDE, for either of them is a right angle^
Wherefor^ (by the 4. of the first) the base AE is equal to the base CE. But it
is pro^ed, that the line AE is ^quall to ye line BE. Wherefore the line BE also
is equal to the line CE. Wherefore these three lines AE, EB, and EC, are
equal the one to the other. Wherefore making the center E, and the space
either AE, or EB, or EC, describe (by the third petition) a circle, and it
shall pass by the points A, B, C. Wherefore there is described the whole
circle of the segment given, And it is manifest, that the segment ABC is les^e
then a semicircle, for the center E falls witho^t it.

The like demo^stration also will serve if the angle ABD be equal to the angle
BAD. The second case.
For the line AD being equal to either of these lines, BD, and DC, there are
three lines^ DA, DB, and DC, equal the one to the other. So that the point D
shall be the center of the circle being complete, and ABC shall be a semicircle.

But if the angle ABD be less then the angle BAD, The third case.
then (by the 23. of the first) upon the right line BA, and unto the point in
it A, make unto the angle ABD an equal angle within y^ segment ABC. And so the
ce^tre of the circle shall fall in ye line DB, and it shall be the point E: and
the segment ABC shall be greater then a semicircle, Wherefore a segment being
given, there is described the whole circle of the same segment: which was
required to be done.

A Corollary. Hereby it is manifest, that in a semicircle the angle BAD is
equal to the angle DBA: but in a section less then a semicircle, it is less:
in a section greater then a semicircle, it is greater.
There is also an other general w^y to find out the foresaid center, An other
more ready way.
which will serve indifferently for any section whatsoever: And that is thus.
Take in the circumference given or section ABC, three points at all auentures
which let be A, B, C. And draw these lin^s AB and BC (by the first peticion)
And (by the 10. of the first) divide into two equal parts ^ith^r of the sayd^
lines. the line AB in the point D, and (...) line BC in the point E. And (by
the 11. of the first) from the point^s D and E raise up unto the lines AB and
BC perpendicular lines DF and OF. Now forasmuch as either of these angles BDF,
Demonstration.
and BEF is a right angle, a right line produced from the point D to the point
E, shall divide either of the said angles: and forasmuch as it falls upon
the right lines DF and OF, it shall make the inward angles on one and the self
same side, namely, the angles DEF and EDF less then two right angles.
Wherefore (by the fifth peticion) the lines DF and OF being produced shall
concur. Let them concur in the point F. And forasmuch as a certain right
line DF deuideth a certain right line AB into two equal parts and
perpendicularly, therefore (by the corollary of the first of this book) in the
line DF is the center of the circle, and by the same reason the center of the
self same circle shall be in the right line OF. Wherefore the center of the
circle whereof ABC is a section, is in the point F, which is common to either of
the lines DF and OF. Wherefore a section of a circle being given, namely, the
section ABC, there is described the circle of the same section: which was
required to be done.

And by this last general way, An addition.
if there be given three points, set howsoever, so that they be not all three
in one right line, a man may describe a circle which shall pass by all the
said three points. For as in the example before put, if you suppose only the
3. points A, B, C, to be given and not the circumference ABC to be drawn, yet
following the self ^ame order you did before, that is, draw a right line from
A to B and an other from B to C and divide the said right lines into two equal
parts, in the points D and E, and erect the perpendicular lines DF and OF
cutting the one the other in the point F, and draw a ^ight line from F to B:
and making the center the point F, and the space FB describe a circle, and it
shall pass by the points A and C: which may be proved by drawing right lines
from A to F, and from F to C. For forasmuch as the two si^es AD and DF of the
triangle ADF are equal to the two sides BD and DF of the triangle BDF (for by
supposition the line AD is equal to the line DB, and the line DF is common to
them bot^) and the angle ADF is equal to the angle BDF (for they are both
right angles) therefore (by the 4. of the first) the base AF is equal to the
base BF. And by the same reason the line FC is equal to the line FB. Wherefore
these three lines FA, FB and FC are equal the one to the other. Wherefore
making the center the point F and the space FB, it shall also pass by the
points A and C. Which was required to be done. This proposition is very
necessary for many things as you shall afterward see.

Campane puts an other way, how to describe the whole circle of a sectio^
given. An other construction and demonstration of this Proposition after,
Campane
Suppose that the section be AB. It is required to describe the whole circle of
the same section. Draw in the section two lines at all adventures AC and BD:
which divide into two equal parts AC in the point E, and BD in the point F.
Then from the two points of the deuisions draw within the section two
perpendicular lines EG and FH which let cut the one the other in the point K.
And the center of the circle shall be in either of the said perpendicular lines
by the corollary of the first of this book. Wherefore the point K is the center
of the circle: which was required to be done.

But if the lines EG and FH do not cut the one the other, but make one right
line as does GH in the second figure: which happens when the two lines AC and
BD are equidistant. Then the line GH, being applied to either part of the
circumference given, shall pass by the center of the circle, by the self same
Corollary. For the lines EG and FH cannot be equidistant. For then one and the
self same circumference should have two centres. Wherefore the line HG being
divided into two equal parts in the point K, the said point K shall be the
center of the section.

Pelitarius here adds a brief way how to find out the center of a circle,
which is commonly used of Artificers.

Suppose that the circumference be ABCD, whose center it is required to find
out. A ready way to find out the center of a circle commonly used amongst
a^tificers.
Take a point in the circumference given which let be A, upon which describe a
circle with what openyng of the compass you will, which let be EFG. Then take
an other point in the circumference given which let be B, upon which describe
an other circle with the same opening of the compass that the circle EFG was
described, and let the same be EHG, which let cut the circle EFG in the two
points E and G. (I have not here drawn the whole circles, but only those
parts of them which cut the one the other for avoiding of confusion) And draw
from those centres these right lines AE, BE, AG, and BG, which four lines
shall be equal, by reason they are semidiameters o^ equal circles. And draw a
right line from A to B, and so shall there be made two Isosceles triangles AEB,
and AGB unto whom the line AB is a common base. Now then divide the line AB
into two equal parts in the point K which must needs fall between the two
circumference EFG and EHG, otherwise the part should be greater then his whole.
Draw a line from E to K and produce it to the point G. Now you see that there
are two Isosceles triangles divided into four equal triangles EAK, EBK, GAK
and GBK. For the two sides AE and AK of the triangle AEK are equal to the two
sides BE and BK of the triangle BEK, and the base EK is common to them both.
Wherefore the two angles at the point K of the two triangles AEK and BEK are by
the 8. of the first equall^ and therefore are right angles. And by the same
reason the other angles at the point K are right angles. Wherefore EG is one
right line by the 14. of the first. Which forasmuch as it deuideth the line AB
perpendicularly, therefore it passes by the center by by the corollary of the
first of this book. And so if you take two other points, name^ C and D in the
circumference given, and upon the^ describe two circles cuttyng the one the
other in the points L and M, and by the said points produce a right line, it
shall cut the line EG being produced in the point N, which shall be the
center of the circle by the same Corollary of the first of this book, if you
imagine the light line CD to be drawn and to be divided perpendicularly by the
line LM, which it must needs be as we have before proved. And here note that
to do this mechanically not regardyng demonstration, you need only to mark
the points where the circles cut the one the other, namely, the points E, G,
and L, M, and by those points to produce the lines EG and LM till they cut the
one the other, and where they cut the one the other, there is the center of the
circle, as you see here in the second figure.

The 23. Theoreme. The 26. Proposition. Equal angles in equal circles consist
in equal circu^ferences, whether the angles be drawn from the centres, or
from the circumferences.
SVppose that these circles ABC and DEF, be equal. And from their centres,
namely, the points G and H, let there be drawn these equal angles BGC and
EHF: and likewise from their circumferences these equal angles BAC and EDF.
Then I say, that the circumference BKC is equal to the circumference ELF. Draw
(by the first petition) right lines from B to C, Construction.
and from E to F. And for as much as the circles ABC and DEF are equal, the
right lines also drawn from their centres to their circumferences,
Demonstration.
are (by the first definition of the third) equal the one to the other.
Wherefore these two lines BG and GC, are equal to these two lines EH and HF.
And the angle at the point G is equal to the angle at the point H: Wherefore
(by the 4. of the first) the base BC is equal to ye base OF. And for as much as
the angle at the point A is equal to the angle at the point D, therefore the
segment BAC is like to the segment EDF. And they are described upon equal
right lines BC and OF. But like segmentes of circles described upon equal
right lines, are (by the 24. of the third) equal the one to the other.
Wherefore the segment BAC is equal to the segment EDF. And the whole circle
ABC is equal to ye whole circle DEF. Wherefore (by the third common sentence)
the circumference remaining BKC is equal to the circumference remaining ELF.
Wherefore equal angles in equal circles consist in equal circumferences,
whether the angles be drawn from the centres or from the circumferences: which
was required to be demonstrated.

The 24. Theoreme. The 27. Proposition. In equal circles the angles which
consist in equal circumferences, are equal the one to the other, whether the
angles be drawn from the centres, or from the circumferences.
SVppose yt these circles ABC, and DEF, be equal. And upon these equal
circumferences of the same circles, namely, upon BC and OF, let there consist
these angles BGC and EHF drawn from the centres, and also these angles BAC and
EDF drawn from the circumferences. Then I say, that the angle BGC is equal to
the angle EHF, and the angle BAC to the angle EDF. If the angle BGC be equal
to the angle EHF, then it is manifest, that the angle BAC is equal to ye angle
EDF (by the 20. of the third). But if the angle BGC be not equal to ye angle
EHF, Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
then is the one of them greater then the other. Let the angle BGC be greater
And (by the 23. of the first) upon the right line BG, and unto the point given
in it G, make unto the angle EHF an equal angle BGK. But (by the 26. of ye
third) equal angles in equal circles consist upon equal circumferences,
whether they be drawn from the centres or from the circumferences. Wherefore
the circumference BK is equal to the circumference OF. But the circumference
OF is equal to the circumference BC: Wherefore the circumference BK also is
equal to the circumference BC, the less to the greater: which is impossible.
Wherefore the angle BGC is not unequal to the angle EHF: Wherefore it is
equal. And (by the 20. of the third) the angle at the point A is the half of
the angle BGC: and (by the same) the angle at the point D is the half of the
angle EHF. Wherefore the angle at the point A is equal to the angle at the
point D. Wherefore in equal circles, the angles which consist in equal
circumferences, are equal the one to the other, whether the angles be drawn
from the centres or from the circumferences: which was required to be proved.

The 25. Theoreme. The 28. Proposition. In equal circles, equal right lines
do cut away equal circumferences, the greater equal to the greater, and the
less equal to the less.
SVppose that these circles ABC, and DEF, be equal. And in them let there be
drawn these equal right lines BC and OF, which let cut away these
circumferences BAC and DEF being the greater, and also these circumferences BGC
and EHF being the less. Then I say, that the greater circumference BAC is
equal to the greater circumference EDF: and the less circumference BGC is
equal to the less circumference EHF. Construction.
Take (by the first of the third) the centres of the circles, and let the same
be the points K and L. And draw these right lines, KB, KC, LE, and LF. And for
as much as the circles are equal, Demonstration.
therefore (by the first definition of the third) the lines which are drawn
from the centres are equal. Wherefore these two lines BK and KC, are equal to
these two lines EL and LF. And (by supposition) the base BC is equal to the
base OF. Wherefore (by the 8. of ye first) the angle BKC is equal to the angle
ELF. But (by the 26. of the third) equal angles drawn from the centres,
consist upon equal circumferences. Wherefore the circumference BGC is equal to
the circumference EHF: and ye whole circle ABC is equal to the whole circle
DEF. Wherefore the circumference remaining BAC, is (by the third common
sentence) equal to the circumference remaining EDF. Wherefore in circles,
equal right lines do cut away equal circumferences, the greater equal to the
greater, and the less equal to the less: which was required to be proved.

The 26. Theoreme. The 29. Proposition. In equal circles, under equal
circumferences are subtended equal right lines.
The converse of the former Proposition.
SVppose that these circles ABC and DEF, be equal. And in them let there be
taken these equal circumferences, BGC and EHF: and draw these right lines BC
and OF. Then I say, that the right line BC is equal to the right line OF. Take
(by the first of ye third) the centres of the circles, and let them be the
points K and L, Construction.
and draw these right lines KB, KC, LE, LF. And for as much as the circumference
BGC is equal to the circumference EHF, Demonstration.
the angle BKC is equal to ye angle ELF (by the 27. of the third). And for
as much as the circles ABC and DEF are equal the one to the other, therefore
(by the first definition of the third) the lines which are drawn from the
centres are equal. Wherefore these y. lines BK and KC, are equal to these y.
lines LE and LF, and they comprehend equal angles. Wherefore (by the 4. of the
first) the base BC is equal to the base OF. Wherefore in equal circles under
equal circumferences, are subtended equal right lines: which was required to
be demonstrated.

The 4. Problem. The 30. Proposition. To divide a circumference given into two
equal parts.
SVppose that the circumference given be ADB. It is required to divide the
circumference ADB into two equal parts. Construction.
Draw a right line from A to B. And (by the 10. of the first) divide the line
AB into two equal parts in the point C. And (by the 11. of the first) from
the point C raise up unto AB a perpendicular line CD. And draw these right
lines AD and DB. And forasmuch as the line AC is equal to the line CB,
Demons^ratio^.
and the line CD is common to them both, therefore these two lines AC and CD
are equal to these two lines BC and CD. And (by the 4. peti^ion) the angle ACD
is equal to the angle BCD, for either of them is a right right angle. Wherefore
(by the 4. of the first) the base AD is equal to the base DB. But equal right
lines do cut away equal circumferences, the greater equal to the greater, and
the less equal to the less (by the 28. of the third) And either of these
circumferences AD and DB is less then a semicircle. Wherefore the circumference
AD is equal to the circumference DB. Wherefore the circumference given is
divided into two equal parts: Which was required to be done.

The 27. Theoreme. The 31. Proposition. In a circle an angle made in the
semicircle is a right angle: but an angle made in the segment greater then the
semicircle is less then a right angle, and an angle made in the segment less
then the semicircle, is greater then a right angle. And moreover the angle of
the greater segment is greater then a right angle: and the angle of the less
segment is less then a right angle.
SVppose that the circle be ABCD, and let the dimetient of the circle be the
right line BC, and the ce^tre thereof the point E. And take in the semicircle a
point at all auentures, and let the same be D. And draw these right lines BA,
AC, AD, and DC. The first ^art of this Theoreme.
Then I say that the angle in the semicircle BAC, namely, the angle BAC is a
right angle. And the angle ABC which is in the segment ABC being greater then
the semicircle, is less then a right angle. And the angle ADC which is in the
segment ADC being less then the semicircle is greater the^ a right angle. Draw
a line from the point A to the point E, and extend the line BA unto the point
F. And forasmuch as the line BE is equal to the line EA, (for they are drawn
from the center to the circumference) therefore the angle EAB is equal to the
angle EBA (by the 5. of the first). Again forasmuch as the line AE is equal
to the line EC, the angle ACE is (by the same) equal to the angle CAE.
Wherefore the whole angle BAC is equal to these two angles ABC and ACB. But the
angle FAC which is an outward angle of the triangle ABC is (by the 32. of the
first) equal to the two angles ABC and ACB. Wherefore the angle BAC is equal
to the angle F^AC. Wherefore either of them is a right angle. Wherefore the angle
BAC which is in the semicircle BAC is a right angle.

Second part.
And forasmuch as (by the 17. of the first) the two angles of the triangle ABC,
namely, ABC and BAC are less then two right angles, and the angle BAC is a
right angle. Therefore the angle ABC is less then a right angle, and it is in
the segment ABC which is greater then the semicircle.

Thir^ part.
And forasmuch as in the circle there is a figure of four sides, namely, ABCD.
But if within a circle be described a figure of four sides, the angles thereof
which are opposite the one to the other are equal to two right angles (by the
22. of the third) Wherefore (by the same) the angles ABC and ADC are equal to
two right angles. But the angle ABC is less then a right angle. Wherefore the
angle remaining ADC is greater then a right angle, and it is in a segment which
is less then the semicircle.

Now also I say that the angle of the greater segment, namely, The fourth part.
the angle which is comprehended under the circumference ABC and the right line
AC is greater then a right angle, and the angle of the less segment
comprehended under the circumference ADC, and the right line AC is less the^ a
right angle, which may thus be proved. Forasmuch as the angle comprehended
under the right lines BA and AC is a right angle, therefore the angle
comprehended under the circumference ABC and the right line AC is greater then
a right angle: for the whole is ever greater then his part (by the 9. common
sentence.

Again forasmuch as the angle comprehended under the right lines AC and AF is
a right angle, The fifth and last part.
therefore the angle comprehended under the right line CA and the circumference
ADC is less then a right angle. Wherefore in a circle an angle made in the
semicircle is a right angle, but an angle made in the segment greater then the
semicircle is less then a right angle, and an angle made in the segment less
then the semicircle, is greater then a right angle. And moreover the angle of
the greater segment is greater then a right angle: and the angle of the less
segment is less then a right angle: which was required to be demonstrated.

An other demonstration to prove that the angle BAC is a right angle. An other
Demonstration to prove that the ang^e in a semicircle is a right angle.
Forasmuch as the angle AEC is double to the angle BAE (by the 32. of the
first) for it is equal to the two inward angles which are opposite. But the
inward angles are (by the 5. of the first) equal the one to the other, and
the angle AEB is double to the angle EAC. Wherefore the angles AEB and AEC are
double to the angle BAC. But the angles AEB and AEC are equal to two right
angles: Wh^rfore the angle BAC is a right angle. Which was required to be
demonstrated.

Correlary.
Hereby it is manifest, A Corollary.
that if in a triangle one angle be equal to the two other angles remaining
the same angle is a right angle: for that the side angle to that one angle
(namely, the angle which is made of the side produced without the triangle) is
equal to the same angles, but when the side angles are equal the one to the
other, they are also right angles.

An addition of Pelitarius.
If in a circle be inscribed a rectangle triangle, the side opposite unto the
right angle shall be the diameter of the circle.

An addition of P^litarius.
Suppose that in the circle ABC be inscribed a rectangle triangle ABC, whose
angle at the point B let be a right angle. Then I say, that the side AC is the
diameter of the circle. For if not, then shall the center be without the line
AC, as in the point E. Demonstration lea^ing to an absurdit^^.
And draw a line from the point A to the point E, and produce it to the
circumference to the point D: and let AED be the diameter: and draw a line from
the point B to the point D. Now (by this 31. Proposition) the angle ABD shall
be a right angle, and therefore shall be equal to the right angle ABC, namely,
the part to the whole: which is absurd. Even so may we prove, that the center
is in no other where but in the line AC. Wherefore AC is the diameter of the
circle: which was required to be proved.

An addition of Campane.
An addition of Campane.
By this 31. Proposition, and by the 16. Proposition of this book, it is
manifest, that although in mixed angles, which are contained under a right line
and the circumference of a circle, there may be given an angle less and
greater then a right angle, yet can there never be given an angle equal to a
right angle. For every section of a circle is either a semicircle, or greater
then a semicircle, or less, but the angle of a semicircle is by the 16. of
this book, less then a right angle, and so also is the angle of a less
section by this 31. Proposition: Likewise the angle of a greater section, is
greater then a right angle, as it has in this Proposition been proved.

The 28. Theoreme. The 32. Proposition. If a right line touch a circle, and
from the touch be drawn a right line cutting the circle: the angles which that
line and the touch line make, are equal to the angles which consist in the
alternate segmentes of the circle.
SVppose that the right line OF do touch the circle ABCD in the point B: and
from the point B let there be drawn into the circle ABCD a right line cutting
the circle, and let the same be BD. Then I say, that the angles which the line
BD together with the touch line OF do make, are equal to the angles which are
in the alternate segmentes of the circle, that is, the angle FBD is equal to
the angle which consists in the segment BAD, and the angle EBD is equal to
the angle which consists in the segment BCD. Construction.
Raise up (by the 11. of the first) from ye point B unto the right line OF a
perpendicular line BA. And in the circumference BD take a point at all
adventures, and let the same be C. And draw these right lines AD, DC, and CB.
Demonstration.
And for as much as a certain right line OF touches the circle ABC in the
point B, and from the point B where the touch is, is raised up unto the touch
line a perpendicular BA. Therefore (by the 19. of the third) in the line BA is
the center of the circle ABCD. Wherefore ye angle ADB being in the semicircle,
is (by the 31. of the third) a right angle. Wherefore the angles remaining BAD
and ABD, are equal to one right angle. But the angle ABF is a right angle.
Wherefore the angle ABF is equal to the angles BAD and ABD. Take away ye angle
ABD which is common to them both. Wherefore the angle remaining DBF, is equal
to the angle remaining BAD, which is in the alternate segment of the circle.
And for as much as in the circle is a figure of four sides, namely, ABCD,
therefore (by the 22. of the third) the angles which are opposite the one to the
other, are equal to two right angles. Wherefore the angles BAD and BCD, are
equal to two right angles. But the angles DBF and DBE, are also equal to two
right angles. Wherefore the angles DBF and DBE, are equal to the angles BAD
and BCD. Of which we have proved that the angle BAD is equal to the angle DBF.
Wherefore the angle remaining DBE, is equal to the angle remaining DCB, which
is in the alternate segment of the circle, namely, in the segment DCB. If
therefore a right line touch a circle, and from the touch be drawn a right line
cutting the circle: the angles which that line and the touch line make, are
equal to ye angles which consist in ye alternate segmentes of the circle:
which was required to be proved.

In this Proposition may be two cases. Two cases in this Proposition.
For the line drawn from the touch and cutting the circle, may either pass by
the center or not. If it pass by the center, then is it manifest (by the 18.
of this book) that it falls perpendicularly upon the touch line, and
deuideth the circle into two equal parts, so that all the angles in each
semicircle, are by the former Proposition, right angles, and therefore equal to
the alternate angles made by the said perpendicular line and the touch line. If
it pass not by the center, then follow the construction and demonstration
before put.

The 5. Problem. The 33. Proposition. Upon a right line given to describe a
segment of a circle, which shall contain an angle equal to a rectiline angle
given.
SVppose that the right line given be AB, and let the rectiline angle ge^^n be
C. It is required upon the right line given AB to describe a segment of a
circle which shall contain an angle equal to the angle C. Now the angle C is
either an acute angle, or a right angle, or an obtuse angle.

Three cases in this Proposition.

The first case.


First, let it be an acute angle as in the first description. And (by the 23 of
the first) upon the right line AB and to the point in it A describe an angle
equal to the angle C, Construction.
and let the same be DAB. Wherefore the angle DAB is an acute angle. From the
point A raise up (by the 11. of ye first) unto the line AD a perpendiculer line
AF. And (by the 10. of the first) divide the line AB into two equal parts in
the point F. And (by the 11. of the same) from the point F raise up unto the
line AB a perpendicular line FG, and draw a line from G to B. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the line AF is equal to the line FB and the line FG is
common to them both, therefore these two lines AF and FG are equal to these two
lines FB and FG: and the angle AFG is (by the 4. peticion) equal to the angle
GFB. Wherefore (by the 4. of the same) the base AG is equal to the base GB.
Wherefore making the center G and the space GA describe (by the 3. peticion) a
circle and it shall pass by the point B: describe such a circle and let the
same be ABE: And draw a line from E to B. Now forasmuch as from the end of the
diameter AE, namely, from the point A is (...) a right line AD making together
with the right line AE a right angle, therefore (by the correllary of the 16. of
the third) the line AD touches the circle ABE. And forasmuch as a certain
right line AD touches the circle ABE, and from the point A where the touch is,
is drawn into ye circle a certain right line AB: therefore (by the 32. of the
third) the angle DAB is equal to the angle AEB which is in the alternate
segment of the circle. But the angle DAB is equal to the angle C, wherefore the
angle C is equal to the angle AEB. Wherefore upon the right line given AB is
described a segment of a circle which contains the angle AEB, which is equal
to the angle given, namely, to C.

The second case.
But now suppose that the angle C be a right angle. It is again required upon
the right line AB to describe a segment of a circle, which shall contain an
angle equal to the right angle C. Construction.
Describe again upon the right line AB and to the point in it A an angle BAD
equal to the rectiline angle given C (by the 23. of the first) as it is set
forth in the second description. And (by the 10. of the first) divide the line
AB into two equal parts in the point F. And making the center the point F and
the space FA or FB describe (by the 3. peticion) ye circle AEB. Demonstration.
Wherefore the right line AD touches the circle AEB: for that the angle BAD is
a right angle. Wherefore ye angle BAD is equal to the angle which is in the
segment AEB, for the angle which is in a semicircle is a right angle (by the
31. of the third) But the angle BAD is equal to the angle C. Wherefore there is
again described upon the line AB a segment of a circle, namely, AEB, which
contains an angle equal to the angle given namely, to C.

But now suppose that the angle C be an obtuse angle. The third case.
Upon the right line AB and to the point in it A describe (by the 23. of the
first) an angle BAD equal to the angle C: as it is in the third description.
Construction.
And from the point A raise up unto the line AD a perpendiculer line AE (by the
11. of the first) And again by the 10. of the first) divide the line AB into
two equal parts in the point F. And from the point F. ra^se up unto the line
AB a perpe^dicular line FG (by the 11. of the same) and draw a line from G to
B. Demonstration.
And now forasmuch as the line AF is equal to the line FB, and the line FG is
common to them both, therefore these two lines AF and FG are equal to these two
lines BF and FG: and the angle AFG is (by the 4. peticion) equal to the angle
BFG: wherefore (by the 4. of the same) the base AG is equal to the base GB.
Wherefore making the center G, and the space GA describe (by the 3. peticion) a
circle and it shall pass by the point B: let it be described as the circle AEB
is. And forasmuch as from the end of the diameter AE is drawn a perpendiculer
line AD, therefore (by the correllary of the 16. of the third) the line AD
touches the circle AEB and from the point of the touch, namely; A, is
extended the line AB. Wherefore (by the 32. of the third) the angle BAD is
equal to the angle AHB which is in the alternate segment of the circle. But
the angle BAD is equal to the angle C. Wherefore the angle which is in the
segment AHB is equal to the angle C. Wherefore upon the right line given AB, is
described a segment of a circle AHB, which contains an angle equal to the
angle given, namely, C: which was required to be done.

The 6. Problem. The 34. Proposition. From a circle given to cut away a
section which shall contain an angle equal to a rectiline angle given.
SVppose that the circle given be AC and let the rectiline angle given be D. It
is required from the circle ABC to cut away a segment which shall contain an
angle equal to the angle D. Cons^^uction.
Draw (by the 17. of the third) a line touching the circle, and let the same be
OF: and let it touch in the point B. And (by the 23. of the first) upon the
right line OF and to the point in it B describe the angle FBC equal to the
angle D. Demonstration.
Now forasmuch as a certain right line OF touches the circle ABC in the point
B: and frora ye point of the touch, namely, B, is drawn into the circle a
certain right line BC, therefor (by the 32. of the third) the angle FBC is
equal to the angle BAC which is in the alternate segment. But the angle FBC is
equal to the angle D. Wherefore the angle BAC which consists in the segment
BAC is equal to the angle D. Wherefore from the circle given ABC is cut away a
segment BAC, which contains an angle equal to the rectiline angle given:
which was required to be done.

The 29. Theoreme. The 35. Proposition. If in a circle two right lines do cut
the one the other, the rectangle parallelograme comprehended under the
segmentes or parts of the one line is equal to the rectangle parallelograme
comprehended under the segment or parts of the other line.
LEt the circle be ABCD, and in it let these two right lines AC and BD c^t the
one the other in the point E. Then I say that the rectangle parallelogramme
contained under the parts AE and EC is equal to the rectangle parallelogramme
contained under the parts DE and EB. Two cases in this Proposition.

First case.


For if the line AC and BD be drawn by the center, then is it manifest, that
for as much as the lines AE and EC are equal to the lines DE and EB by the
definition of a circle, Demonstration.
the rectangle parallelograme also contained under the lines AE and EC is
equal to ye rectangle parallelograme contained under the lines DE and EB.

But now suppose that the lines AC and DB be not extended by the center, The
second c^se.
and take (by the 1. of the third) the center of the circle ABCD, and let the
same be the point F, Construction.
and from the point F draw to the right lines AC and DB perpendicular lines FG
and FH (by the 12. of the first) and draw these right lines FB, FC, and FE. And
forasmuch as a certain right line FG drawn by the center, Demonstration.
cutteth a certain right line AC not drawn by the center in such sort that
it makes right angles, it therefore deuideth the line AC into two equal parts
(by the 3. of the third). Wherefore the line AG is equal to the line GC. and
forasmuch as the right line AC is divided into two equal parts in the point
G, and into two unequal parts in the point E: therefore (by the 5. of the
second) the rectangle parallelogramme contained under the lines. AE and EC
together with the square of the line EG is equal to the square of the line GC.
Put the square of the line GF common to them both, wherefore that which is
contained under the lines AE and EC together with the squares of the lines EG
and GF is equal to the squares of the lines GF and GC. But unto ye squares of
ye lines EG and GF is equal ye square of ye line FE (by the 47. of the first):
and to the squares of the lines GC and GF is equal the square of the line FC
(by the same) Wherefore that which is contained under the lines AE and EC,
together with the square of the line FE is equal to the square of the line FC.
But the line FC is equal to the line FB. For they are drawn from the center
to the circumference. Wherefore that which is contained under the lines AE and
E^ together with the square of the line FE is equal to the square of the line
FB. And by the same demonstration that which is contained under the lines DE
and EB together with the square of the line FE is equal to the square of the
line FB. Wherefore that which is contained under the lines AE and EC together
with the square of the line OF is equal to that which is contained under the
lines DE and EB together with the square of the line OF. Take away the square
of the line FE which is common to them both. Wherefore the rectangle
parallelogramme remaining which is contained under the lines AE and EC is
equal to the rectangle parallelogramme remaining, which is contained under the
lines DE and EB. If therefore in a circle two right lines do cut the one the
other: the rectangle parallelogramme comprehended under the segmentes or parts
of the one line is equal to the rectangle parallelograme comprehended under
the segmentes or parts of the other line: which was required to be demonstrated.

In this Proposition are three cases: Three cases in this ^roposition.
For either both the lines pass by the center, or ^eyther of them passes by
the center: or the one passes by the center and the other not. The two first
cases are before demonstrated.

But now let one of the lines only, namely, the line AC pass by the center,
which let be the point F, The third case.
and let it cut the other line, namely, BD, in the point E. Now then the line
AC deuideth the line BD either into two equal parts, or into two unequal
parts. First let it divide it into two equal parts: Wherefore also it
deuideth it ^ight angled wise by the 3. of this book. Draw a right line from
B to F. Wherefore BEF is a right angled triangle. And for as much as the right
line AC is divided into two equal parts in the point F, and into two unequal
parts in the point E. Therefore the rectangle figure contained under the lines
AE and EC together with the square of the line OF, is equal to the square of
the line FC (by the 5. of the second). But unto the square of the line FC is
equal the square of the line BF (for that the lines FB and FC are equal).
Therefore that which is contained under the lines AE and EC together with the
square of the line OF, is ^^uall to the square of the line BF. But unto the
square of the line BF, are equal the squares of the lines BE and OF (by the
47. of the first). Wherefore that which is contained under the lines AE and EC
together with the square of the line OF, is equal to the squares of the lines
BE and OF. Take away the square of the line OF which is common to them both:
Wherefore that which remains, namely, that which is contained under the lines
AE and EC, is equal to the residue, namely, to the square of the line BE. But
the square o^ the line BE is that which is contained under the lines BE and ED:
for (by supposition) the line BE is equal to the line ED. Wher^fore that which
is contained under the lines AE and EC, is equal to that which is contained
under the lines BE and ED: which was required to be proved.

But now let the line AC passing by the center, divide, the line BD not passing
by the center, unequally in the point E. And from the point E raise up unto the
line AC a perpendicular line EH, which produce on the other side to the point
G. Where^ore (by the 3. of this book) the line EH is equal to the line EG.
Wherefore as we have before proved, that which is contained under the lines AE
and EC, is equal to that which is contained under the lines GE and EH: but
that which is contained under the lines BE and ED, is also equal to that which
is contained under the lines GE and EH, by the second case of this Proposition:
Wherefore that which is contained under the lines AE and EC, is equal to that
which is contained under the lines BE and ED: which was again required to be
proved.

Amongst all the Propositions in this third book, doubtless this is one of the
chiefest. For it sets forth unto us the wonderful nature of a circle. So
that by it may be done many goodly conclusions in Geometry, as shall afterward
be declared when occasion shall serve.

The 30. Theoreme. The 36. Proposition. If without a circle be taken a certain
point, and from that point be drawn to the circle two right lines, so that the
one of them do cut the circle, and the other do touch the circle: the rectangle
parallelogramme which is comprehended under the whole right line which cutteth
the circle, and that portion of the same line that lies between the point and
the utter circu^ference of the circle, is equal to the square made of the line
that touches the circle.
SVppose that the circle be ABC: and without the same circle take any point at
all adventures, and let the same be D. Construction.
And from the point D let there be drawn to the circle two right lines DCA and
DB, and let the right line DCA cut the circle ACB in the point C, and let the
right line BD touch the same. Then I say, that the rectangle parallelogramme
contained under the lines AD and DC, Two cases in this Proposition.
is equal to the square of the line BD. Now the line DCA is either drawn by
the center, or not.

First let it be drawn by the center. The first case.
And (by the first of the third) let the point F be ye center of the circle
ABC, and draw a line from F to B. Wherefore the angle FBD is a right angle.
Demonstration.
And for as much as ye right line AC is divided into two equal parts in the
point F, and unto it is added directly a right line CD, therefore (by the 6. of
the second) that which is contained under the lines AD and DC together with the
square of ye line CF, is equal to the square of the line FD. But the line FC
is equal to the line FB, for they are drawn from the center to ye
circumference: Wherefore that which is contained under the lines AD and DC
together with the square of the line FB, is equal to the square of the line
FD. But ye square of the line FD, is (by the 47. of the first) equal to the
squares of the lines FB and BD (for the angle FBD is a right angle). Wherefore
that which is contained under the lines AD and DC together with the square of
the line FB, is equal to the squares of the lines FB and BD. Take away the
square of the line FB which is common to them both. Wherefore that which
remains, namely, that which is contained under the lines AD and DC, is equal
to the square made of the line DB which touches the circle.

But now suppose that the right line DCA be not drawn by the center of the
circle ABC. The second case.
And (by the first of the third) let the point E be ye center of the circle
ABC. Construction.
And from ye point E, draw (by the 12. of the first) unto the line AC a
perpendicular line OF, and draw these right lines EB, EC, and ED. Demonstration.
Now the angle EFD is a right angle. And ^or as much as a certain right line OF
drawn by the center, cutteth a certain other right line AC not drawn by the
center, in such sort that it makes right angles, it deuideth it (by ye third
of the third) into two equal parts. Wherefore the line AF is equal to the
line FC. And for as much as the right line AC is divided into two equal parts
in the point F, and unto it is added directly an other right line making both
one right line, therefore (by the 6. of the second) that which is contained
under the lines DA and DC together with the square of the line FC, is equal to
the square of the line FD: put the square of the line FE common to them both.
Wherefore that which is contained under the lines DA and DC together with the
squares of the lines CF and FE, is equal to the squares of the lines FD and
FE. But to the squares of the lines FD and FE, is equal the square of the line
DE (by the 47. of the first) for the angle EFD is a right angle. And to the
squares of the lines CF and FE, is equal the square of the line CE (by the
same). Wherefore that which is contained under the lines AD and DC together with
the square of the line EC, is equal to the square of the line ED. But the line
EC is equal to the line EB: for they are drawn from the center to the
circumference. Wherefore that which is contained under the lines AD and DC
together with the square of the line EB, is equal to the square of the line
ED. But to the square of the line ED, are equal the squares of the lines EB
and BD (by the 47. of the first) for the angle EBD is a right angle: Wherefore
that which is contained under the lines AD and DC together with the square of
the line EB, is equal to the squares of the lines EB and BD. Take away the
square of the line EB which is common to them both: Wherefore the residue,
namely, that which is contained under the lines AD and DC, is equal to the
square of the line DB. If therefore without a circle be taken a certain point,
and from that point be drawn to the circle two right lines, so that the one of
them do cut the circle, and the other do ^ouch the circle: the rectangle
parallelogramme which is comprehended under the whole right line which cutteth
the circle and that portion of the same line that lies between the point and
the utter circumference of the circle, is equal to the square made of the line
that touches the circle: which was required to be demonstrated.

Two Corollaries out of Campane.
If from (...) and the self same point taken without a circle be drawn into
the circle lines how many soever: First Corollary.
the rectangle Parallelogrammes contained under every one of them and his
outward part, are equal the one to the other.

And this is hereby manifest, for that every one of those rectangle
Parallelogrammes are equal to the square of the line which is drawn from that
point and touches the circle by this 36. Proposition. Hereunto he adds.

If two lines drawn from one and the self same point do touch a circle,
Second Corollary.
they are equal the one to the other.

Which although it need no demonstration, for that the square of either of
them is equal to that which is contained under the line drawn from the same
point and his outward part: yet he thus proves it.

Suppose that there be a circle BCD, whose center let be E, and without it take
the point A. And from the point A draw two lines AB and AD, which let touch
the circle in the points B and D. Then I say, that they are equal. Draw these
right lines EB, ED, and AE. And by the 18. of this book, either of the angles
at the points B and D is a right angle. Wherefore (by the 47. of the first)
the square of the line AE, is equal to the two squares of the lines AB and EB:
and by the same reason, to the two squares of the lines AD and ED. Wherefore
the two squares of the lines AB and EB, are equal to the two squares of the
lines AD and ED. And for as much as the squares of the lines EB and ED are
equal, therefore the two other squares of the lines AB and AD are also equal.
Wherefore the line AB is equal to the line AD^ which was required to be proved.

The same may be proved an other way: Draw a line from B to D. And (by the 5.
of the first) the angle EBD is equal to the angle EDB. And for as much as the
two angles ABE and ADE are equal, namely, for that they are right angles: if
you take from them the equal angles EBD and EDB, the two other angles
remaining, namely, the angles ABD and ADB shall be equal. Wherefore (by the 6.
of the first) the line AB is equal to the line AD.

Hereunto also Pelitarius adds this Corollary.
From a point given without ^ circle, can be drawn unto a circle only two
touch lines. Third Corollary.


The former description remaining, I say that from the point A can be drawn
unto the circle BCD no more touch lines, but the two lines AB and AD. For if it
be possible, let AF also be in the former figure a touch line, touching the
circle in the point F. And prawe a line from E to F. And the angle at the point
F shall be a right angle, by the 18. of this book: Wherefore it is equal to
the angle EBA, which is contrary to the 20. of the first.

This may also be thus proved. For as much as all the lines drawn from one and
the self same point and touching a circle are equal, as we have before
proved, but the lines AB and AF can not be equal, by the 8. Proposition of
this book, therefore the line AF can not touch the circle BCD.

The 31. Theoreme. The 37. Proposition. If without a circle be taken a certain
point, and from that point be drawn to the circle two right lines, of which,
the one does cut the circle and the other falls upon the circle, and that in
such sort, that the rectangle parallelogramme which is contained under the
whole right line which cutteth the circle, and that portion of the same line
that lies between the point and the utter circumfere^ce of the circle, is
equal to the square made of the line that falls upon the circle: then that
line that so falls upon the circle shall touch the circle.
LEt the circle be ABC: and without the same circle take a point, and let the
same be D, This proposition is the co^uerse of the former.
and from the point D let there be drawn to the circle ABC two right lines DCA
and DB: and let DCA cut the circle, and DB fall upon the circle. And that in
such sort, that that which is contained under the lines AD and DC, be equal to
the square of the line DB. Then I say, that ye line DB touches the circle ABC.
Draw (by the 17. of the third) from the point D a right line touching the
circle ABC, and let the same be DE. Construction.
And (by the first of the same) let the point F be the center of the circle
ABC: and draw these right lines FE, FB, and FD. Wherefore the angle FED is a
right angle. Demonstration.
And for as much as the right line DE touches the circle ABC, and the right
line DCA cutteth the same, therefore (by the Proposition going before) that
which is contained under the lines AD and DC, is equal to the square of the
line DE. But that which is contained under the lines AD and DC, is supposed to
be equal to the square of the line DB. Wherefore the square of the line DE is
equal to the square of the line DB. Wherefore also the line DE is equal to
the line DB. And the line FE is equal to the line FB, for they are drawn from
the center to ye circumference. Now therefore these two lines DE and OF are
equal to these two lines DB and BF, and FD is a common base to them both.
Wherefore (by the 8. of the first) the angle DEF is equal to the angle DBF.
But the angle DEF is a right angle. Wherefore also the angle DBF is a right
angle. And ye line FB being produced, shall be the diameter of the circle. But
if from the end of the diameter of a circle be drawn a right line making right
angles, the right line so drawn touches the circle (by the Correllary of the
16. of the third). Wherefore the right line DB touches the circle ABC. And the
like demonstration will serve if the center be in the line AC. If therefore
without a circle be taken a certain point, and from that point be drawn to
the circle two right lines, of which the one does cut the circle, and the other
falls upon the circle, and that in such sort, that the rectangle
parallelogramme which is contained under the whole right line which cutteth the
circle, and that portion of the same line that lies between the point and the
utter circumference of the circle, is equal to the square made of the line
that falls upon the circle: then the line that so falls upon the circle
shall touch the circle: which was required to be proved.

An other demonstration after Pelitarius.
Suppose that there be a circle BCD, whose center let be E: An other
demonstration after Pelitarius.
and take a point without it, namely, A: And from the point A draw two right
lines ABD, and AC: of which let ABD cut the circle in the point B, and let the
other fall upon it. And let that which is contained under the lines AD and AB,
be equal to the square of the line AC. Then I say, that the line AC touches
the circle. For first if the line ABD do pass by the center, draw the right
line CE. And (by the 6. of the second) that which is contained under the lines
AD and AB together with the square of the line EB, that is, with the square of
the line EC (for the lines EB and EC are equal) is equal to the square of the
line AE. But that which is contained under the lines AD and AB, is supposed to
be equal to the square of the line AC: Wherefore the square of the line AC
together with the square of the line CE, is equal to the square of the line
AE. Wherefore (by the last of the first) the angle at the point C is a right
angle. Wherefore (by the 18. of this book) the line AC touches the circle.

But if the line ABD do not pass by the center, draw from the point A the
line AD, in which let be the center E. And forasmuch as that which is contained
under this whole line and his outward part, is equal to that which is
contained under the lines AD and AB by the first Corollary before put,
therefore the same is equal to the square of the line AC, wherefore the angle
ECA is a right angle as has before been proved in the first part of this
Proposition. And therefore the line AC touches the circle: Which was required
to be proved.

The end of the third book of Euclides Elements.
The fourth book of Euclides Elements.
THIS FOVRTH BOOK entreats of the inscription and circumscription of
rectiline figures: The argument of this book.
how one right lined figure may be inscribed within an other right lined
figure, and how a right lined figure may be circumscribed about an other right
lined figure, in such as may be inscribed and circumscribed within or about the
other. For all right lined figures cannot so be inscribed or circumscribed
within or about the other. Also it teaches how a triangle, a square, and
certain other rectiline figures being regular may be inscribed within a
circle. Also how they may be circumscribed about a circle. Likewise how a
circle may be inscribed within them. And how it may be circumscribed about
them. And because the manner of entreatie in this book is diverse from the
entreaty of the former books, he uses in this other words and terms then he
used in them. The definitions of which in order here after follow.

Definitions.
A rectiline figure is said to be inscribed in a rectiline figure, First
definition.
when every one of the angles of the inscribed figure touches every one of the
sides of the figure wherein it is inscribed.
As the triangle ABC is inscribed in the triangle DEF, because that every angle
of the triangle inscribed, namely, the triangle ABC touches every side of the
triangle within which it is described, namely, of the triangle DEF. As the
angle CAB touches the side ED the angle ABC touches the side DF, and the
angle ACB touches the side OF. So likewise the square ABCD is said to be
inscribed within the square EFGH. for every angle of it touches some one side
of the other. So also the Pentagon or five angled figure ABCDE is inscribed
within the Pentagon or five angled figure FGHIK^ As you see in the figure^.

Likewise a rectiline figure is said to be circumscribed about a rectiline
figure, Second definition.
when every one of the sides of the figure circumscribed, touches every one of
the angles of the figure about which it is circumscribed.
As in the former descriptions the triangle DEF is said to be circumscribed
about the triangle ABC, for that every side of the figure circumscribed,
namely, of the triangle DEF touches every angle of the figure wherabout it is
circumscribed. As the side DF of the triangle DEF circumscribed, touches the
angle ABC of the triangle ABC about which it is circumscribed: and the side OF
touches the angle BCA, and the side CD touches the angle CAB. Likewise
understand you of the square EFGH which is circumscribed about the square ABCD:
for every side of the one touches some one side of the other. Eue^ so by the
same reason the Pentagon FGHIK is circumscribed about the Pentagon ABCDE, as
you see in the figure on the other side. And thus may you of other ^ectiline
figures consider.

The inscriptition and circumscription of rectiline ^ig^res pertai^eth only to
regular figures.
By these two definitions it is manifest, that the inscription and
circumscription of rectiline figures here spoken of, pertayne to such rectiline
figures only, which have equal sides and equal angles, which are commonly
called regular. It is also to be noted that rectiline figures only of one kind
or form can be inscribed or circumscribed the one within or about the other.
As a triangle within or about a triangle: A square within or about a square:
and so a Pentagon within or about a Pentago^, and likewise of others of one
form. But a triangle can not be inscribed or circumscribed within or about a
square: nor a square within or about a Pentagon. And so of others of diverse
kinds. For every plain rectiline figure has so many angles as it has sides.
Wherefore the figure inscrided must have so many angles as the figure in which
it is inscribed has sides: and the angles of the one (as is said) must touch
the sides of the other. And contrariwise in circumscription of figures, the
sides of the figure circumscribed must touch the angles of the figure about
which it is circumscribed.

The third definition.
A rectiline figure is said to be inscribed in a circle, when every one of the
angles of the inscribed figure touches the circumference of the circle.
A circle by reason of his uniform and regular distance which it has from the
center to the circumference may easily touch all the angles of any regular
rectiline figure within it: and also all the sides of any figure without it.
And therefore any regular rectiline figure may be inscribed within it, and also
be circumscribed about it. And again a circle may be both inscribed within any
regular rectiline figure, and also be circumscribed about it.

As the triangle ABC is inscribed in the circle ABC^ for that every angle
touches some one point of the circumference of the circle. As the angle CAB
of the triangle ABC touches the point A of the circumference of the circle.
And the angle ABC of the triangle touches the point B of the circumference of
the circle. And also the angle ACB of the tri^ngle (...) the point ^ of the
circumference of the circle. In like manner the square ADEF is inscribed in the
same circle ABC: for that every angle of the square inscribed, touches some
one point of the circle in which it is inscribed. And so imagine you of
rectilined figures.

A circle is said to be circumscribed about a rectiline figure, The fourth
definition.
when the circumference of the circle touches every one of the angles of the
figure about which it is circumscribed.
As in the former example of the third definition. The circle ADEF is
circumscribed about the triangle ABC, because the circumference of the circle
which is circumscribed touches every angle of the triangle about which it is
circumscribed^ namely, the angles CAB, ABC, and BCA. Likewise the same circle
ADEF is circumscribed about the square ADEF by the same definition as you may
see.

A circle is said to be inscribed in a rectiline figure, The fifth definition.
when the circumference of the circle touches every one of the sides of the
figure within which it is inscribed.
As the circle ABCD is inscribed within the triangle EFG, because the
circumference of the circle touches every side of the triangle in which it is
inscribed^ namely the side OF in the point B, and the side GF in the point C,
and the side GE in the point D. Likewise by the same reason the same circle is
inscribed within the square HIKL. And so may you judge of other rectiline
figures.

A rectilined figure is said to be circumscribed about a circle, The sixth
deuition.
when every one of the sides of the figure circumscribed touches the
circumference of the circle.
As in the former figure of the fifth definition, the triangle EFG is
circumscribed about the circle ABCD, for that every side of the same triangle
being circumscribed touches the circumference of the circle, about which it is
circumscribed. As the side EG of the triangle EFG touches the circumference of
the circle in the point D: and the side OF touches it in the point B: and the
side GF in the point C. Likewise also the square HIKL is circumscribed about
the circle ABCD, for every one of his sides touches the circumference of the
circle, namely, in the points A, B, C, D. And thus consider of all other
regular right lined figures (for of them only are understood these
definitions) to be circumscribed about a circle, or to be inscribed within a
circle: or of a circle to be circumscribed or inscribed about or within any of
them.

Seventh definition.
A right line is said to be coapted or applied in a circle, when the extremes or
ends thereof, fall upon the circumference of the circle.
As the line BC is said to be coapted or to be applied to the circle ABC, for
that both his extremes fall upon the circumference of the circle in the points
B and C. Likewise the line DE. This definition is very necessary, and is
properly to be taken of any line given to be coapted and applied into a circle,
so that it exceed not the diameter of the circle given.

The 1. Problem. The 1. Proposition. In a circle given, to apply a right line
equal unto a right line given, which excedeth not the diameter of a circle.
SVppose that the circle given be ABC, and let the right line given, exceeding
not the diameter of the same circle, be D. Now it is required in the circle
given ABC, to apply a right line equal unto the right line D. Construction.
Draw the diameter of the circle ABC, and let the same be BC. Now if the line
BC be equal unto the line D, then is that done which was required. For in the
circle given ABC is applied a right line BC equal unto ye right line D. Two
cases in this Proposition.
But if not, First case^
then is the line BC greater then ye line D. Second case.
And (by the third of the first) put unto the line D an equal line CE. And
making the center C, and the space CE, describe (by the third petition) a
circle EGF, cutting the circle ABC in the point F, and draw a line from C to F.
And for as much as the point C is ye center of the circle EGF, Demonstration.
therefore (by the 13. definition of the first) the line CF is equal unto the
line CE. But the line CE is equal unto the line D. Wherefore (by the first
common sentence) the line CF also is equal unto the line D. Wherefore in the
circle given ABC, is applied a right line CA equal unto the right line given
D: which was required to be done.

The 2. Problem. The 2. Proposition. In a circle given, to describe a triangle
equiangle unto a triangle given.
SVppose that the circle given be ABC: and let the triangle given be DEF. Now
it is required in the circle given ABC to describe a triangle equiangle unto
the triangle given DEF. Construction.
Draw (by the 17. of the third) a right line touching the circle ABC, and let
the same be GAH, and let it touch in the point A. And (by the 23. of the first)
unto ye right line AH, and unto the point in it A, describe an angle HAC equal
unto the angle DEF. And (by the self same) unto the right line AG, and unto
the point in it A, make an angle GAB equal unto the angle DFE. And draw a
right line from B to C. And for as much as a certain right line GAH touches ye
circle ABC, Demonstration.
and from the point where it touches, namely, A, is drawn into the circle a
right line AC; therefore (by the 31. of the third) the angle HAC is equal unto
the angle ABC which is in the alternate segment of the circle. But the angle
HAC is equal to the angle DEF. Wherefore the angle ABC is equal to the angle
DEF. And by the same reason, the angle ACB is equal to the angle DFE.
Wherefore the angle remaining, BAC, is equal unto the angle remaining, EDF.
Wherefore the triangle ABC is equiangle unto the triangle DEF. And it is
described in the circle given ABC. Wherefore in a circle given, is described a
triangle equiangle unto a triangle given: which was required to be done.

The 3. Problem. The 3. Proposition. About a circle given, to describe a
triangle equiangle unto a triangle given.
SVppose yt the circle given be ABC, and let the triangle given be DEF. It is
required about the circle ABC to describe a triangle equiangle unto the
triangle DEF. Construction.
Extend the line OF on each side to the points G and H. And (by the first of
the third) take the center of the circle ABC, and let the same be the point K.
And then draw a right line KB. And (by the 23. of the first) unto the right
line KB, and unto the point in it K, make an angle BKA equal unto the angle
DEGREES, and likewise make the angle BKC equal unto the angle DFH. And (by the 17.
of the third) draw right lines touching the circle A, B, C, in the points A,
B, C. And let ye same be LAM, MBN, and NCL. Demonstration.
And for as much as the right lines LM, MN, and NL, do touch the circle ABC in
the points A, B, C, and from the center K unto the points A, B, C, are drawn
right lines KA, KB, and KC, therefore the angles which are at the points A, B,
C, are right angles (by ye 18. of the third). And for as much as the four
angles of the four sided figure AMBK, are equal unto four right angles:
whose angles KAM, and KBM, are two right angles: therefore the angles remaining
AKB, and AMB, are equal to two right angles. And the angles DEGREES, and DEF, are
(by the 13. of the first) equal to two right angles. Wherefore the angles AKB,
and AMB, are equal unto the angles DEGREES, and DEF: of which two angles the angle
AKB is equal unto the angle DEGREES: Wherefore the angle remaining, AMB, is equal
unto the angle remaining, DEF. In like sort may it be proved, that the angle
LNM, is equal to the angle DFE. Wherefore the angle remaining MLN, is equal
unto the angle remaining EDF. Wherefore the triangle LMN, is equiangle unto the
triangle DEF: and it is described about the circle ABC. Wherefore about a
circle given is described a triangle equiangle unto a triangle given: which was
required to be done.

An other way after Pelitarius.
An other way after Peli^arius.
In the circle ABC inscribe a triangle GHK equiangle to the triangle EDF (by the
former Proposition): so that let the angle at the point G be equal to the
angle D, and let the angle at the point H be equal to the angle E: and let
also the angle at the point K be equal to the angle F. Then draw the line LM
parallel to the line GH, which let touch the circle in the point A (which may
be done by the Proposition added of the said Pelitarius after the 17.
Proposition). Construction.
Draw likewise the line MN parallel unto the line HK and touching the circle in
the point B: And also draw the line LN parallel unto the line GK and touching
the circle in the point C. And these three lines shall undoubtedly concur, as
in the points L, M, and N, Demonstration.
which may easily be proved, if you produce on either side the lines GH, GK,
and HK, until they cut the lines LM, LN, and MN, in the points O, P, Q, R, S,
T. Now I say, that the triangle LMN circu^scribed about the circle ABC, is
equiangle to the triangle DEF. For it is manifest, that it is equiangle unto
the tria^gle GHK, by the propriety of parallel lines. For the angle MTQ is
equal to the angle at the point G of the triangle GHK (by the 29. of the
first) and therefore also the angle at the point L, is equal to the self same
angle at the point G (for the angle at the point L, is by the same 29.
Proposition, equal to the angle MTQ). And by the same reason the angle at the
point M, is equal to the angle at the point H of the self same triangle: and
the angle at the point N, to the angle at the point K. Wherefore the whole
triangle LMN, is equiangle to the whole triangle GHK: Wherefore also it is
equiangle to the triangle DEF: which was required to be done.

The 4. Problem. The 4. Proposition. In a triangle given, to describe a circle.
SVppose that the triangle given be ABC. It is required to describe a circle in
the triangle ABC. Construction.
Divide (by the 9. of the first) the angles ABC, and ACB into two equal par^es
by two right lines BD and CD. And let these right lines meet together in the
point D. And (by the 12. of the first) from the point D draw unto the right
lines AB, BC and CA perpendicular lines, namely, DE, DF, and DG. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the angle ABD is equal to tho angle CBD, and the right angle
BED is equal unto the right angle BFD. Now then there are two triangles EBD
and FBD having two angles equal to two angles, and one side equal to one
side, namely, BD which is common to them both, and subtendeth one of the equal
angles. Wherefore (by the 26. of the first) the rest of the sides are equal
unto the rest of the sides. Wherefore the line DE is equal unto the line DF:
and by the same reason also the ^ne DG is equal unto ye line DF. Wherefore
these three right lines DE, DF, and DG, are equal the one to the other (by the
first common sentence). Wherefore making the center the point D, and the space
DE, or DF, or DG, describe a circle and it will pass through the points E, F,
G, and will touch ye right lines AB, BC, and CA. For the angles made at the
points E, F, G, are right angles. For if ye circle cut those right lines, then
from the end of the diameter of the circle shall be drawn a right line making
two right angles, Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
and falling within the circle: which is impossible, as it was manifest (by the
16. of the third). Wherefore the circle described, D being the center thereof,
and the space thereof being either DE, or DF, or DG, cutteth not these right
lines AB, BC, and CA. Wherefore (by the Corollary of the same) it touches them,
and the circle is described in the triangle ABC. Wherefore in the triangle given
ABC, is described a circle EFG: which was required to be done.

The 5. Problem. The 5. Proposition. About a triangle given, to describe a
circle.
SVppose that the triangle given be ABC. It is required about the triangle ABC
to describe a circle. Divide (by the 10. of the first) the right l^nes AB and
AC into two equal parts in the points D and E. And from the points D and E
(by the 11. of the first) raise up unto the lines AB and AC two perpendicular
lines DF and OF. Three cases in this Propositi^n.
Now these perpendicular lines meet together either within the triangle ABC,
or in the right line BC, or else witho^ the right line BC.

The (...) case.
First let them meet together within the triangle in the point F. And (by ye
first peticion) draw right lines from F to B, from F to C, and from F to A.
And forasmuch as the line AD is equal unto the line DB, and the line DF is
common unto them both, and makes the angles on each side of him right angles,
therefore (by the 4. of the first) the base AF is equal unto the base FB. In
like sort may we prove that the line CF is equal unto the line AF. Wherefore
the line FB is equal unto the line CF. Wherefore these three right lines FA,
FB, and FC are equal the one (...) the other. Wherefore making the center the
point F, and the space FA, or FB, or FC describe a circle and it shall pass by
the points ABC. And so there is a circle described about the triangle ABC, as
ye see in the first description.

But now suppose that the right lines DF and OF do meet together upon the
right line BC in the point F, as it is in the second description, The second
case.
and draw a right line from A to F, and in like sort may we prove that the
point F is the center of the circle described about the triangle ABC.

But now suppose that the right lines DF and OF do meet together without the
triangle ABC in the point F. The third case.
Again as it is in the third description draw right lines from F to A, from F
to B, and from F to C. And forasmuch as the line AD is equal unto the line DB,
and the line DF is common unto them both, and makes a right angle on each side
of him, wherefore (by the 4. of the first) the base AF is equal unto the base
BF. And in like sort may we prove that the line CF is equal unto the line AF.
Wherefore again making F the center, and the space FA, or FB, or FC, describe a
circle and it shall pass by the points A, B, C, and so is there a circle
described about the triangle ABC, as ye see it i^ in the third description.
Wherefore about a triangle given is described a circle: which was required to be
done.

Correlary.
Hereby it is manifest, that when the center of the circle falls within the
triangle, the angle BAC being in a greater segment of a circle is less the^ a
right angle. But when it falls upon the right line BC the angle BAC being in
a semicircle is a right angle. But when the center falls without the right
line BC, the angle BAC being in a less segment of a circle, is greater then a
right angle. Wherefore also when the angle given is less then a right angle,
the right lines DF and OF will meet together within the said triangle. But
when it is a right angle they will meet together upon the line BC. But when it
is greater then a right angle, they will meet together without the right line
BC.

The 6. Problem. The 6. Proposition. In a circle given, to describe a square.
SVppose that the circle given be ABCD. It is required in the circle ABCD to
describe a square. Draw in the circle ABCD two diameters making right angles,
Construction.
and let the same be AC and BD, and draw right lines from A to B, from B to C,
from C to D, and from D to A. And forasmuch as the line BE is equal unto the
line ED (by the 15. definition of the first) for the point E is the center.
Demonstration.
And the line EA is common to them both, making on each side a right angle:
therefore (by the 4. of the first) the base AB is equal unto the base AD. And
by the same reason also either of these lines BC and CD is equal to either of
these lines AB and AD: wherefore ABCD is a figure of four equal sides. I say
also that it is a rectangle figure. For forasmuch as the right line BD is the
diameter of the circle ABCD, therefore the angle BAD being in the semicircle is
a right angle (by the 31. of the third) And by the same reason every one of
these angles ABC, BCD and CDA is a right angle. Wherefore the four sided figure
ABCD is a rectangle figure, and it is proved that it consists of equal
sides. Wherefore (by the 30. definition of the first) it is a square, and it is
described in the circle ABCD: which was required to be done.

The 7. Problem. The 7. Proposition. About a circle given, to describe a
square.
SVppose that the circle given be ABCD. It is required about the circle ABCD to
describe a square. Draw in the circle ABCD two diameters making right angles,
Construction.
where they cut the one the other, and let the same be AC and BD. And by the
points A, B, C, D, draw (by the 17. of the third) right lines touching the
circle ABCD, and let the same be FG, GH, HK, and KF. Demonstration.
Now for as much as the right line FG touches the circle ABCD in the point A,
and from the center E to the point A where the touch is, is drawn a right line
EA, therefore (by the 18. of the third) the angles at the point A are right
angles, and by the same reason the angles which are at the points B, C, D, are
also right angles. And forasmuch as the angle AEB is a right angle, and the
angle EBG is also a right angle, therefore (by the 28. of the first) the line GH
is a parallel unto the line AC: and by the same reason the line AC is a
parallel unto the line FK. In like sort also may we prove that either of these
lines GF and HK is a parallel unto the line BED. Wherefore these figures GK, GC,
AK, FB, and BK are parallelogrames^ Wherefore (by the 34. of the first) the line
GF is equal unto the line HK, and the line GH is equal unto the line FK. And
forasmuch as the line AC is equal unto the line BD, but the line AC is equal
unto either of these lines GH and FK: an^ the line BD is equal to either of
these lines GF and HK. Wherefore either of these lines GH and FK is equal to
either of these lines GF and HK. Wherefore the figure FGHK consists of four
equal sides. I say also that it is a rectangle figure. For forasmuch as GBEA
is a parallelogramme, and the angle AE^ is a right angle: therefore (by the 34.
of the first) the angle AGB is a right angle. In like sort may we prove that
the angles at the points H, K, and F are right angles. Wherefore FGHK is a
rectangle four sided figure, and it is proved that it consists of equal
sides: wherefore it is a square, and it is described about the circle ABCD.
Wherefore about a circle given is described a square: which was required to be
done.

The 8. Problem. The 8. Proposition. In a square given, to describe a circle.
SVppose that the square given be ABCD. It is required in the square ABCD to
describe a circle. Construction.
Divide (by the 10. of the first) either of these lines AB and AD into two
equal parts in the points E and F. And by the point E (by the 31. of the
first) draw a line EH parallel unto either of these lines AB and DC:
Demonstration.
and (by the same) by the point F draw a line FK parallel unto either of these
lines AD and BC. Wherefore every one of these figures AK, KB, AH, HD, AG, GC,
BG, and GD is a parallelograme, and the sides which are opposite the one to the
other, are (by the 34. of the first) equal the one to the other. And forasmuch
as the line AD is equal unto the line AB, and the half of the line AD is the
line AE, and the half of the line AB, is the line AF, therefore the line AE is
equal unto the line AF: wherefore (by the same) the sides which are opposite
are equal. Wherefore the line FG is equal unto the line EG. In like sort may
we prove that either of these lines GH, and GK is equal to either of these
lines FG and GE. Wherefore (by the first common sentence) these four lines GE,
GF, GH, and GK are equal the one to the other. Wherefore making the center G,
and the space either GE, or GF, GH, or GK, describe a circle and it will pass
by the points E, F, H, K, and will touch the right lines AB, BC, CD, and DA.
For the angles at the points E, F, H, K, are right angles. For if the circle
do cut the right lines AB, BC, CD, and DA, then the line which is drawn by the
end of the diameter of the circle making right angles should fall within the
circle, which is impossible (by the 16. of the third) Wherefore the center being
the point G and the space being GE, or GF, or GH, or GK if a circle be
described, it shall not cut the rig^t lines AB, BC, CD, and DA. Wherefore it
shall touch them. And it is described in the square ABCD: wherefore in a square
given is described a circle: which was required to be done.

The 9. Problem. The 9. Proposition. About a square given, to describe a
circle.
SVppose that the square given be AB CD. It is required about the square ABCD
to describe a circle. Draw right lines from A to C, and from D to B, and let
them cut the one the other in the point E. Construction.
And forasmuch as the line DA is equal unto the line AB, Demonstration.
and the line AC is common unto them both, therefore these two lines DA and AC
are equal unto these two lines BA and AC, the one to the other. And the base
DC is equal unto the base BC. Wherefore (by the 8. of the first) the angle DAC
is equal unto the angle BAC. Wherefore the angle DAB is divided into two
equal parts by the line AC. And in like sor^ may we prove that every one of
these angles ABC, BCD, and CDA is divided into two equal parts by the right
lines AC and DB. And forasmuch as the angle DAB is equal unto the angle ABC,
and of the angle DAB the angle EAB is the half; and of the angle ABC the angle
EBA is the half: Therefore the angle EAB is equal unto the angle EBA: wherefore
(by the 6. of the first) the side EA is equal unto the side EB. In like sort
may we prove that either of these right lines EA and EB is equal unto either
of these lines EC and ED. Wherefore these four lines EA, EB, EC, and ED are
equal the one to the other. Wherefore making the center E, and the space any of
these lines EA, EB, EC, or ED. Describe a circle and it will pass by the
points A, B, C, D, and shall be described about the square ABCD, as it is
evident in the figure ABCD. Wherefore about a square given is described a
circle: which was required to be done.

A Proposition added by Pelitarius.
A square circumscribed about a circle, is double to the square inscribed in
the same circle.

Suppose that the square ABCD be circumscribed about the circle EFGH, A
Propos^tion added by Pelitarius.
whose center let be K. And let the points of the touches be E, F, G, H. And
drawing these two diameters EG, and FH, and these right lines OF, FG, GH, and
HB, there shall be inscribed in the circle a square EFGH (by the sixth of this
book). Then I say, that the square ABCD, is double to the square EFGH. For
forasmuch as the side AB of the greater square, is (by the 34. of the first)
equal to FH, which is the diameter of the less square: but the square of FH
is double to the square whose diameter it is, namely, to the square EFGH (by
the 47. of the first). Wherefore also the square of AB which is ABCD, is double
to the square EFGH: which was required to be proved.

This may also be demonstrated by the equalite of the triangles and squares
contained in the great squares.

The 10. Problem. The 10. Proposition. To make a triangle of two equal sides
called Isosceles, which shall have either of the angles at the base double to
the other angle.
TAke a right line at all adventures which let be AB, and (by ye 11. of the
second) let it be so divided in ye point C, Construction.
yt the rectangle figure comprehended under the lines AB and BC be equal unto
ye square which is made of the line AC. And making the center the point A, and
the space AB, describe (by the 3. peticion) a circle BDE, and (by the 1. of the
fourth) into the circle BDE apply a right line BD equal to the right line AC
which is not greater then the diameter of the circle BDE. And draw lines from A
to D and from D to C. And (by the 5. of ye fourth) about the triangle ACD
describe a circle ACDF. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the rectangle figure contained under the lines AB and BC is
equal to the square which is made of the line AC: (For that is by supposition)
But the line AC is equal unto the line BD. Wherefore that which is contained
under the lines AB and BC is equal to the square which is made of the line BD.
And forasmuch as without the circle ACDF is taken a point B, and from B unto
the circle ACDF are drawn two right lines BCA, and BD, in such sort that the
one of them cutteth the circle, and the other ends at the circumference, and
that which is contained under the lines AB and BC is equal to the square which
is made of the line BD, therefore (by the 17. of the third) the line BD touches
the circle ACDF. And forasmuch as the line BD touches in the point D, and from
D where the touch is, is drawn a right line DC, therefore (by the 32. of the
same) the angle BDC is equal unto the angle DAC, which is in ye alternate
segment of ye circle. And forasmuch as ye angle BDC is equal unto ye angle DAC,
put the angle CDA common unto the^ both. Wherefore ye whole angle BDA is equal
to these two angles CDA, and DAC. But unto ye angles CDA, and DAC is equal the
outward angle BCD (by the 32. of the 1.) Wherefore ye angle BDA is equal unto ye
angle BCD. But ye angle BDA is (by ye 5. of the first) equal unto the angle
CBD, for (by the 15. definition of y^ first) the side AD is equal unto the
side AB: wherefore (by the 1. common sentence) the angle DBA is equal unto the
angle BCD. Wherefore these three angles BDA, DBA, and BCD are equal the one to
the other. And forasmuch as the angle DBC is equal unto the angle BCD, the
side therefore BD is equal unto the side DC. But the line BD is by supposition
equal unto the line CA. (...) two right angles. And either of the Angles at
the base^ is two ^ift parts of two right angles, or four fifth parts of one
right angle. Which shall manifestly appear, if we divide two right angles into
five parts. For then in this kind of triangle, the angle at the top shall
be one fifth part, and either of the two angles at the base shall be two fifth
parts.

This also is to be noted, that the line AC is the side of an equilater
Pentagon to be inscribed in the circle ACD. For by the latter construction it
is manifest, that the three arkes AC, CD, and DE, of the less circle, are
equal. And forasmuch as by the same it is manifest that the two lines AD and
AE are equal, the arc also AE shall be equal to the arc AD (by the 20. of
the third). Wherefore their halfes also are equal. If therefore the arc AE be
(by the 30. of the third) divided into two equal parts, the whole
circu^ference ACDEA shall be divided into five equal arkes. And forasmuch as
the lines subtending the said equal arkes are (by the 2^. of the same) equal,
therefore every one of the said sides shall be the side of an equilater
Pentagon^ which was required to be proved. And the same line AC shall be the
side of an equilater ten angled figure to be inscribed in the circle BDE: the
demonstration whereof I omit, for that it is demonstrated by Propositions
following.

A Proposition added by Petarilius.
A Proposition added by Pelitarius.
Upon a right line given being finite, to describe an equilater and equiangle
Pentagon figure.

Suppose that the right line given be AB, upon which it is required to describe
an equilater and equiangle Pentagon. Upon the line AB describe (by the 23. and
32. of the first) an Isosceles triangle ABC equiangle to the Isosceles triangle
described by the former Proposition: namely, let the angles CAB and CBA, at the
base AB, be equal to the two angles ABD and ADB in the former construction: so
that either of them shall be two fifth parts of two right angles, and the angle
at the top, namely, the angle C, shall be one fifth part. Then divide the
angle C into two equal parte^ by drawing the right line CD. And upon the line
AC, and unto the point A, describe the angle CAD equal to the angle ACD, by
drawing the line AD, which line AD let concur with the line CD, in the point
D^ and that within the triangle ABC, for the line CD being produced, shall fall
upon the base AB, and the line AD upon the side BC. And draw a line from the
point D to the point B. And for as much as in the triangle ACD the two angles A
and C are equal, therefore (by the 6. of the first) the two sides AD and CD are
equal. Again forasmuch as the two sides CB and CD of the triangle CBD, are
equal to the two sides CA and CD of the triangle ACD, and the angle C of the
one, is equal to the angle C of the other (by construction) therefore (by the
4. of the first) the base DB is equal to the base DA, and so is equal to the
line DC. Wherefore (by the 9. of the third) the point D shall be the center of
the circle described about the triangle ABC. Describe the said circle and let
it be ABECF. Now then the angle ADB is double to the angle ACD (by the 20. of
the third). Wherefore the angle ADB makes two fifth parts of two right angles,
that is, one fifth part of four right angles. And for as much as the space about
the center D is equal to four right angles, then if the said space be divided
into five angles equal to the angle ADB, namely, into fine fifth parts, by
drawing the right lines DE and DF, which with the lines DA, DB, and DC, will
cause the said space to be divided into five equal parts, and if also there
be drawn these right lines AF, FC, CE, and EB^ there shall be described a
rectiline Pentagon figure A^ECF, which shall be equila^er, by the rule of a
circle and of a circumference, and help of the 4. Proposition of the first^
and shall also be equiangle (by the 4. and 5. of the same). For the five angles
A, B, E, C, F, are divided each into ten equal parts: which was required to be
done.

If we consider well this demonstration of Pelitarius, it will not be hard for
us, upon a right line given to describe the rest of the figures whose
inscriptions hereafter follow. Note.


The 11. Problem. The 11. Proposition. In a circle given to describe a
pentagon figure aequilater and equiangle.
SVppose that the circle given be ABCDE. Construction.
It is required in the circle ABCDE to inscribe a figure of five angles of
equal sides and of equal angles. Take (by the proposition going before) an
Isosceles triangle FGH having either of the angles at ye base GH double to the
other angle, namely, unto the angle F. And (by the 2. of ye fourth) in the
circle ABCDE inscribe a triangle ACD equiangle unto the triangle FGH. So that
let the angle CAD be equal to the angle F, and the angle ACD unto the angle G,
and likewise the angle CDA to the angle H. Wherefore either of these angles
ACD, and CDA is double to the angle CAD. Divide (by the 9. of the first) either
of these angles ACD, and CDA into two equal parts by the right lines CE and
DB. and draw right lines from A to B, from B to C, from C to D, from D to E,
and from E to A. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as either of these angles ACD, and CDA is double to the angle
CAD: and they are divided into two equal parts by the right lines CE and DB,
therefore the five angles DAC, ACE, ECD, CDB, and BDA are equal the one to the
other. But equal angles (by the 26. of the third) subtend equal
circumferences. Wherefore the five circumferences AB, BC, CD, DE, and EA are
equal the one to ye other. And (by ye 29, of ye same) unto equal
circumferences are subte^ded equal right lines: wherefore ye five right lines
AB, BC, CD, DE, and EA are equal ye one to the other. Wherefore ye figure ABCDE
having five angles is equilater.

Now also I say that it is equiangle. For forasmuch as the circumference AB is
equal to the circumference DE, put the circumference BCD common unto them
both. Wherefore the whole circumference ABCD is equal to the whole
circumference EDCB: and upon the circumference ABCD consists the angle AED,
and upon the circumference EDCB, consists the angle BAE. Wherefore the angle
BAE is equal to ye angle AED (by the 27. of the third) and by the same reason
every one of these angles ABC, and BCD, and CDE, is equal to every one of
these angles BAE and AED. Wherefore the five angled figure ABCDE, is equiangle,
and it is proved, that is also equilater. Wherefore in a circle given is
described a figure of five angles equilater and equiangle: which was required
to be done.

An other way to do the same after Pelitarius.
Suppose that the Isosceles triangle described by the former Proposition, be
DE^^ so that let either of the angles E and F be double to the angle D: An
other way to do the same after Pelitarius.
And let the (...)uen be ABC: the ce^tre whereof let be K. And upon the center K
describe the angle BKC equal to one of the angles E or F of the triangle DEF.
And draw a right line from B to C. Then I say, that the line BC is the side of
the Pentagon figure to be inscribed in the circle ABC. Divide the angle BKC
into two equal parts by drawing the diameter AKL. And draw these right lines
BA and AC. Now the^ it is manifest (by the 20. of the third) that the angle BKC
is double to the whole angle BAC. Wherefore the whole angle BAC is equal to
the angle D, unto which angle, the angle BKC also is double. And forasmuch as
in the triangle ABK the two angles A and B are (by the 5. of the first) equal
(for the lines KA and KB are drawn from the center) therefore (by the 32. of
the same) the outward angle BKL is double to either of the inward angles KAB
and KBA. And by the same reason, the angle CKL is double to either of the
angles KAC and KCA. Wherefore forasmuch as the two angles at the point K are
equal, the two angles A and B of the triangle ABK, are equal to the two
angles A and C of the triangle ACK, the one to the other: and therefore (by the
26. of the first) the two bases AB and AC are equal. Wherefore ABC is an
Isosceles triangle. And forasmuch as the whole angle BAC is equal to the angle
D, the two angles remaining ABC and ACB, shall (by the 32. of the first) be
equal to the two angles remaining E and F. Wherefore the triangle ABC is
equiangle to the triangle DEF. And now you may proceed in the demonstration as
you did in the former, imagining first the lines BG and CH to be drawn.

Here it is a pleasant thing to behold the variety of triangles: for in the
triangle ABC either of the angles at the point A is one fifth part of a right
angle. Whereby is produced the side of a ten angled figure to be inscribed in
the selfsame circle: Which is manifest if we imagine the lines BL and LC to be
drawn. For the arc BC is divided into two equal parts in the point L (by
the 26. of the third). So then by the inscription of an equilater triangle, is
known how to inscribe an Hexagon figure, namely, by dividing each of the arkes
subtended under the sides of the triangle into two equal parts. And so
always by the simple number of the side, is known the double thereof: as by a
square is known an eight angled figure: and by an eight angled figure a
sixtene angled figure. And so continually in the rest.

Pelitarius teaches yet an other way how to inscribe a Pentagon. An other way
also after Pelitarius.
Take the same circle that was before, namely, ABC, and the same triangle also
DEF^ And (by the 17. of the third) draw the line MAN touching the circle in the
point A. And upon the line AM and to the point A, describe (by the 23. of the
first) the angle MAB equal to one of these two angles E or F (either of which,
as it is manifest, is less then a right angle) by drawing the right line AB:
which let out the circumference in the point B. Again, upon the line AN and to
the point in it A, describe the angle NAC equal to the angle MAB, by drawing
the right line AC: which let cut the circumference in the point C. And draw a
right line from B to C. Then I say, that BC is the side of a Pentagon figure to
be inscribed in the circle ABC. Which is manifest, if we divide the arc AB
into two equal parts in the point H, and draw these right lines AH and BH,
and if also we divide the arc AC into two equal parts in the point G, and
draw these right lines AG and CG. For taking the quadrangle figure ABCG, it is
manifest (by the 32. of the third) that the angle ABC is equal to the
alternate angle NAC, and therefore is equal to the angle E. Likewise taking the
quadrangle figure ACBH, the angle ACB shall be equal to the alternate angle
MAB, and therefore is equal to the angle F. Wherefore (by the 32. of the
first) as before, the triangle ABC is equiangle to the triangle DEF: And now
may you proceed in the demonstration as you did in the former.

The 12. Problem. The 12. Proposition. About a circle given, to describe an
equilater and aquiangle pentagon.
SVppose that the circle given be ABCDE. It is required about the circle ABCDE
to describe a figure of five angles consisting of equal sides and of equal
angles. Construction.
Take the points of the angles of a five angled figure described (by the 11.
of the fourth) so that by the proposition going before, let ye circumfere^ces
AB, BC, CD, DE, and EA be equal the one to the other. And by the points A, B,
C, D, E, draw (by the 17. of the third) right lines touching the circle, and
let the same be GH, HK, KL, LM, and MG. And (by the 1. of the third) take the
center of the circle and let the same be F. And draw right lines from F to B,
from F to K, from F to C, from F to L, and from F to D. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the right line KL, touches the circle ABCDE in the point C,
and from the center F unto the point C where the touch is, is drawn a right
line FC: therefore (by the 18. of the third) FC is a perpendicular line unto
KL. Wherefore either of the angles which are at the point C is a right angle,
and by the same reason the angles which are at the points D and B are right
angles. And forasmuch as the angle FCK is a right angle, therefore the square
which is made of FK is (by the 47. of the first) equal to the squares which
are made of FC and CK. And by the same reason also the square which is made of
FK is equal to the squares which are made of FB and BK. Wherefore the squares
which are made of FC and CK are equal to the squares which are made of FB and
BK, of which the square which is made of FC is equal to the square which is
made of FB. Wherefore the square which is made of CK is equal to the square
which is made of BK. Wherefore the line BK is equal unto the line CK. And
forasmuch as FB is equal unto FC, and FK is common to them both, therefore
these two BF and FK are equal to these two CF and FK. And the base BK is
equal unto the base CK. Wherefore (by the 8. of the first) the angle BFK is
equal unto the angle KFC: and the angle BKF to the angle FKC. Wherefore the
angle BFC is double to the angle KFC. And the angle BKC is double to the angle
FKC. And by the same reason the angle CFD is double to the angle CFL, and the
angle DLC is double to the angle FLC. And forasmuch as the circumference BC is
equal unto the circumference CD, therefore (by the 27. of the third) the angle
BFC is equal to the angle CFD. And the angle BFC is double to the angle KFC,
and the angle DFC is double to the angle LFC, wherefore the angle KFC is equal
unto the angle LFC. Now then there are two triangles FKC, and FLC, having two
angles equal to two angles, and one side equal to one side, namely, FC, which
is common to them both. Wherefore (by the 26. of the third, the other sides
remaining are equal unto the sides remaining, and the angle remaining unto the
angle remaining. Wherefore the right line KC is equal to the right line CL, and
the angle FKC to the angle FLC. And forasmuch as KC is equal to CL: therefore
KL is double to KC, and by the same reason also may it be proved that HK is
double to BK. And forasmuch as it is proved that BK is equal unto KC, and KL
is double to KC, and H K double to B K, therefore H K is equal unto KL. In like
sort may we prove yt every one of these lines HG, GM, and ML is equal unto
either of these lines H K and KL. Wherefore the five angled figure GH KLM is of
equal sides. I say also that it is of equal angles. For forasmuch as the
angle F KC is equal unto the angle FLC, and it is proved that the angle H KL
is double to the angle F KC, and the angle KLM is double to the angle FLC,
therefore the angle H KL is equal to the angle KLM. In like sort may it be
proved that every one of these angles KHG, HGM, and GML, is equal to either of
these angles H KL, and KLM. Wherefore the five angles GH K, H KL, KLM, LMG, and
MGH are equal the one to the other. Wherefore the five angled figure GH KLM is
equiangle, and it is also proved that it is equilater, and it is described
about the circle ABCDE: which was required to be done.

An other way to do the same after Pelitarius, by parallel lines.
Suppose that the circle given be ABC, An other way to do the sam^ after
Pelitarius.
whose ce^tre let be the point F: and in it (by the former Proposition)
inscribe an equilater and equiangle Pentagon ABCDE^ by whose five angles draw
from the center beyond the circu^ference, five lines, FG, FH, FK, FL, and FM.
And it is m^nifest, that the five angles at the ce^tre F, are equal, when as
the five sides of the triangles within are equal, and also their bases. It is
manifest also, that the five angles of the Pentagon which are at the
circumference, are divided into ^^n equal ^ngles (by the 4. of the fir^^): Now
then between the two lines FG and FH, draw the line GH parallel to the side AB,
and touching the circle ABC (which is done by a Proposition added by Pelitarius
after the 17. of the third). And so likewise draw these lines HK, KL, and LM,
parallel to each of these sides BC, CD, and DE, and touching the circle. And for
as much as the lines FG and FH fall upon the two parallel lines AB and GH,
Demonstration.
the two angles FGH, and FHG, are equal to the two angles FAB and FBA, the one
to the other (by the 29. of the first). Wherefore (by the sixth of the same) the
two lines FG and FH are equal. And by the same reason, the two angles FHK and
FKH, are equal to the two angles FGH and FHG the one to the other: and the
line FK is equal to the line FH, and therefore is equal to the line FG. And
forasmuch as the angles at the point F are equal, therefore (by the 4. of the
first) the base HK is equal to the base GH. In like sort may we prove, that
the three lines FK, FL, and FM, are equal to the two lines FG and FH. And also
that the two bases KL and LM, are equal to the two bases GH and HK: and that
the angles which they make with the lines FK, FL, and FM, are equal the one to
the other. Now then draw the fifth line MG: which shall be equal to the four
former lines (by the 4. of the first) for that as we have proved, the two lines
FG and FM, are equal, and the angle GFM is equal to every one of the angles
at the point F. This line also MG touches the circle. For unto the point where
the line LM touches the circle which let be N, draw the line FN. And it is
manifest (by the 18. of the third) that either of the angle^ at the point N, is
a right angle. Wher^fore for as much as the angle L of the triangle FLN, is
equal to the angle M of the triangle FMN, and the angle N of the one, is
equal to the angl^ N of the other: and the line FN is common to the^ both, the
line NL shall (by the 26. of the first) be equal to the line NM. And so is the
line ML divided equally in the point N. And forasmuch as the three sides of the
triangle FGP are equal to the three sides of the triangle FMP, the angle P of
the one shall be equal to the angle P of the other (by the 8. of the first).
Wherefore either of the^ is a right angle (by the 13. of the same). And
forasmuch as the two angles FMP and FPM of the triangle FMP, are equal to the
two angles FMN and FNM of the triangle FMN, and the side FM is common to them
both, therefore the line FP is equal to the line FN. But the line FN is drawn
from the center to the circumference. Wherefore also the line FP is drawn from
the center to the circumference. And forasmuch as the line MG is perpendicular
to the line FP, therefore (by the Corollary of the 16. of the third) it
touches the circle. Wherefore the Pentagon GHKLM circumscribed about the circle
is equilater: it is also equiangle, a^ it is easy to prove by the equality of
the halfes: which was required to be done.

The 13. Problem. The 13. Proposition. An equilater and equiangle pentagon
figure being given, to describe in it a circle.
SVppose yt ye equilater and equiangle Pe^tago^ figure given be ABCDE. It is
required in the said five angled figure ABCDE to describe a circle. Divide (by
the the 9. of the first) either of these angles BCD, and CDE into two equal
parts, by these right lines CF and FD, Demonstr^tion.
and from the point F where th^se right lines CF and DF meet. Draw these right
lines FB, FA, and F^. And forasmuch as BC is equal unto CD and CF is common to
them both. Wherefore these two lines BC and CF are equal to these two lines DC
and CF: and the angle BCF is equal to the angle DCF. Wherfo^e (by the 4. of
the first) the base BF is equal to the base DF, and the triangle BCF is equal
to the triangle DCF, and the angles remaining are equal unto the angles
remaynyng the one to the other, under which are subtended equal sides.
Wherefore the angle CBF is equal to the angle CDF. And forasmuch as the angle
CDE is double to the angle CDF. But the angle CDE is equal to the angle ABC,
and the angle CDF is equal to the angle CBF. Wherefore the angle CBA is double
to the angle CBF. Wherefore the angle ABF is equal to the angle FBC. Wherefore
the angle ABC is divided into two equal parts by the right line BF. In like
sort also may it be proued^ that either of these angles BAE, and AED are
divided into two equal parts by either of these lines FA and OF. Draw (by
the 12. of the first) from the point E to the right lines AB, BC, CD, and EA
perpendi^ular 2^. of the first) the sides remay^^ng are eq^all unto the sides
remaining. Wherefore the perpendiculer FH is equal unto the perpendiculer FK.
And in like sort also may it be prou^d that every one of these lines FL, FM,
and FG is equal to every one of th^^^ lines FH and FK. Wh^^fore these five
right lines FG, FH, FK, FL, and FM are equal the one to the other. Wherefore
making the center F and the space FG, or FH, or FK, or FL, or FM. Describe a
circle, and it will pass by the points G, H, K, L, M. And shall touch the
right lines AB, BC, CD, DE, and EA (by the correllary of the 16. of the third)
for the angles which are at the points G, H, K, L, M, are right angles.
Demonstration leading to an absurdity.
For if it do not touch them but cut, then from the end of the diameter of
the circle, shall be drawn a right line making two right angles, and falling
with in the circle: which is (by the 16. of ye third) proved to be impossible
Wherefore making F the center, and ye space one of these lines, FG, FH, FK, FL,
FM, describe a circle and it shall not cut the right lines AB, BC, CD, DE, and
EA. Wherefore (by the corollary of the 16. of the third) it shall touch them
as it is manifest in the circle GHKLM. Wherefore in the equilater and equiangle
pentagon figure given, is described a circle: which was required to be done^

By this proposition and the former, it is manifest that perpendicular lines
drawn from the middle points of the sides of an equilater and equiangle
Pentagon figure, A Corollary.
and produced, shall pass by the center of the circle, in which the said
Pentagon figure is inscribed, and shall also divide the opposite angles
equally, as here, AK is one right line, and deuideth the side CD and the angle
A equally. And so of the rest which is thus proved. The space about the center
F is equal to four right angles, which are divided into ten equal angles by
ten right lines metyng together in the point F. Wherefore the five angles AFM,
MFE, EFL, LFD, and DFK are equal to two right angles. Wherefore (by the 14. of
the first) the lines AF and FK make one right line. The like proof also will
serve touching the re^t of the lines. And this is always true in all equilater
figures which consist of uneven sides.

The 14. Problem. The 14. Proposition. About a pentagon or figure of five
angles given being equilater and equiangle, to describe a circle.
SVppose that ye Pentagon or figure of five angles given, being of equal sides
and of equal angles, be ABCDE. It is required about the said Pentagon ABCDE,
to describe a circle. Divide (by the 9. of the first) either of these angles
BCD, Construction.
and CDE into two equal parts by either of these right lines CF, and DF. And
from the point F where those right lines meet, draw unto the points B, A, E,
these right lines FB, FA, FE. Demonstration.
And in like sort (by the Proposition going before) may it be proved, that
every one of these angles CBA, BAE, and AED is divided into two equal parts,
by these right lines FB, FA, and FE. And for as much as the angle BCD is equal
to the angle CDE, and the half of the angle BCD is the angle FCD, and likewise
the half of the angle CDE is ye angle CDF. Wherefore the angle FCD is equal to
the angle FDC. Wherefore ye side FC is equal to the side FD. In like sort also
may it be proved, that every one of these lines FB, FA, and FE is equal to
every one of these lines FC and FD. Wherefore these five right lines FA, FB,
FC, FD, and FE are equal the one to the other. Wherefore making the center F;
and the space FA, or FB, or FC, or FD, or FE. Describe a circle and it will
pass by the points A, B, C, D, E, and shall be described about the five
angled figure ABCDE which is equiangle and equilater. Let this circle be
described and let the same be ABCDE. Wherefore about the Pentagon given be^^g
both equiangle and equilater, is described a circle: which was required to be
^one.

The 15. Problem. The 15. Proposition. In a circle given to describe an
hexagon or figure of six angles equilater and equiangle.
SVppose that the circle given be ABCDEF. It is required in the circle given
ABCDE to describe a figure of six angles of equal sides and of equal angles.
D^aw the diameter of the circle ABCDEF, and let the same be AD. And (by the
first of the third) take the c^n^re of the circl^ and let the same be G. And
making the center D, and the space DG, describe (by the third petition) a
circle CGEH: and drawing right lines from E to G, and from G to C, extend them
to the points B and F of the circumference of the circle given. And draw these
right lines AB, BC, CD, DE, OF, and FA. Then I say, that ABCDEF is an Hexagon
figure of equal sides and of equal angles. Demonstration.
For forasmuch as the point G is the center of the circle ABCDEF, therefore (by
the 15. definition of the first) the line GE is equal unto the line GD. Again
forasmuch as the point D is the center of the circle CGEH (therefore (by the
self same) the line DE is equal unto the line DG: And it is proved that the
line GE is equal unto the line GD. Wherefore the line GE is equal unto the
line ED (by the first common sentence) wherefore the triangle EGD is equilater,
(and bi^ three angles, namely, EGD, GDE, DEGREES, are equal the one to the other.
And forasmuch as (by the 5. of the first) in triangles of two equal sides
c^^mon^l^ called Isosceles, the angles at the base are equal the one to the
other, and the three angles of a triangle are (by the 30. of the first) equal
unto two right angles, therefore the angle EGD is the third part of two right
angles. And in like sor^e may it be proved, that the angle DGC is the third
part of two right angles. And forasmuch as the right line CG standing upon the
right line EB does (by the 13. of the fi^^t) make the two side angles ^GC, and
CG^ equal to two right angles, therefore the angle remaining CGB is the third
part of two right angles. Wherefore the angles EGD, DGC, and CGB are equal the
one to the other. Wherefore their head angles, that is, BGA, AGF, and FGE are (by
the 15. of the first) equal to these angles EGD, DGC, and CGB. Wherefore these
six angles EGD, DGC, CGB, BGA, AGF, and FGE are equal the one to the other.
But equal angles consist upon equal circumferences (by (...) the third.
Therefore these six circumferences AB^ BC^ CD^ DE^ EF^ and ^A are equal the
one to the other. But under equal circumferences are ^^bt^^ded equal right
lines (by the 29. of the same.) Wherefore these six right lines AB, BC, CD,
DE, OF, and FA are equal the one to the other. Wherefore the Hexagon ABCDEF is
equilater. I say also that it is equiangle. For forasmuch as the circumference
AF is equal unto the circumference ED add the circumference ABCD common to
them both. Wherefore the whole circumference FABCD is equal to the whole
circumference EDCBA. And upon the circumference FABCD consists the angle
FED: and upon the circumference EDCBA consists the angle AFE. Wherefore the
angle AFE is equal to the angle DEF. In like sort also may it be proved that
the rest of the angles of the Hexagon ABCDEF, that is every one of these angles
FAB, ABC, BCD, and CDE is equal to every one of these angles AFE, and FED.
Wherefore the Hexagon figure ABCDEF is equiangle, and it is proved that it is
also equilater, and it is described in the circle ABCDEF. Wherefore in the
circle given ABCDEF is described a figure of six angles of equal sides and of
equal angles: Which was required to be done^

An other way to do the same after Orontius.
Suppose that the circle given be ABCDEF in which first let there be described
an equilater and equiangle triangle ACE (by the second of this book). An ^ther
way to do the same after Oro^tius.
Wherefore the arkes ABC, CDE, EFA are (by the 28. of the third) equal the one
to the other. Divide every one of those three arkes into two equal parts (by
the 30. of the same) in the points B, D, and F. And draw these right lines AB^
BC, CD, DE, OF, and FA. Now then by the 2. definition of this book there shall
be described in the circle give an Hexagon figure ABCDEF, which must needs be
equilater: for that every one of the arkes which subtend the sides thereof are
equal the one to the other. I say also that it is equiangle. For every angle
of the Hexagon figure is set upon equal arkes, namely, upon four such parts
of the circu^ference whereof the whole circumference co^tayneth six. Wherefore
the angles of the Hexagon figure are equal the one to the other (by the 27. of
the third). Wherefore in the circle given ABCDEF is inscribed an equilater and
equiangle Hexagon figure: which was required to be done.

An other way to do the same after Pelitarius.
Suppose that the circle in which is to be inscribed (...) ^^uil^ter and
^^^iangle Hexagon figure be ABCDE, An other way after Pelitarius.
whose c^ntre let be F. And from the center draw the semidiameter FA. And from
the point A apply (by the first o^ ^hys book) the line ^^ equal to the
semidiameter. Which I say is the side of an equilater and eq^iangle Hexagon
figure to be inscribed in the circle ABCDE. Draw ^ ^^ght ^ine from E to B^ And
for as much as the line AB is equal to the line FA^ and it is also equal to
the line FB, therefore the triangle AFB is equilater, and by the 5. of the first
equiangle. Now then upon the center F describe the angle BFC equal to the
angle AF^, or to the angle FBA (which is all one) by drawing the right line FC.
And draw a line from B to C. And for as much as the angle AFB is the third part
of two right angles by the 5. and 32. of the first, the angle BFC also shall be
the third part of two right angles. Wherefore either of the two angles
remaining FBC and FCB, for as much as they are equal by the 5. of the first,
shall be two third parts of two right angles (by the 32. of the same). Or (by
the 4. of the first) forasmuch as the angle BFC is equal to the angle FBA, and
the two sides FB and FC are equal to the two sides AB and BF, the base BC
shall be equal to the base BF, and therefore is equal to the line FC.
Wherefore the triangle FBC is equilater and equiangle. Lastly make the angle
CFD equal to either of the angles at the point F, by drawing the line FD. And
draw a line from C to D. Now then by the former reason the triangle FCD shall
be equilater and equiangle. And for as much as the three angles at the point F
are equal to two right angles (for each of them is the third part of two right
angles) therefore (by the 14. of the first) AD is one right line: and for that
cause is the diameter of the circle. Wherefore if the other semicircle AFD be
divided into so many equal parts as the semicircle ABCD is divided into, it
shall comprehend so many equal lines subtended unto it. Wherefore the line AB
is the side of an equilater Hexagon figure to be inscribed in the circle: which
Hexagon figure also shall be equiangle: For the half of the whole angle B is
equal to the half of the whole angle C: which was required to be done.

Now then if we draw from the center F a perpendicular line unto AD, which let
be FE, and draw also these right lines BE and CE: there shall be described a
triangle BEC whose angle E which is at the top shall be the 6. part of two
right angles by the 20. of the third. For the angle BFC is double unto it. And
either of the two angles at the base, namely, the angles EBC, and ECB is dupla
sesquialter to the angle E: that is, either of them contains the angle E
twice and half the angle E. And by this reason was found out the side of an
Hexagon figure.

Correlary.
Hereby it is manifest, that the side of an Hexagon figure described in a
circle is equal to a right line drawn from the ce^tre of the said circle unto
the circumference. And if by the points A, B, C, D, E, F, be drawn right
lines touching the circle, then shall there be described about the circle an
Hexagon figure equilater and equiangle, which may be demonstrated by that which
has been spoken of the describing of a Pentagon about a circle. And moreover
by those things which have been spoken of Pentagons we may in a Hexagon given
either describe or circumscribe a circle: which was required to be done.

The 16. Problem. The 16. Proposition. In a circle given to describe a
quindecagon or figure of fiftene angles, equilater and equiangle.
SVppose that the circle given be ABCD. It is required in the circle ABCD to
describe a figure of fiftene angles consisting of equal sides and of equal
angles. Describe in the circle ABCD the sides of an equilater triangle, and let
the same be AC, and in ye arc AC describe the side of an equilater pentagon
and let the same be AB. Construction.
Now then of such equal parts whereof the whole circle ABCD contains
fiftene, of such parts I say, the circumference ABC being the third part of
the circle shall contain five. And the circumference AB being the fifth part of
a circle shall contain three, wherefore the residue BC shall contain two.
Divide (by the 30. of the first) the arc BC into two equal parts in the
point E. Demonstration.
Wherefore either of these circumferences BE and EC is the fiftene part of the
circle ABCD. If therefore there be drawn right lines from B to E, and from E to
C, and then beginning at the point B or at the point C there be applied into
the circle ABCD right lines equal unto EB or EC, and so continuing till ye
come to the point C if you began at B, or to ye point B if you began at C, and
there shall be described in the circle ABCD a figure of fiftene angles
equilater and equiangle: which was required to be done. And in like sort as in
a pentagon, if by the points where the circle is divided, be drawn right
lines touching the circle in the said points, there shall be described about
ye circle a figure of fiftene angles equilater and equiangle. And in like sort
by ye self same observations that were in Pentagons, we may in a figure of
fiftene angles given being equilater and equiangle either inscribe, or
circumscribe a circle.

An addition of Flussates.
An addition of Flussates to find out infinite figures of many angles.
If into a circle from one point be applied the sides of two A Poligonon figure
is a figure consisting of many sides.
Poligonon figures: the excess of the greater arc above the less, shall
comprehend an arc containing so many sides of the Poligonon figure to be
inscribed by how many unities the denomination of the Poligonon figure of the
less side excedeth the denomination of the Poligonon figure of the greater
side: and the number of the sides of the Poligonon figure to be inscribed is
produced of the multiplication of the denominations of the foresaid Poligonon
figures the one into the other.

As for example. Suppose that into the circle ABE be applied the side of an
equilater and equiangle Hexagon figure (by the 15. of this book) which let be
AB: and likewise the side of a Pentagon (by the 11. of this book) which let be
AC: and the side of a square (by the 6. of this book) which let be AD: and the
side of an equilater triangle (by the 2. of this book) which let be AE. Then I
say, that the excess of the arc AD above the arc AB, which excess is the
arc BD, contains so many sides of the Poligonon figure to be inscribed, of
how many unities the denominator of the Hexagon AB, which is six, excedeth the
denominator of the square AD, which is four. And forasmuch as that excess it
two unities, therefore in BD there shall be two sides. And the denominator of
the Poligonon figure which is to be inscribed shall be produced of the
multiplication of the denominators of the foresaid Poligonon figures, namely,
of the multiplication of 6. into 4. which makes 24. which number is the
denominator of the Poligonon figure, whose two sides shall subtend the arc BD.
For of such equal parts whereof the whole circumference co^tayneth 24, of such
parts I say, the circumference AB contains 4, and the circumference AD
contains 6. Wherefore if from AD which subtendeth 6. parts be taken away 4.
which AB subtendeth, there shall remain unto BD two of such parts of which
the whole contains 24. Wherefore of an Hexagon and a square is made a
Poligonon figure of 24. sides. Likewise of the Hexagon AB and of the Pentagon
AC shall be made a Poligonon figure of 30. sides, one of whose sides shall
subtend the arc BC. For the denomination of AB which is 6. excedeth the
denomination of AC which is 5. only by unity. So also forasmuch as the
denomination of AB which is 6. excedeth the denomination of AE which is 3. by
3. therefore the arc BE shall contain 3. sides of a Poligonon figure of.18.
sides. And observing this self same method and order, a man may find out
infinite sides of a Poligonon figure.

The end of the fourth book of Euclides Elements.
The fifth book of Euclides Elements.
THIS FIFTH BOOK of Euclide is of very great commodity and use in all
Geometry, The argument of this fifth book.
and much diligence ought to be bestowed therein. It ought of all other to be
thoroughly and most perfectly and readily known. For nothing in the books
followyng can be understand without it: the knowledge of them all depend of
it. And not only they and other writings of Geometry, but all other Sciences
also and arts: as Music, Astronomy, Perspectiue, Arithmetique, the art of
accomptes and reckoning, with other such like. This book therefore is as it
were a chief treasure, and a peculiar iuell much to be accounted of. It
entreats of proportion and Analogy, or proportionalitie, which pertayneth
not only unto lines, figures, and bodies in Geometry: but also unto soundes
and voices, of which Music entreats, as witnesses Boethius and others which
write of Music. Also the whole art of Astronomy teaches to measure
proportions of times and mouinges. Archimides and Jordan with other, writing of
waightes, affirm, that there is proportion between weight and weight, and also
between place and place. Ye see therefore how large is the use of this fifth
book. Wherefore the definitions also thereof are common, although hereof
Euclide they be accommodate and applied only to Geometry. The first author of
this book was as it is affirmed of many, one Eudoxus who was Platos scholar,
The first a^thor of this book Eudoxus.
but it was afterward framed and put in order by Euclide.

Definitions.
The first definition.
A part is a less magnitude in respect of a greater magnitude, when the less
measures the greater.
As in the other books before, so in this, the author first sets orderly
the definitions and declarations of such terms and words which are
necessarily required to the entreatie of the subject and matter thereof, which
is proportion and comparison of proportions or proportionalitie. And first he
shows what a part is. Here is to be considered that all the definitions of
this fifth book be general to Geometry and Arithmetique, and are true in both
arts, even as proportion and proportionalitie are common to them both, and
chiefly appertain to number, neither can they aptly be applied to matter of
Geometry, but in respect of number and by number. Yet in this book, and in
these definitions here set, Euclide seems to speak of them only
Geometrically, as they are applied to quantity continual, as to lines,
superficieces, and bodies: for that he yet continues in Geometry. I will
notwithstanding for facility and farther help of the reader, declare the^
both by example in number, and also in lines.

For the clearer understanding of a part, it is to be noted, A part taken two
manner of ways.
that a part is taken in the Mathematical Sciences two manner of ways. The
first way.
One way a part is a less quantity in respect of a greater, whether it
measure the greater o^ no. The second way, The second way.
a part is only that less quantity in respect of the greater, which
measures the greater. A less quantity is said to measure or number a greater
quantity, How a less quantity is said to measure a greater.
when it, being oftentimes taken, makes precisely the greater quantity
without more or less, or being as oftentimes taken from the greater as it may,
there remains nothing. As suppose the line AB to contain 3. and the line CD
to contain 9. the^ does the line AB measure the line CD: for that if it be
take certain times, namely, 3. times, it makes precisely the line CD, that is
9. without more or less. Again if the said less line AB be taken from the
greater CD, as often as it may be, namely, 3. times, there shall remain
nothing of the greater. So the number 3. is said to measure 12. for that being
taken certain times, namely, four times, it makes just 12. the greater
quantity: and also being taken from 12. as often as it may, namely, 4. times,
there shall remain nothing. And in this meaning and signification does Euclide
undoubtedly here in this define a part: In what signification Euclide here
takes a part.
saying, that it is a less magnitude in comparison of a greater, when the
less measures the greater. As the line AB before set, containing 3. is a
less quantity in comparison of the line CD which contains 9. and also
measures it. For it being certain times taken, namely, 3. times, precisely
makes it, or taken from it as often as it may, there remains nothing.
Wherefore by this definition the line AB is a part of the line CD. Likewise in
numbers, the number 5. is a part of the number 15. for it is a less number or
quantity compared to the greater, and also it measures the greater: for being
taken certain times, namely, 3. times, it makes 15. And this kind of part is
called commonly pars metiens or mensurans, Part metien^ or mensuran^.
that is, a measuryng part: some call it pars multiplicatina: Pars
multiplicati^a.
and of the barbarous it is called pars aliquota, Pars aliquota.
that is an aliquote part. And this kind of part is commonly used in
Arithmetique. This kind of part commonly used in Arithmetique.


The other kind of a part, The other kind of part.
is any less quantity in comparison of a greater, whether it be in number or
magnitude, and whether it measure or no. As suppose the line AB to be 17. and
let it be divided into two parts in the point C, namely, into the line AC, and
the line CB, and let the line AC the greater part contain 12. and let the line
BC the less part contain 5. Now either of these lines by this definition is a
part of the whole line AB. For either of them is a less magnitude or quantity
in co^pariso^ of the whole line AB: but neither of the^ measures the whole
line AB: for the less line CB containing 5. taken as often as ye list, will
never make precisely AB which contains 17. If ye take it 3. times it makes
only 15. so lacks it 2. of 17. which is to little. If ye take it 4. times, so
makes it 20. the^ are there three to much, so it never makes precisely 17. but
either to much or to little. Likewise the other part AC measures not the whole
line AB: for taken once, it makes but 12. which is less then 17. and taken
twice, it makes 24. which are more then 17. by ^. So it never precisely makes
by taking thereof the whole AB, but either more or less. And this kind of part
they commonly call pars constituens, or componens: Pars constit^ens, or
componens.
Because that it with some other part or parts, makes the whole. As the line
CB together with the line AC makes the whole line AB. Of the barbarous it is
called pars aliquanta. Pars aliquanta.
In this signification it is taken in B^rla^^ in the beginning of his book, in
the definition of a part, when he says: Every less number compared to a
greater, is said to be a part of the greater, whether the less measure the
greater, or measure it not.

Multiplex is a greater magnitude in respect of the less, when the less
measures the greater. The second definition.

As the line CD before set in the first example, is multiplex to the line AB.
For that CD a line containing 9. is the greater magnitude, and is compared to
the less, namely, to the line AB containing 3. and also the less line AB
measures the greater line CD: for taken 3. times, it makes it, as was above
said. So in numbers 12. is multiplex to 3: for 12 is the greater number, and
is compared to the less, namely, to 3. which 3. also measures it: Numbers
very necessary for the understanding of this book and the other books
following.
for 3 taken 4 times makes 12. By this word multiplex which is a term proper
to Arithmetike and number, it is easy to consider that there can be no exact
knowledge of proportion and proportionalitie, and so of this fifth book with
all the other books followyng, without the aid and knowledge of numbers.

Proportion is a certain respect of two magnitudes of one kind, The t^ird
definition.
according to quantity.
Euclide as in the first definition, so in this and the other following, and
likewise in all his Propositions of this book, mentions only magnitudes,
and gives his examples and demonstrations of lines: for that hitherto in the
4. books before he has entreated of lines and figures, and so continues in
his sixth book following after this, comparing figure to figure, and sides of
figures to sides of figures, without mention of number at all. Notwithstanding
as it is said they are general to all kind of quantity, both discrete and
continual, namely, number and magnitude: and need for the young reader and
studient in these arts to be declared in both. For, the opening of them in
numbers (in which they are first and naturally found) gives a great and
marvelous light to their declaration in magnitudes. what proportion is.
Proportion (says he) is a certain behavior, that is, a certain respect or
comparison of two quantities of one kind: as of one line to an other, and one
figure generally to an other, and one number to an other, as touching
quantity, that is to say, that the quantity compared, Things compa^ed
together this ways.
is to that whereunto it is compared, either equal, or greater, or less then
it. For after these three manners may things be compared the one to the other.
But quantities of diverse kinds can not be compared together. A superficies can
not be compared to a line: nor number to a body: nor a body to a line or
number: for that they are not of one kind. For example of this definition,
Example of this definition in magnitudes.
take two quantities, namely, two lines AB and CD, and compare the one to the
other, namely, AB to CD according to some certain respect of greatness, or
lessenes, or equality, namely, in this example, let AB be greater then CD, and
contain it twice. Now this comparison, relation, or respect of AB to CD, and
generally of any one quantity to any other, is called proportion. Likewise is
it, if AB be equal to CD, as in the second example: or if AB be less then CD,
as in the third example. The like is it also in numbers comparing 5. to 5.
equal to equal, Example thereof in numbers.
or 6. to 3. the greater to the less, or 4. to 8. the less to the greater. So
to the accomplishing of any Proportion there are required two quantities, In
proportion^ two quantities required, which are called terms.
and also a comparing or respect of the one to the other. The quantities
compared together are commonly called the Terms of the Proportion. And in this
book of Euclide, and also in other writers of Geometry, the first Term,
namely, that which is compared is called the antecedent, The i. term called
the antecedent.
whether it be equal, greater, or less then the other: And the second Term,
namely, that whereunto the comparison is made, is called the consequent. The ij.
term called the consequent.
As in the former example, the line AB compared to the line CD is antecedent:
and the line CD is consequent: And contrariwise if the line CD be compared to
the line AB, then is the line CD antecedent, and the line AB consequent. Albeit
in Arithmeticke Boethius and others call the term compared Dux, Dux.
and the ^rme to whom the comparison is made they call Comes. Comes.
This book has been accounted of all men one of the hardest and most
intricate of all Euclides books. This book counted the hardest of all
Euclides books.
And proportion is a general knowledge to all learninges, chiefly to the
Mathematicalls. Wherefore it shall be very necessary some little brief
instruction and induction to be here added in the beginning hereof: of the
knowledge and nature of proportions and what they are, and of how many kinds:
which things are here of Euclide supposed to be before known, and therefore
makes no mention so distinctly of them.

Ye must understand that there are of proportions two general kinds,
Proportion of two kinds, rational and irrational.
the one is called rational, certain, and known, and the other irrational,
uncertain and unknown. Such magnitudes or quantities, which may be expressed
by number, are called rational magnitudes or quantities^ Proportion rational.
As suppose a line, namely, the line AB to contain 5. inches, and compare it
to the line CD, containing 3. inches: these quantities ye see may be expressed
by numbers, namely, by these numbers 5. and 3: and therefore are rational, and
have the same proportion, that number has to number, namely, that the number
5. has to the number 3: and therefore the proportion of the one to the other,
is a rational, certain, and known proportion. And generally when soever one
number is compared to an other, or two lines or other magnitudes, both which
may be expressed by number, the proportion between them is ever rational, and
only the proportion of such quantities is rational. So that in Arethmeticke
all proportions are rational, In Arithmetique all proportions are rational.
for that therein ever one number is compared to an other.

There are certain lines magnitudes or quantities which ca^ not be named and
expressed by number, and therefore commonly are called Surd lines or
magnitudes. Proportion irrational.
As suppose the square ABCD to contain 16, then the side or root thereof,
namely, the line AB contains 4, and the diameter of the same square, namely,
the line BC shall be ^ 32, which is a surd number, and can nor be expressed by
any determinate and certain number, but only by this manner of circumlocution
Root square of 32. Now if ye compare the line AB to the line BC, or
contrariwise the line BC to the line AB, for that one of them is a surde
quantity, neither can each of them be expressed by number (and therefore can
not have that proportion that number has to number) the proportion between
them is irrational, confused, unknown, uncertain, and surd. And this kind
of proportion is found only in magnitudes, as in lines and figures (and not in
numbers) of which he of purpose entreats in his tenth book. Wherefore I will
here omit to speak of it, and remit it to his due place. And somewhat will I
now say for the elucidation of the first kind.

Rational proportion divided ^^to two kinds.
Proportion rational is divided into two kinds, into proportion of equality,
and into proportion of inequality. Proportion of equality is, when one
quantity is referred to an other equal unto it self: as if ye compare 5 to
5, or 7 to 7, and so of other. And this proportion has great use in the rule
of Cosse. Proportion of equality.
For in it all the rules of equations tend to none other end but to find out
and bring forth a number equal to the number supposed, which is to put the
proportion of equality.

Proportion of inequality.
Proportion of inequality is, when one unequal quantity is compared to an
other, as the greater to the less, as 8. to 4: or 9. to 3: or the less to the
greater as 4. to 8: or 3. to 9.

Proportion of the greater to the less.
Proportion of the greater to the less has five kinds, namely, Multiplex,
Superparticular, Superpartiens, Multiplex superperticular, and Multiplex
superpartiens.

Multiplex, is when the antecedent contains in it self the consequent
certain times without more or less: Multiplex.
as twice, thrice, four times, and so farther. And this proportion has under
it infinite kinds. For if the antecedent contain the consequent justly twice,
it is called dupla proportion, Duple proportion.
as 4 to 2. If thrice tripla, Triple, quadruple. Quintuple.
as 9. to 3. If 4. times quadrupla as 12. to 3. If 5. times quintupla as 15. to
3. And so infinitely after the same manner.

Superperticular.
Superperticular is, when the antecede^t contains the consequent only once,
and moreover some one part thereof as an half, a third, or fourth, etc. This
kind also has under it infinite kinds. For if the antecedent contain the
consequent once and an half, thereof it is called Sesquialtera, Sesquialtera.
as 6. to 4: if once and a third part Sesquitertia, Sesquitertia.
as 4. to 3: if once and a fourth part Sesquiquarta, Sesquiquarta.
as 5. to 4. And so in like manner infinitely.

Superpartiens.
Superpartiens is, when the antecedent contains the consequent only once, and
moreover more parts then one of the same, as two thirdes, three fourthes,
four fifthes and so forth. This also has infinite kinds under it. For if the
antecedent contain above the consequent two parts, it is called
Superbipartiens, Superbipartiens.
as 7. to 5. If 3. parts Supertripartiens as 7. to 4. Supertripartiens.
If 4. parts Superquadripartiens, Superquadripartiens.
as 9. to 5. If 5. parts Superquintipartiens as 11. to 6. Superquintipartiens.
And so forth infinitely.

Multiplex superperticular.
Multiplex Superperticular is when the antecedent contains the consequent more
then once, and moreover only one part of the same. This kind likewise has
infinite kinds under it. For if the antecedent contain the consequent twice
and half thereof, it is called dupla Sesquialtera, Dupla Sesquialtera.
as 5. to 2. If twice and a third Dupla Sesquitertia as 7. to 3. Dupla
sesquitertia.
If thrice and an half Tripla sesquialtera as 7. to 2. Tripla sesquialtera.
If four times and an half Quadr^pla Sesquialtera, as 9. to 2. And so going
on infinitely.

Multiplex superpartiens.
Multiplex Superpartient, is when the antecedent contains the consequent more
then once, and also more parts then one of the consequent. And this kind also
has infinite kinds under it. For if the antecedent contain the consequent
twice, and two parts over, it is called dupla Superbipartiens as 8. to 3.
Dupla superbipartiens.
If twice and three parts, dupla Supertripartiens as 11. to 4. Dupla
supertripartiens.
If thrice and two parts, it is named Tripla Superbipartiens as 11. to 3.
Tripla superbipartiens.
If three times and four parts Treble Superquadripartiens as 31. to 9. Tripla
superquad^ipartiens.
And so forth infinitely.

Here is to be noted that the denomination of the proportion b^twene any two
numbers, is had by dividing of the greater by the less. For the quotient o^
number produced of that division is even the denomination of the proportion.
How to kno^ the denomination of any proportion.
Which in the first kind of proportion, namely, multiplex, is ever a whole
number, and in all other kinds of proportion it is a broken number.

As if ye will know the denomination of the proportion between 9 and 3. Divide
9. by 3. so shall ye have in the quotient 3. which is a whole number, and is
the denomination of the proportion: and shows that the proportion between 9.
and 3. is Tripla. So the proportion between 12. and 3. is quadrupla, for that
12. being divided by 3. the quotient is 4. and so of others in the kind of
multiplex. And although in this kind the quotient be ever a whole number, yet
properly it is referred to unity, and so is represented in manner of a broken
number as 5/^ and 4/^ for unity is the denomination to a whole number.

Likewise the denomination of the proportion between 4 and 3 is 1. 1/^ for that
4 divided by 3. has in the quotient 1 1/^ one and a third part, of which third
part, it is called sesquitercia: so the proportion between 7 and 6. is 1 one
and a sixth, of which fixed part it is called sesquisexta, and so of other of
that kind. Also between, 7 and 5 the denomination of the proportion is 1 ^/^
one and two fifthes, which denomination consists of two parts, namely, of the
munerator and denominator of the quotient of 2. and 5: of which two fifthes it
is called superbipartiens quintas: for 2 the numerator shows the denomination
of the number of the parts, and 5. the denominator, shows the denominatio^,
what parts they are, and so of others. Also the denomination between 5 and 2.
is 2 two and a half, which consists of a whole number and a broken, of 2.
the whole number it is dupla, and of the half, it is called sesquialtera, so
is the proportion dupla sesquialtera.

Again the denomination of the proportion between 11. and 3. is 3 ^/^ three
and two thirdes, consisting also of a whole number and a broken, of 3. the
whole number it is called tripla, and of ^/^ the broken number, it is called
Superbipartiens tertias, so the proportion is tripla superbipartiens tertias.
Thus much hitherto touching proportion of the greater quantity to the less.

Proportion of the less quantity to the greater has as many kinds, as that
of the greater to the less, which kinds are in the same order: Proportion of
the less in the greater.
and have also the self same names, but that to the names before put ye must
add here this word sub. As comparing the greater to the less, it was called
multiplex, superparticular, superpartient, multiplex superparticular, and
multiplex superpartient, now comparing the less quantity to the greater, it
is called submultiplex, Submultiplex.
subsuperparticular, Subsuperparticular.
subsuperpartient, Subsuperpertient. etc.
submultiplex superparticular, and submultiplex superpartient. And so in like
manner to all the inferior kinds of all sorts of proportion ye shall add that
word sub. The examples of the former serve also here, only transposing the
terms of the proportion making the antecedent consequent, and the consequent
the antecedent. As 4. to 2. is dupla proportion: so 2. to 4. is subdupla. As 9.
to 3. is tripla: so is 3. to ^. subtripla. And as 9. to 6. is sesquialtera, so
6. to 9. is subsesquialtera. As 7. to 5. is superbipartiens quintas, so is 5.
to 7. subsuperbipartiens quintas. As 5. to 2. is dupla sesquialtera, so is 2.
to 5. subdupla sesquialtera. And also as 8. to 3. is dupla superbipartiens
tertias, so is 3. to 8. subdupla superbipartiens tertias. And so may ye proceed
infinitely in all others. Thus much thought I good in this place for the ease
of the beginner to be added touching proportion.

The fourth definition.
Proportionalitie, is a similitude of proportions.
As in proportion are compared together two quantities, and proportion is
nothing else but the respect and comparison of the one to the other, and these
quantities are the terms of the proportion: so in proportionallitie are
compared together two proportions. And proportionallitie is nothing else, but
the respect and comparison of the one of them to the other. And these two
proportions are the terms of this proportionallitie. He calls it the
similitude, that is, the likeness or idemptitie of proportions: Example of this
definition in magnitudes.
As if ye will compare the proportion of the line A contaynyng 2. to the line B
containing 1, to the proportion of the line C containing 6. to the line D
containing 3, either proportion is dupla. This likeness, idemptitie, or
equallitie of proportion is called proportionallitie. Example thereof in
numbers.
So in number 9. to 3. and 21. to 7. either proportion is tripla. Where note
that proportions compared together, are said to be like the one to the other:
Note.
but magnitudes compared together, are said to be equal the one to the other.

The fifth definition.
Those magnitudes are said to have proportion the one to the other, which being
multiplied may exceed the one the other.
Before he showed and defined, what proportion was, now by this definition he
declares between what magnitudes proportion falls, saying: That those
quantities are said to have proportion the one to the other, which being
multiplied, may excede the one the other. An example of this ^efinition in
magnitudes.
As for that the line A being multiplied by what soever multiplication or
number, as taken twice, thrice, or four, five, or more times, or once and
half, or once and a third, and so of any other part, or parts, may excede and
become greater then the line B or contrariwise, then these two lines are said
to have proportion the one to the other. And so ye may see that between any two
qua^tities of one kind, there is a proportion. For the one remaining
vnmultiplied, and the other being certain times multiplied, shall be greater
then it. As 3. to 24. has a proportion, for leaving 24. vnmultiplied, and
multiplying 3. by 9, ye shall produce 27: which is greater then 24, and
excedeth it. Here is to be noted, that Euclide in defining what quantities have
proportion, Why Euclide in defining of Proportion used multiplication.
was compelled to use multiplication, or else should not his definition be
general to either kind of proportion: namely, to rational and irrational:
to such proportion I say which may be expressed by number, and to such as
cannot be expressed by any determinate number, but remains surd and
innominable. In rational quantities which have one common measure, the excess
of the one above the other is known, and by it is known the proportion, which
may be expressed by some determinate number. But in irrational quantities
which have no common measure, it is not so. For in them the excess of the one
to the other is ever unknown, and therefore is surd, and innominable. As
between the side of a square and the diameter therof^ there is undoubtedly a
proportion, for that the side certain times multiplied may excede the
diameter. Likewise between the diameter of a circle and the circumference
thereof there is certainly, by this definition, a proportion, for that the
diameter certain times multiplied may excede the circumference of the circle:
although neither of these proportions can be named and expressed by number. For
this cause therefore used Euclide this manner of defining by multiplication.

Magnitudes are said to be in one or the self same proportion, The sixth
definition.
the first to the second, and the third to the fourth, when the equimultiplices
of the first and of the third being compared with the equimultiplices of the
second and of the fourth, according to any multiplication: either together
exceed the one the other, or together are equal the one to the other, or
together are less the one then other.
In the definition last going before, he showed what magnitudes have proportion
the one to the other, and now this diffinition shows what magnitudes are in
one and the self same proportion, An example of this definitiin in magnitudes.
and how to know whether they be in one and the self same proportion, or not.
It is plain that every proportion has two terms, so that when ye compare
proportion to proportion, ye must of necessity, have 4. terms, that is, an
antecedent and a consequent, to either of the proportions. As suppose A, B, C,
D, to be four magnitudes, A the first, B the second, C the third, and D the
fourth now if ye take the equimultiplices of A and C the first and the third,
that is, if ye multiply A and C by one and the self same number, as let the
multiplex of A be E, and let the equimultiplex of C be F. Likewise also if ye
take the equimultiplices of B and D, the second and the fourth, that is if ye
multiply them by any one number, whether it be by that number whereby ye
multiplied A and C, or by any other number greater or less, as let the
multiplex of B be G, and the equimultiplex of D be H: how it the
equimultiplices of A and C be both greater hen the eqnimultiplices of B and D,
that is if the multiplex of A be greater then the multiplex of B, and the
multiplex of C be greater then the multiplex of D, or if they be both less
then they: or both equal to them, An example in numbers.
then are the magnitudes A, B and ^, D in one and the self same proportion.

Likewi^^ in numbers 8. to 6. has a proportion, also 4. to 3. has a
proportion: now to see whether they be in one and the self same proportion or
not, set them in order as in the example here written, 8 the first, 6 the
second, 4 the third, and 3. the fourth. Now take the equemultiplices of 8 and
4. the first, and the third, that is, multiply them by one and the self same
number, suppose it be by 3. so the triple of 8 is 24. and the triple of 4. is
12: likewise take the equimultiplices of 6 and 3. the second and the fourth,
multiply^ng them likewise by one and the self same number, suppose it be also
by 3 as before ye did, the triple of 6 is 18. and the triple of 3 is 9. Now ye
see that the triple of 8 the first, namely, 24. excedeth the triple of 6. the
second, namely, 18: likewise the triple of 4 the third number, namely, 12.
excedeth the triple of 3. the fourth, namely, 9. Wherefore by the first part of
this definition, the numbers 8 to 6. and 4 to 3. are in one and the self same
proportion, because that the equemultiplices of 8 and 4. the first and the
third, do both exceed the equimultiplices of 6 and 3. the second and the
fourth.

An other example in numbers.
Again, take the same numbers and try the same after this manner. Take the
equimultiplices of 8. and 4. the first and the third, multiplieng each by 3. as
before ye did, so shall ye have 24 for the triple of 8. and 12 for the triple
of 4. as ye had before. Then take the equimultiplices of 6 and 3. the second
and the fourth, multipliyng them by some one number, but not by 3 as before ye
did: but by 4. so for the quadruple of 6 the second number, shall ye have 24.
and for the quadruple of 3 the fourth number, ye shall have 12. And now ye see
that the equimultiplices of 8 and 4. the first and the third, namely, 24 and
12. are both equal to the multiplices of 6 and 3. the second and the fourth,
namely, to 24 and 12. Wherefore the numbers given, are by the second part of
this definition in one and the self same proportion, because the
equimultiplices of 8 and 4 the first and the third, are both equal to the
equimultiplices of 6 and 3. the second and the fourth.

An other example in numbers.
Again to show the same, and for the fulness of the diffinition, take the same
numbers 8, 6, 4, 3. and take the equimultiplices of 8 and 4. the first and the
third, multiplieng each by 2. so have ye 16 for the duple of 8, the first
number, and 8 for the duple of 4 the third number: then take also the
equimultiplices of 6 and 3, the second and the fourth, multipliyng each by 3.
so have ye 18 for the triple of 6 the second, and 9 for the triple of 3. the
fourth number. And now ye see that the equimultiplices of 8 and 4. the first
and the third, namely, 16. and 8 are both less then the equimultiplices of 6
and 3. the second and the fourth namely 18 and 9. For 16 are less then 18, and
8 are less then 9. Wherefore by the third part of this diffinition, the
numbers proposed are in one and the self same proportion, for that the
equimultiplices of 8 and 4 the first and the third are both less then the
equimultiplices of 4 and 3 the second and the fourth.

Farther in this diffinition, this particle (according to any multiplication)
is most diligently to be considered, Note this particle according to any
multiplication.
which signifie^h by any multiplication indifferently whatsoever. For
whenever the quantities be in one and the self same proportion, then by any
multiplication whatsoever, the equimultiplices of the f^rst and the third,
shall exceed the equimultiplices of the second and the fourth, or shall be
equal unto them, or less then them. Yet it may so happen by some one
multiplication; that the equimultiplices of the first and the third, do exceed
the equimultiplices of the second and the fourth, and yet the quantities given
shall not be in one and the self same proportion. As in this example here set,
where the equimultiplices of 6 and 5, the first and the third, namely, 18. and
15. do both exceed the equimultiplices of 4 and 3. the second and the fourth,
namely, 8 and 6. An example where the equimultiplices of the first and third
exceed^ the equimultiplices of the second and fourth, and yet the quantities
given are not in one and the self same proportion.
yet are not the numbers given in one and the self same proportion. For 6 has
not that proportion to 4. which 5. has to 3. In this example 6 and 5 the first
and the third were multiplied by 3. which made their equimultiplices 18 and 15.
which exceed the equimultiplices of 4 and 3, the second and the fourth being
multiplied by 2. namely, 8 and 6: but if ye shall multiply 6 and 5 the first
and the third by 2. ye shall produce 12 and 10 for their equimultiplices, and
then if ye multiply 4 and 3. the second and the fourth by 3. so shall ye
produce for their equimultiplices 12 and 9. Now ye see that by this
multiplication the equimultiplices of the first and the third do not both
exceed the equimultiplices of the second and fourth: for 12 the multiplex of 6
does not exceed 12 the multiplex of 4. and therefore the numbers or quantities
ar^ not in one and the self same proportion, for that it holds not in all
multiplications whatsoever.

And because this diffinition requires all manner of multiplicatio^s to bring
forth the excesses, equalities, and wantes of the antecedents above, to, or
under the consequents; to avoid the tediousnes and infinite labor thereof, I
have set forth a rule much to be made of and esteemed, whereby ye may in any
rational proportion produce equimultiplices of the first and the third equal
to the equimultiplices of the second and the fourth. The rule is this, A rule
to produce equimultiplices of the first and third equal to the equimultiplices
of the second^ and f^urth.
take two numbers whatsoever in that proportion in which your quantities are,
and by the number which is antecedent multiply the consequents of your
proportions, namely, the second and the fourth: and by the number which is the
consequent multiply the antecedentes of your proportions, namely, the first and
the third^ then necessarily shall be produced the equimultiplices of the first
and the third equal to the equimultiplices of the second and the fourth. As by
example, take 6 to 2. and 3 to 1, which are in one and the self same
proportion, and taking these two numbers 9 and 3. which are in the same
proportion, now by 9 the antecedent multiply the cons^que^ts 2 and 1. and so
shall ye have 18 and 9 for the equimultiplices of the second and the fourth,
Example thereof.
then by 3 the consequent multiply the antede^ts 6 and 3, so shall ye have 18
and ^ for the equimultiplices of the first and the third, which are equal to
the former equimultiplices of the second and fourth. Whereof it follows that if
ye multiply 18 and 9 the equimultiplices of the first and the third by any
number greater the^ 3. whereby they were now multiplied, they shall both ever
exceed the equimultiplices of the second and the fourth: and if ye multiply
the^ by any number less then 3. they shall ever both want of them. So that
whatsoever multiplication it be, they shall ever both exceed, be equal, or
want above, to, or from 18. and 9. the equimultiplices of the second and fourth.

The seventh definition
Magnitudes which are in one and the self same proportion, are called
Proportional.
As if the line A, have the same proportion to the line B, that the line C has
to the line D, then are the said four magnitudes A, B, C, D, called
proportional. Also in numbers for that 9. to 3. has that same proportion that
12 has to 4: 9 12
therefore these four numbers 9.3.12.4. 3 4
are said to be proportional. Here is to be noted that this likeness or
idemptitie of proportion which is called, as before was said proportionalitie,
is of two sorts: the one is continual, the other is discontinuall.
Proportionality of two sorts, conti^uall and discontinuall.
Continual proportionalitie is, when the magnitudes set in like proportion,
are so joined together, that the second which is consequent to the first, is
antecedent to the third, and the fourth which is consequent to the third, is
antecedent to the fifth, and so continually forth. So every quantity or term
in this proportionalitie, is both antecedent and consequent (consequent in
respect of tha which went before, An example of continual proportionalitie in
numbers.
and antecedent in respect of that which follows) except the first, which is
only antecedent to that which follows, and the last which is only
consequent to that which went before. Take an example in these numbers,
16.8.4.2.1. 16.8.4.2.1.
In what proportion 16. is to 8, in the same is 8. to 4, in the same also is 4.
to 2, and likewise 2. to 1. For they all are in duple proportion: 16. the first
is antecedent to 8, and 8. is consequent unto it: and the self same 8. is
antecedent to 4: which 4 being consequent to 8. is antecedent to 2, which 2
likewise is consequent to 4. and antecedent to 1: which because he is the last,
is only consequent, and antecedent to none, as 16. because it was the first,
was antecedent only, and consequent to none. Also in this proportionalitie all
the magnitudes must of necessity be of one kind, In coutinnall
proportionalitie the quantities cannot be of one kind.
by reason of the continuation of the proportions in this proportionalitie,
because there is no proportion between quantities of diverse kinds.
Discontinuall proportionalitie is, Discontinuall prop^rtionalitie.
when the magnitudes which are set in like proportion, are not continually set,
as before they were, having one term referred both to that which went before,
and to that which follows, but have their terms distinct and severed asonder:
as the first is antecedent to the second, so is the third antecedent to the
fourth. Example in numbers, as 8 is to 4. Example of discontinual
proportionality in numbers.
so is 6. to 3. for either proportion is duple. Where ye see, how each
proportion has his own antecedent and consequent distinct from the antecedent
and consequent of the other, and no one number is antecedent and consequent in
diverse respects. And by reason of the discontinuaunce of the proportions in
this proportionalitie, In disco^tinual proportionalitie the proportions may be
of diverse kinds.
the quantities compared, may be of diverse kinds, because the consequent in
the first proportion is not the antecedent in the second proportion. So that ye
may compare superficies to superficies, or body to body in the self same
proportion that ye do line to line.

When the equemultiplices being taken, The eight definition.
the multiplex of the first excedeth the multiplex of the second, and the
multiplex of the third, excedeth not the multiplex of the fourth: then has the
first to the second a greater proportion, then has the third to the fourth.
In the sixth definition was declared what magnitudes are said to be in ^^e and
the same proportion: now he shows in this definition what magnitudes are said
to be in a greater proportion. And here is supposed the same order of
multiplication, that there in that definition was used: namely, that the first
and the third be equally multiplied, that is, by one and the self same number:
and also that the second and the fourth be equally multiplied by the same or
some other number: and then if the multiplex of the first, excede the multiplex
of the second: An example of this definition in magnitudes.
and the multiplex of the third; excede not the multiplex of the fourth, the
first has a greater proportion to the second, then has the third to the
fourth. As suppose that there be four quantities, A, B, C, D: of which let A
be the first, B the second, C the third, and D the fourth. And let A the first
co^mine 6. and let B the second contain 2. and C the third 4. and D the fourth
3: Now take the equimultiplices of A and C the first and the third, which let
be E and F, so that how multiplex E is to A so multiplex let F be to C: namely
for example sake let either of them be triple: so have you 18. for the
multiplex of A, and 12. for the multiplex of C. Likewise take the
equimultiplices of B and D, the second and the fourth, multiplying them also by
one and the self same number, as by 4: so have ye for the multiplex of B the
second 8, namely, the line G, and for the multiplex of D the fourth 12, namely,
the line H. Now because the line E multiplex to the first, namely, 18, excedeth
the line G multiplex to the second, namely, 8: And the line F multiplex to the
third, namely, 12, excedeth not the line H multiplex to the fourth, namely, 12
(for that they are equal) the proportion of A to B the first to the second, is
greater then the proportion of C to D the third to the fourth. So likewise in
numbers: take 11. to 2. and 7. to 3. and multiply 11. and 7. An example in
numbers.
(the first, and the third) by 2, so shall ye have 22. for the multiplex of the
first, and 14. for the multiplex of the third: and multiply 2. and 3. the
second and the fourth by 6: so shall the multiplex of the second be 12. and the
multiplex of the fourth be 18: Now ye see 22. the multiplex of the first,
excedeth 12, the multiplex of the second. But 14. the multiplex of the third,
excedeth not 18. the multiplex of the fourth: Wherefore the proportion of 11.
to 2. the first to the second, is greater then the proportion of 7. to 3, the
third to the fourth. And so of all other quantities and numbers, which are not
in one and the self same proportion, ye may know when the first to the second
has a greater proportion then the third to the fourth.

An other example.
This example have I set to declare that although the proportion of the first
to the second be greater then the proportion of the third to the fourth, yet
the multiplex of the first excedeth not the multiplex of the second. Wherefore
it is diligently to be noted, Note.
that it is sufficient to show that the proportion of the first to the second
is greater the^ the proportion of the third to the fourth, if the want or lack
of the multiplex of the first from the multiplex of the second, be less then
the want or lack of the multiplex of the third to the multiplex of the fourth.
As in this example 16. the multiplex of 8. the first, wants of 20. the
multiplex of 4. the second, four: whereas 18. the multiplex of 9, the third,
wa^teth of 45, the multiplex of 9 the fourth, 27. And so of all others whereas
(the proportions being diverse) the equimultiplices of the first and the third
are both less, then the equimultiplices of the second and the fourth. Likewise
if the equimultiplices of the first and the third do both excede the
equimultiplices of the second and the first, the^ shall the excess of the
multiplex of the first above the multiplex of the second, be greater the^ the
excess of the multiplex of the third, above the multiplex of the fourth. As in
these numbers here set, the equimultiplices of 6. and 4. the first and the
third, namely, 12. and 8. do both excede the equimultiplices of 2. and 3. the
second and the fourth, namely, 4. and 6. But 12. the multiplex of the first
excedeth 4. the multiplex of the second by 4, and 8. the multiplex of the third
excedeth 6. the multiplex of the fourth by 2. but 8. is more then 2. Howbeit
this is generally certain that when soever the proportion of the first to the
second is greater then the proportion of the third to the fourth, there may be
found some multiplication, that when the equimultiplices of the first and the
third shall be compared to the equimultiplices of the second and the fourth,
the multiplex of the first shall excede the multiplex of the second, and the
multiplex of the third shall not excede the multiplex of the fourth, according
to the plain words of the definition.

In like manner when you have taken the equimultiplices of the first and the
third, and also the equimultiplices of the second and the fourth, if the
multiplex of the first excede not the multiplex of the second, and the
multiplex of the third excede the multiplex of the fourth: then has the first
to the second a less proportion, then has the third to the fourth. As in the
example before, if ye change the terms, and make C the first, D the second, A
the third, and B the fourth: then shall F, namely, 12. the multiplex of the
first not excede H, namely, 12. the multiplex of the second: but E, namely, 18.
the multiplex of the third excedeth G, namely, 8. the multiplex of the fourth.
Wherefore the proportion of C to D, the first to the second, is less then the
proportion of A to B, the third to the fourth.

Even so in numbers. As in this example, 5. to 4. and 7. to 3. If ye multiply
5. and 7. the first and the third each by 3, ye shall for the multiplex of 5.
the first have 15. and for the multiplex of 7. the third shall ye have 21:
again if ye multiply 4. and 3. the second and the fourth by 6, for the
multiplex of 4. the second ye shall have 24, and for the multiplex of 3. the
fourth, ye shall have 18. So ye see that ^5. the multiplex of the first, is
less then 24, the multiplex of the second: and 21. the multiplex of the third
is greater then 18. the multiplex of the fourth. Wherefore the proportion of 5.
to 4. the first to the second is less then the proportion of 7. to 3. the
third to the fourth.

Proportionallitie consists at the lest in three terms. The ninth definition.

Before it was said, that proportionalitie is a likeness or an idemptitie of
proportions. Wherefore of necessity in proportionalitie, there must be two
proportions, and every proportion has two terms, namely, his antecedent and
consequent. Therefore in every proportionalitie th^re are four terms. But for
that sometime, one term supplieth by diverse relations, the room of two, for in
respect to the first it is consequent, and in respect to that which follows,
it is antecedent: therefore three terms at least and not under may suffice in
proportionalitie, which three are in power four, and occupy the rome of four,
as is said. An example of this definition in magnitudes.
As suppose that A has to B that proportion, that B has to C: then are these
three quantities A, B, C, set in the lest number of proportionality. Example ^n
numbers.
Likewise in numbers, as 8. 4. 2. and 9. 6. 4.

When there are three magnitudes in proportion, The tenth definition.
the first shall be unto the third in double proportion that it is to the
second. But when there are four magnitudes in proportion the first shall be
unto the fourth in treble proportion that it is to the second. And so always
in order one more, as the proportion shall be extended.
This definition is also understand in continual proportionalitie. Example of
this definition in magnitudes.
As if the three magnitudes A, B, C, be proportional: then shall the
proportion of A the first to C the third, be double to the proportion which
is between A and B the first and the second, that is the proportion of A to B
taken twice, or added to it self (which is all one) shall make the proportion
of A to C. For the easier understanding of this and the practice thereof, it
shall be much necessary somewhat to instruct the rude beginner how proportions
may be added one to an other. Which is done by this rule.

A rule to add proportions to proportions.
Multiply the antecedent of the one proportion by the antecede^t of the other,
and the number produced shall be the antecedent of the proportion which
contains them both. Likewise multiply the consequent of the one proportion by
the consequent of the other, and the number produced shall be consequent of the
proportion which shall contain them both.

Example thereof.
An example. If ye will add the proportion which is between 4 and 2. (which is
dupla) to the proportion which is between 9 and 3. (which is tripla) multiply
9. the antecedent of the first proportion by 4. the antecedent of the second
proportion, and ye shall produce 36. which reserve and keep for the antecedent
of the proportion which ye seek for. Likewise multiply 3 the consequent of the
first proportion, by 2 the consequent of the second, so shall ye have 6. which
6. shall be consequent to the former antecede^t, namely, to 36. so shall the
proportion which is between 36 and 6. namely, sextupla, contain in it the two
proportions given, namely, tripla, and dupla. And by this means are they added
together, and brought into one. And by this may ye add all other kinds of
proportions whatsoever they be. Now for that the diffinition says, that if
there be three quantities in proportion, that is, what proportion the first
has to the second, the same has the second to the third, which for example
let be tr^ple, as in these numbers, 27. 9. 3. add triple to triple by the rule
abouesaid. And forasmuch as it is easier to work in small numbers then in
great, reduce these proportio^s to their least denomination: 27. 9. ^.
So 27. to 9. reduced to the lest terms in that proportion, is as much as 3.
to 1. Likewise 9 to 3 reduced to their lest terms are also as much as 3 to 1. 9
now add together these two triple proportions thus reduced, multipliyng 3 by
3. 3 -- 3
the one antecedent by the other, so shall ye produce 9 for a new antecedent,
then multiply 1 by 1. 1 -- 1
the one consequent by the other, so shall you produce 1. which let be
consequent to 9. your antecedent, so the proportion between 9 and 1. which is
noncuple contains both the two triple proportions. And because they were
equal the one to the other, it is duple to each of them. Ye see ^lso that the
proportion of 27 to 3. the first to the third, is also noncuple. Wherefore
according to the definition, the proportion of the first to the third, is
double to the proportion of the first to the second, as 9 to 1. being noncuple,
is double 3 to 1. which is triple, because it contains it twice.

So if there be 4. quantities in continual proportion, the proportion of the
first to the fourth, shall be triple to the proportion which is between the
first and the second, that is, it shall contain it three times. As for
example, Take 4. numbers in continual proportion 8. 4. 2. 1. 8. 4. 2. 1.
Ye see that the proportion of 8 to 1. 2 2 2
the first to the fourth, 1 1 1
is octupla: the proportion of 8 to 4. the first to the second is dupla, now
treble dupla proportion, that is, add 3. dupla proportions together, by the
rule before given, as ye see in the example. Multiply all the antecedentes
together 2. the antecedent of the first proportion, by 2. the antecedent of the
second, so have ye 4: which 4. multiply by 2 the antecedent of the third
proportion, so shall ye have 8 for a new antecedent. In like manner multiply all
the consequentes together, 1. the consequent of the first proportion by 1. the
consequent of the second proportion, so shall ye have 1, which 1. multiply
again by 1. the co^sequent of the third proportion, so shall ye have again 1:
which 1. let be consequent to your former antecedent 8: so have ye 8 to 1.
which is octupla, which was also the proportion of the first to the fourth,
which octupla is also brought fourth of the addition of three dupla proportions
together, and contains it three times, wherefore octupla is tripla to dupla,
and therefore as the diffinition says: the proportion of the first to the
fourth is tripla to the proportion of the first to the second. And so
consequently forth as long as the proportionalitie continues according to the
sentence of the diffinition, the terms of the proportions exceeding the number
of proportions by one. As if ye have 5. terms in proportion, the proportion of
the first to the fifth shall be quadrupla to the proportion of the first to the
second, and if there be 6. terms, it shall be quintupla and so in order.

Magnitudes of like proportion, are said to be antecedents to antecedentes, and
consequentes to consequentes. The eleventh definition.

For that before it was said, that proportion was a relation or a respect of
one quantity to an other, now shows he what magnitudes are said to be of
like proportion, namely, these whose antecedents have like respect to their
consequentes, and whose consequents receive like respects of their
antecede^ts. Example of this definition in magnitud^.
As putting 4. magnitudes A, B, CD. If A antecedent to B, be double to B, and C
antecedent to D, be double also to D, the^ have the two antecedentes like
respects to their consequents. Likewise if B the consequent be half of A, and
also D the consequent be half of C, then the two consequentes B and D receive
of their antecedentes like respects and relations. And by this diffinition,
are these magnitudes A, B, C, D, of like proportion.

Also in numbers, 9. 3. 6. 2: because 9 the antecedent is triple to 3. his
consequent, and the antecedent 6. is also triple to 2 his consequent: Example
in numbers.
the two antecede^ts 9 and 6 have like respects to their consequentes, and
because that 3 the consequent is the subtriple or third part of ^. his
antecedent, and likewise 2 the consequent is the subtriple or third part of 6.
his antecedent, the two consequentes 3 and 2 receive also like respects of
their antecedentes, and therefore are numbers of like proportion.

Proportion alternate, or proportion by permutation is, The twelf^h definition.
when the antecedent is compared to the antecedent, and the consequent to the
consequent.
The understanding of this definition and of all the definitions following,
depends of the definition going before, and use it for a general
supposition, namely, to have four quantities in proportion. Suppose four
magnitudes A, B, C, D, to be in proportion, Example of this de^inition in
magnituds.
namely, as A is to B, so let C be to D. Now if ye compare A the antecedent of
the first proportion to C the antecedent of the second as to his consequent,
and likewise if ye compare B the co^sequent of the first proportion as an
antecedent to D the consequent of the second as to his consequent: then shall
ye have the magnitudes in this sort: as A to C, antecedent to antecedent,
Example in numbers.
so B to D, consequent to consequent, and this is called permutate proportion
or alternate. In numbers as 12. to 6, so 8. to 4. either is dupla. Wherefore by
permutation of proportion, as 12. to 8. antecedent to antecedent, so is 6. to
4. consequent to consequent, for either is sesquialtera.

The thirtenth definition.
Converse proportion, or propo^tion by conversion is, when the consequent is
taken as the antecedent, and so is compared to the antecedent as to the
consequent.
Suppose as before four magnitudes in proportion, A, B, C, D, as A to B, so C
to D: Example of this definition in magnituds.
if ye refer B the consequent of the first proportion, as antecedent, to A
the antecedent of the first, as to his consequent: and likewise if ye refer D
the conseque^t of the second proportion as antecede^t to C the antecede^t of
the second proportion, as to his co^sequent: the^ shall ye have the magnitudes
in this order. As B to A co^sequent to antecede^t^ so D to C consequent to
antecede^t. Example in numbers.
And this is called co^uerse proportion. So also in numbers, 9. to 3, as 6. to
2, either is tripla, wherefore comparing 3. to 9, the consequent of the first to
his antecedent 9, and also 2. the consequent of the second to his antecedent 6,
by converse proportion it comes to pass as 3. to 9, so 2. to 6: For either
is subtripla.

The fourtenth definition.
Proportion composed, or composition of proportion is, when the antecedent and
the consequent are both as one compared unto the consequent.
Suppose that in the former four magnituds in proportion, A, B, C, D, as A is
to B, so is C to D: Example of this definition in magnituds.
if ye add A and B the antecedent and the consequent of the first proportion
together, and compare them so added as one antecedent to B the consequent of
the first proportion as to his consequent: and likewise if ye add together C
and D the antecedent and the consequent of the second proportion, and so added,
compare them as one antecedent to D the consequent of the second proportion, as
to his consequent: then shall ye have the magnitudes in this order. As AB to B,
so CD to D, for either of them is tripla. And this is called composed
proportion, or composition of proportion. And so also in numbers. Example in
numbers.
As 8. to 4, so 6. to 3: 8. and 4, the antecedent and consequen^ of the first
proportion added together, make 12: which 12. as antecedent compare to 4. the
consequent of the first proportion as to his consequent: so add together 6.
and 3, the antecedent and consequent of the second proportion, they make 9:
which 9. as antecedent compare to 3. the consequent of the second proportion,
as to his consequent: so shall ye have by composition of proportion, as 12. to
4, so 9. to 3, for either of them is tripla.

Proportion divided, or division of proportion is, The fi^t^ne definition.
when the excess wherein the antecedent excedeth the consequent, is compared
to the consequent.
This definition is the converse of the definition going next before: This is
the co^uerse of the former definition.
in it was used composition, and in this is used division. As before so now
suppose four magnitudes in proportion AB the first, B the second, CD the
third, and D the fourth: as AB to B: so CD to D: AB, Example in magnitudes.
the antecedent of the first proportion excedeth B the consequent of the first
proportion by the magnitude A, wherefore A is the excess of the antecedent AB
above the consequent B: so likewise CD the antecedent of the second proportion,
excedeth D the consequent of the same proportion, by the quantity C, wherefore
C is the excess of the antecedent CD above the consequent D. Now if ye compare
A the excess of AB the first antecedent, above the consequent B, as antecedent
to B the consequent, as to his consequent: also if ye compare D the excess of
the second antecedent CD, above the consequent D, as antecedent to D the
consequent, as to his consequent: then shall your magnitudes be in this order.
As A to B, so is C to D: which is called division of proportion, or proportion
divided. Example in numbers.


And so in numbers, as 9. to 6, so 12. to 8, either proportion is sesquialtera:
the excess of 9. the antecedent of the first proportion above 6. the
consequent of the same is 3^: the excess of 12. the antecedent of the second
proportion above 8, the consequent of the same, is 4^ then if ye compare 3. the
excess of 9. the first antecedent above the consequent, as antecedent to 6,
the consequent, as to his consequent: and also if ye compare.4 the excess of
12. the second antecedent above the consequent, as antecedent, to 8. the
consequent, as to his consequent, ye shall have your numbers after this manner
by division of proportion, as 3. to 6: so 4. to 8: for either proportion is
subdupla.

Conversion of proportion (which of the elders is commonly called euerse
proportion, The sixtene definition.
or euersio^ of proportion) is, when the antecedent is compared to the excess,
wherein the antecedent excedeth the consequent.
An example of this definition in magnitudes.
Four magnitudes supposed as before, AB the first, B the second, CD the third,
and D the fourth. As AB to A, so CD to C: AB the antecedent of the first
proportion excedeth B the consequent of the same by the magnitude A, wherefore
A is the excess of the antecedent AB above the consequent B: so also the
magnitude C is the excess of CD the antecedent of the second proportion above
D the consequent of the same: now if ye refer AB the antecedent of the first
proportion, as antecedent, to A the excess thereof above the consequent B, as
to his consequent: if ye compare also CD the antecedent of the second
proportion as antecedent to C the excess thereof above the consequent D, as to
his consequent: then shall your magnitudes come to this order. As AB to A, so
CD to C, and this is called conversion of proportion, and of some euersion of
proportion. Likewise in numbers, as 9. to 6, so 12. to 8. An example in numbers.
either proportion is sesquialtera: the excess of 9. the antecedent of the
first proportion above 6. the consequent of the same is 3: the excess of 12.
the antecedent of the second proportion above 8. the consequent of the same, is
4: now compare the antecedent of the first proportion 9. as antecede^t to 3.
the excess thereof above 6. the conseque^t, as to his consequent, likewise
compare 12. the antecedent of the second proportion as antecedent to 4. the
excess thereof above 8. the consequent, as to his consequent: so shall your
numbers be in this order by conversion of proportion: as 9. to 3: so 12. to 4:
for either proportion is triple.

The seue^tenth definition.
Proportion of equality is, when there are taken a number of magnitudes in one
order, and also as many other magnitudes in an other order, comparing two to
two being in the same proportion, it comes to pass, that as in the first
order of magnitudes, the first is to the last, so in the second order of
magnitudes is the first to the last. Or otherwise it is a comparison of
extremes together, the middle magnitudes being taken away.
To the declaration of this definition are required two orders of magnitudes
equal in number, and in like proportion: An example of this definition in
magnitudes.
As if there be taken in some determinate number certain magnitudes, namely,
four, A, B, C, D. And also in the same number be taken other quantities,
namely, four, E, F, G, H: then take the equal proportions by two and two: as
A to B, so E to F: as B to C, so F to G: and as C to D, so G to H. Now
according to the first definition, if A the first magnitude of the first order
be to D the last magnitude of the same order, as E the first magnitude of the
second order is to H the last magnitude the same, then it is called proportion
of equality, or equal proportion.

By the second definition, which is all one in substance with the first, ye
leave the mean magnitudes in either order, namely, B, C, on the one side, and
F, G on the other side, and only compare the extremes of each side together,
which by this definition shall be in like proportion, as A is to D, so is E to
H.

Even so in numbers, take for example these two orders, 27. 9. 12. 24. 25. and
9. 3. 4. 8. 5. there are in each order as ye see, An example in numbers.
five numbers, then see that all the proportions taken by two and two be like:
between 27 and 9, numbers of the first order, and between 9. and 3, numbers of
the second order, there is one and the self same proportion, namely, tripla:
also between ^, and 12, numbers of the first order, and 3. and 4, numbers of
the second order, is like proportion, namely, subsesquitertia proportion: so
between 12. and 24, numbers of the first order, and 4. and 8, numbers of the
second order, is also like proportion, namely, subdupla: Last of all, between
24. and 15, numbers of the first row, and between 8. and 5, numbers of the
second row, the proportion is one, namely, super^ripar^iens quintas. Wherefore
by this definition, leaving out all the mean numbers of each side, ye may
compare together only the e^tremes, and conclude that as 27. of the first row
is to 15. the last of the same row, ^o is 9. the first of the second row to 5,
the last of the same row: for the proportion of each is superquadripartiens
quintas.

Here is to be considered, Note.
that it is not of necessity that all the proportione in each row of numbers
be set in like order, as in the one so in the other: but it shall be sufficient
that the proportions be the same and in equal number in each row. Whether it
be in the self same order, or in contrary, or inue^^ed order, it makes no
matter. As in these numbers^ 12. 6. 2. in the ^^rst row^ and ^^. 8^ 4. in the
second. As 12. is to 6, the first to the second of the first row, so is 8. to
4. the second to the third of the second row: either i^ duple proportion. And
as 6^ to 2^ the second to the third in the first order: so is 24. to 8. the
first to the second in the second order. Where ye see that the proportions are
not placed in one and the self same order, and course, and yet notwithstanding
ye may conclude by equality of proportion, leaving the means 6. and 8: as 12.
to 2. the first to the last of the first order, so 24. to 4. the first and last
of the second order. And so of others whatsoever and how soever they be placed.

An ordinate proportionality is, when as the antecedent is to the consequent,
The eighttenth definition.
so is the antecedent to the consequent, and as the consequent is to another,
so is the consequent to an other.
For the declaration of this definition are also required two orders of
magnitudes. An example of this definition in magnitudes.
Suppose in the first order, that the antecedent A, to his consequent B, have
the same proportion that the antecedent D, has to his co^sequent E in the
second order: and make the consequent B antecede^t to some other quantity, as
to C. Also make the consequent E antecede^t to an other quantity, as to F, so
that there be the same proportion of B to C, which is of E to to F. And this
disposition of proportions is called ordinate proportionalitie. Likewise in
numbers, 18.9.3 and 6.3.1. Example in numbers.
As 18. to 9. antecedent to consequent, so is 6. to 3. antecedent to
consequent: either is dupla proportion: and as 9. the consequent is to an
other, namely, to the number 3, so is the consequent 3. to an other, namely, to
unity. And this ordinate proportionalitie may be exte^ded as far as ye li^t,
as ye may see in the example of numbers in the definition next before.

The nintenth definition.
An inordinate proportionality is, when as the antecedent is to the consequent,
so is the antecedent to the consequent: and as the consequent is to an other,
so is an other to the antecedent.
This definition also as the other before, requires two orders of magnitudes,
Suppose in the first order that the antecede^t A be to the co^seque^t B, as the
antecede^t C, An example of this definition in magnitudes.
in the second order is to the consequent D, and let B the conseque^t of the
first proportion be to some other, namely, to the magnitude E, as some other,
namely, the magnitude F, is to the antecedent C of the second proportion:
Example in numbers.
this kind of proportionalitie is called inordinate or perturbate. Take also
an example in numbers, as 9 to 6. the antecedent to the consequent, so is 3 to
2 the antecedent to the consequent, either proportion is s^squ^ul tera, and as
^ the consequent of the first proportion, is to an other, namely, to the number
3. so is another namely, the number 6. to 3. the antecedent of the second
proportion, for either is dupla proportion.

An extended proportionality is, when as the antecedent is to the consequent,
so is the antecedent to the consequent, The 20. definition.
and as the consequent is to an other, so is the consequent to an other.
Apertu^bate proportionalitie is, when, three magnitudes being compared to three
other magnitudes, The 2^. defi^ition.
it comes to pass, that as in the first magnitudes the antecedent is to the
consequent, so in the second is the antecedent to the consequent, and as in the
first magnitudes the consequent is to an other magnitude, so in the second
magnitudes is an other magnitude to the antecedent.
These two last definitions here put by Zamberte seem all one with the other
two last before set. These two last definitions not found in the greek
examplers.
Wherefore it is not like that they were written and set here by Euclide, for
that they seem no^ necessary, but rather superfluous, neither are they found
in the Greek examples commonly set forth in print, nor mentioned of any that
has written commentaries upon Euclide, old or new: Not of Campane,
S^^ub^lius, Pellitarius, Orontius, nor Fl^ssates: wherefore it is not of
necessity to add unto them any explanation or example either in magnitudes or
in numbers. The examples of the two last definitions set before, may likewise
serve for them also.

The 1. Theoreme. The 1. Proposition. If there be a number of magnitudes how
many soever equemultiplices to a like number of magnitudes each to each: how
multiplex on magnitude is to one, so multiplices are all the magnitudes to all.
SVppose that there be a number of magnitudes, namely, AB, and DC
equimultiplices. to a like number of magnitudes E and F each to each. Then I say,
that how multiplex AB is to E, so multiplices are AB and DC to E and F. For
forasmuch as how multiplex AB is to E, so multiplex is DC to F, therefore how
many magnitudes there are in AB equal unto E so in any are there in DC equal
unto F. Construction.
Divide AB into the magnitudes which are equal unto E, that is, into AG and
GB: and likewise DC into the magnitudes which are equal unto F, that is, into
DH and HC. Demonstration.
Now then the multitude of these DH and HC, is equal unto the multitude of
these AG and GB. And forasmuch as AG is equal unto E, and DH unto F: therefore
AG and DH, are equal unto E and F: and by the same reason forasmuch as GB is
equal unto E, and HC unto F, GB also and HC are equal unto E and F. Wherefore
how many magnitudes there are in AB equal unto E, so many are there in AB and
DC equal unto E and F: Wherefore how multiplex AB is to E, so multiplices are
AB and DC to E and F. If therefore there be a number of magnitudes how many
soever equemultiplices to a like number of magnitudes each to each, how multiplex
one magnitude is to one, so multiplices are all the magnitudes to all: which
was required to be proved.

The 2. Theoreme. The 2. Proposition. If the first be equemultiplex to the
second as the third is to the fourth, and if the fifth also be equemultiplex to
the second as the sixth is to the fourth: then shall the first and the fifth
composed together be equemultiplex to the second, as the third and the sixth
composed together is to the fourth.
SVppose that there be six quantities, of which let AB be the first, C the
second, DE the third, F the fourth, BG the fifth, and EH the sixth: and suppose
that the first, AB, be equemultiplex unto the second, C, as the third, DE, is
to the fourth, F: and let the fifth, BG, be equemultiplex unto the second, C, as
the sixth, EH, is to the fourth, F. Then I say, that the first and the fifth
composed together, which let be AG, is equemultiplex unto the second, C, as the
third and sixth composed together, which let be DH, is to the fourth, F. For
forasmuch as AB is equemultiplex to C, Demonstration^
as DE is to F, therefore how many magnitudes there are in AB equal unto C, so
many magnitudes are there in DE equal unto F: and by the same reason how many
there are in BG equal unto C, so many also are there in EH equal unto F.
Wherefore how many there are in the whole AG equal unto C, so many are there
in the whole DH equal unto F. Wherefore how multiplex AG is unto C, so
multiplex is DH unto F. Wherefore the first and the fifth composed together,
namely, AG is equemultiplex unto the second C, as the third and the sixte
composed together, namely, DH, is to the fourth F. If therefore the first be
equemultiplex to the second as the third is to the fourth, and if the fifth
also be equemultiplex to the second as the sixth is to the fourth: then shall
the first and the fifth composed together, be equemultiplex to the second, as
the third and the sixth composed together^ is to the fourth: which was required
to be proved.

The 3. Theoreme. The 3. Proposition. If the first be equemultiplex to the
second, as the third is to the fourth, and if there be taken equemultiplices to
the first and to the third: they shall be equemultiplices to them which were
first taken, the one to the second, the other to the fourth.
SVppose that there be four magnitudes, of which let A be the first, B the
second, C the third, and D the fourth. And let the first, A, be equemultiplex
to the second, B, as ye third, C, is to the fourth, D. Construction.
And unto A and C take equemultiplices, which let be OF and GH, so that how
multiplex OF is to A, so multiplex let HG be to C. Then I say, that OF is
equemultiplex unto B, as GH is unto D. For forasmuch as OF is equemultiplex
unto A, as GH is unto C, therefore how many magnitudes there are in OF equal
unto A, so many magnitudes also are there in GH equal unto C. Let OF be
divided into the magnitudes that are equal unto A, that is, into EK and KF.
And likewise GH into the magnitudes equal unto C, that is, into GL and L H.
Now then the multitude of these magnitudes EK and KF, Demonstration.
is equal unto ye multitude of these magnitudes GL and LH. And forasmuch as A
is equemultiplex to B, as C is to D: but EK is equal unto A, and GL unto C,
therefore EK is equemultiplex unto B, as GL is unto D. And by the same reason
KF is equemultiplex unto B, as L H is to D. Now then there are six magnitudes
whereof EK is the first: B ye second: GL y^ third: D y^ fourth: KF the fifth:
LH the sixth. And forasmuch as the first EK is equemultiplex to the second B, as
the third GL is to the fourth D: and the fifth KF is equemultiplex to the second
B, as the sixth LH is to the fourth D: therefore (by the second of the fifth) the
first is the fifth composed together, namely, OF is equemultiplex unto the
second B, as the third and the sixth composed together, namely, GH is to the
fourth D. If therefore the first be equemultiplex to the second, as the third
is to the fourth; and if there be taken the equemultiplices to the first and to
the third, they shall be equemultiplices to them which were first taken, the
one to the second, then other to the fourth: which was required to be proved.

The 4. Theoreme. The 4. Proposition. If the first be unto the second in the
same proportion that the third is to the fourth: then also the equemultiplices
of the first and of the third, unto the equemultiplices of the second and of
the fourth, according to any mnltiplication, shall have the same proportion
being compared together.
SVppose that there be four magnitudes, of which let A be the first, ^ the
second, C the third, and D the fourth. And let the first A be unto the second B
in the fame proportion, that the third C is unto the fourth D. And to A and C
take equemultiplices E, and F, and likewise to B and D, Construction.
any other equimultiplices G and H. The^ I say yt as E is to G, so is F to H.
Unto E and F take equemultiplices K and L, and unto G and H any other
equemultiplices, that is, M and N. And forasmuch as E is equemultiplex unto A
as F is unto C, Demonstration.
and unto E and F be taken the equemultiplices K and L, therefore (by the 3. of
the fifth) K is equemultiplex to A, as L is to C: and by the same reason also M
is equemultiplex unto B, as N is to D. And seeing that as A is to B, so is C to
D, and of A and C are taken equemultiplices K and L, and likewise of B and D
are taken other equemultiplices, namely, M and N, therefore if K exceed M, L
also excedeth N: and if it be equal, it is equal, and if it be lesse^ ^t is
less (by the converse of the 6. definition of the fifth). And K and L are
equemultiplices to E and F: and M and N are other equemultiplices to G and H.
Wherefore as E is to G, so is F to H by the said sixth definition. If therefore
the first be unto the second in the same proportion that the third is to the
fourth: then also the equemultiplice^ of the first and of the third, unto the
equemultiplices of (...) second and of the fourth, according to any
multiplication, shall have the same proportion being compared to^^^her: which
was required to (...) proved.

An Assumpt. ALemmae, or an assumpt.
Wherefore seeing it has been proved that if K exceed M, L also excedeth N, and
if it be equal it is equall^ and if it be less, it is less: it is manifest
that if M exceed K, N also excedeth L: and if it be equal it is equal: and
if it be less it is less: and by this reason as G is to E, so is H to F.

A Coroll^^y.
Hereby it is manifest that if there be four magnitudes proportional, they
shall also by conversion be proportional: that is, if the first be unto the
second, A Corollary. Converse proportion.
as the thide is to the fourth: then by conversion as the second is to the
first, so is the fourth to the third.

The 5. Theoreme. The 5. Proposition. If a magnitude be equemultiplex to a
magnitude, as a part taken away of the one, is to a part taken away from the
other: the residue also of the one, to the residue of the other, shall be
equemultiplex, as the whole is to the whole.
SVppose that the whole magnitude AB be unto the whole magnitude CD
equemultiplex, as the part taken away of the one, namely, AE, is to the part
taken away of the other, namely, CF. Then I say that the residue^ of the one,
namely, EB, is to the residue of the other, namely, DF equemultiplex as the
whole AB is to the whole CD. How multiplex AE is to CF, so multiplex make EB to
CG. Construction.
And forasmuch as (by ye first of the fifth) AE is to GF equemultiplex, as AB
is to GF: Demonstration.
but AE is to CF equemultiplex, as AB is to CD. Wherefore AB is equemultiplex to
either of these GF and CD. Wherefore GF is equal unto CD. Take away CF which is
common to them both. Wherefore that which remains namely, GC, is equal unto
that which remains namely, DF. And forasmuch as AE is to CF equemultiplex as
EB is to GC, but GC is equal unto DE, therefore AE is to CF equemultiplex as
EB is to FD. But AE is put to be equemultiplex to CF, as AB is to CD, wherefore
EB is to FD equemultiplex, as AB is to CD. Wherefore the residue EB is to the
residue FD equemultiplex, as the whole AB is to the whole CD. If therefore a
magnitude be equemultiplex to a magnitude, as a part taken away of the one is
to a part taken away of the other: the residue of the one also to the residue
of the other, shall be equemultiplex as the whole is to the whole: which was
required to be proved.

The 6. Theoreme. The 6. Proposition. If two magnitudes be ^quemultiplices to
two magnitudes, and any par^es taken away of them also, be aequemultiplices to
the same magnitudes: the residues also of them shall unto the same magnitudes be
either equal, or equemultiplices.
SVppose that there be two magnitudes AB and CD equemultiplices to two
magnitudes E and F, and let the parts taken away of the magnitudes AB and CD,
namely, AG and CH be equemultiplices to the same magnitudes E and F. Two cases
in this Propotion.
Then I say that the residues GB and HD, are unto the self same magnitudes E
and F either equal, or else equemultiplices.

The first.
Suppose first that GB be equal unto E. Then I say that HD is equal unto F.
Construction.
Unto F put an equal magnitude CK. And forasmuch as AG is equemultiplex unto
E, as CH is unto F: Demonstration.
but GB is equal unto E, and KC unto F: therefore AB is equemultiplex to E, as
KH is to F. But AB is put equemultiplex unto E, as CD is to F. Wherefore KH is
equimultiplex unto F, as CD is to F. And forasmuch as either of these KH and CD
are equimultiplices unto F, therefore (by the 1 common sentence) KH is equal
unto CD. Take away CH which is common to them both. Wherefore the residue KC is
equal unto the residue HD. But KC is equal unto F, wherefore HD is equal unto
F. Wherefore if GB be equal unto E, DH also shall be equal unto F.

And in like sort may we prove, yt if GB be multiplex to E, HD also shall be so
multiplex unto F. If therefore there be two magnitudes equemultiplices to two
magnitudes, The second.
and any parts taken away of them be also equemultiplices to ye same
magnitudes: the residues also of them shall unto the same magnitudes be either
equal, or equemultiplices: which was required to be proved.

The 7. Theoreme. The 7. Proposition. Equal magnitudes have to one and the
self same magnitude, one and the same proportion. And one and the same
magnitude has to equal magnitudes one and the self same proportion.
SVppose that A and B be equal magnitudes, and take any other magnitude,
namely, C. Then I say, that either of these A and B have unto C one and the
same proportion: and that C also has to either of these A and B one and the
same proportion.

Take the equemultiplices of A and B, and let the same be D and E: The first
part of this Proposition demonstrated.
and likewise of C, take any other multiplex, and let the same be F. Now
forasmuch as D is unto A equemultiplex as E is to B, but A is equal unto B,
therefore (by the first common sentence) D is equal unto E. And of C there is
taken any other multiplex F. Wherefore if D exceed F, E also excedeth F: and
if it be equal it is equal, and if it be less it is less. But D and E are
the equemultiplices of A and B, and F is of C an other multiplex. Wherefore as A
is to C, so is B to C.

I say moreover, that C has to either of these A and B one and the same
proportion. The second part demonstrated.
For the same order of constructio^ remaining, we may in like sort prove, yt D
is equal unto E, and there is taken an other multiplex to C, namely, F.
Wherefore if F exceed D, it also excedeth E: and if it be equal it is equal:
and if it be less it is less. But F is multiplex to C: and D and E are other
equemultiplices to A and B. Wherefore as C is to A, so is C to B. Wherefore
equal magnitudes have to one and the same magnitude, one and the same
proportion: and one and the same magnitude has to equal magnitudes one and
the self same proportion: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 8. Theoreme. The 8. Proposition. Unequal magnitudes being taken, the
greater has to one and the same magnitude a greater proportion then has the
less. And that one and the same magnitude has to the less a greater
proportion then it has to the greater.
SVppose that AB and C be unequal magnitudes, of which let AB be the greater,
and C ye less. And let there be an other magnitude whatsoever, namely, D. Then
I say that AB has unto D a greater proportion then has C to D: and also that
D has to C a greater proportion, then it has to AB. For forasmuch as AB is
greater then C, let there be taken a magnitude equal unto C, namely, BE.

Now then the less of these two magnitudes AE and EB being multiplied will at
the length be greater then D. The first part of this Proposition demonstrated.


First let AE be less then EB: and let AE be so often multiplied until that
which is produced be greater then D, The first case of the same.
and let that multiplex be FG which is greater then D. And how multiplex FG is
to AE, so multiplex let GH be to EB, and K to C. Then double D, and let the
same be L. And again treble it and let the same be M: and so forth increasing
by one till such time as the multiplex of D so taken be first greater then K,
that is, that multiplex which amongst all the multiplices of D does first
exceed K, and let the same be N, which here is quadruple to D, and the first
multiplex greater then K. Now forasmuch as K is ye first multipl^x less then
N, therefore K is not less then M. And for that FG i^ to AE equemultiplex as GH
is to EB, therefore (by the first of the fifth) FH is to AB equemultiplex as FG
is to AE: but FG is equemultiplex to AE as K is to C. Wherefore FH and K are
equemultiplices to AB and C. Again forasmuch as GH is equemultiplex to EB as K
is to C, but EB is equal unto C, therefore GH is also equal unto K. But K is
not less then M: wherefore neither also is GH less then M. But FG is greater
then D. Wherefore the whole FH is greater then both these D and M. But both
these D and M are equal unto N, for M is triple to D, and M and D together are
quadruple to D, and N also is quadruple to D: wherefore both these M and D are
equal unto N; but FH is greater then M and D, wherefore FH excedeth N, (that
is, ye multiplex of the first, namely, of AB excedeth the multiplex of the
second, namely, of D.) But K excedeth not N (that is, the multiplex of the
third, namely, of C, excedeth not the multiplex of the fourth, namely, of the
same D:) and FH and K are equemultiplices to AB, and C, and N, is a certain
other multiplex to D. Wherefore (by the 8. definition) AB has to D a greater
proportion then has C to D.

The second part of the proposition demonstrated.
I say moreover that D has to C a greater proportion then D has to AB. For the
same order of construction still remaining, we may in like sort prove that N is
greater then K, and that it is not greater then FH. And N is multiplex to D,
and FH and K are certain other equemultiplices to AB and C. Wherefore D has to
C a greater proportion then D has to AB.

But now suppose that AE be greater then EB. The second case of the f^rs^ pa^^.
Now then EB being the less, and being oftentimes multiplied, will at the
length be greater then D. Let it be so multiplied, and let the multiplex of EB,
namely, GH, be great^r then D. And how multiplex GH is to EB so multiplex let
FG be to AE and K to C. And by the former reason may we prove, that FH and K
are equemultiplices to AB and C. Likewise also let N be multiplex of D, and
also let it be ye first multiplex which is greater then FG: wherefore again FG
is not less then M. But GH is greater then D: wherefore the whole FH, excedeth
D and M, that is, N: but K excedeth not N. For FG which is greater then GH,
that is, then K exceeds not N. And so followyng the same order we did before,
we shall perform the demonstration. Wherefore unequal magnitudes being taken,
the greater has to one and the same magnitude a greater proportion then has
the less: and that one and the same magnitude has to the less a greater
proportion then it has to the greater: which was required to be proved.

For that Orontius seems to demonstrate this more plainly therefore I thought
it not amiss here to set it.
Suppose that there be two unequal magnitudes, of which le^ A^ b^ the gre^ter,
and C the less: and let there be a certain other magnitude, namely, D. Then I
say first, that AB has to D a greater proportion then has C to D. For
forasmuch as by supposition AB is greater then the magnitude C: therefore the
magnitude AB contay^^th the same magnitude C, and an other magnitude besides.
Let E^ be equal unto C: and let AE be the part remaining of the same
magnitude. First differ^c^ of the first part.
Now AE and EB are either unequal or equal the one to the other. First let
them be vnequall^ and le^ AE be less then EB. And unto AE the less take any
multiplex whatso^u^r, so that it be greater the^ the magnitude D: and let the
same be FG. And how multiplex FG is to AE, so multiplex let GH be to E^^ and K
to C. Again take the duple of D^ which let be L, and then the triple, and le^
the same be M. And so forward, alway^s adding one: until there be produced
such a multiplex to D which shall be n^xt greater then GH (that is, which
amongst the (...) o^ D^ by the con^in^all addition of one, does first begin
to exce^de GH) and let the ^^me be N^ which let ^e quadruple to D. Now then the
multiplex GH is the next multiplex less then N^ and the^fore ^s not less then
M, that is, is either equal unto it or greater then it. Demonstrati^ of the
same first difference.
And forasmuch ^s FG is equemultiplex to AE, as GH is to E^, therefore how
multiplex F^ is to AE, so multiplex is FH to AB (by the first of the fifth). But
how multiplex FG is to AE, so multiplex is K to C, therefore how multiplex FH
is to AB, so multiplex is K to C. Moreover forasmuch as GH and K are
equemultiplices unto EB and C^ and EB is by construction equal unto C,
therefore (by the common sentence) GH is equ^ll unto K. But GH is not less then
M, as has before been showed, and FG^ was put to be greater then D. Wherefore
the whole FH is greater then these two D and M. But D and M are equal unto N.
For N is quadruple to D. And M being triple to D, does together with D make
quadruple unto D. Wherefore FH is greater then N. Farther, K is proved to be
equal to GH. Wherefore K is less then N. But FH and K are equemultiplices
unto AB and C, unto the first magnitude, I say, and the third: and N is a
certain other multiplex unto D, which represents the second and the fourth
magnitude. And the multiplex of the first excedeth the multiplex of the second:
but the multiplex of the third excedeth not the multiplex of the fourth.
Wherefore AB the first has unto D the second a greater proportion, then has C
the third to D the fourth (by the 8. definition of this book).

But if AE be greater then EB, let EB the less be multiplied until there be
produced a multiplex greater then the magnitude D: which let be GH. And how
multiplex GH is to EB, Second diffe^ence.
so multiplex let FG be to AE, and K also to C. Then take unto D such a
multiplex as is next greater then FG: and again let the same be N, which let
be quadruple to D. And in like sort as before may we prove, that the whole FH
is unto AB equemultiplex as GH is to EB: and also that FH and K are
equemultiplices unto AB^ and C: and finally that GH is equal unto K. And
forasmuch as the multiplex N is next greater then FG: therefore FG is not less
then M. But GH is greater then D by construction. Wherefore the whole FH is
greater then D and M: and so consequently is greater then N. But K excedeth not
N: for K is equal to GH: for how multiplex K is to EB the less, so multiplex
is FG to A^ the greater. B^t those magnitudes which are equemultiplice^ unto
unequal magnitud^s are according to the same proportion unequal. Wherefore K
is less then FG, and therefore i^ much less then N. Wherefore again the
multiplex of the first exceeds the multiplex of the second: but the multiplex
of the third excedeth not the multiplex of the fourth. Wherefore (by the 8.
definition of the fifth) A^ the first, has to D the second, a greater
proportion, then has C the third to D the fourth.

Third di^^erence.
But now if AE be equal unto EB, either of them shall be equal unto C.
Wherefore unto either of thos^ three magnitudes take equemultiplices greater
then D. So that let FG be multiplex to AE, and GH unto EB, and K again to C:
which (by the 6. common sentence) shall be equal the one to the other. Let N
also be multiplex to D, and be next greater then every one of them, namely, let
it be q^adrupl^ to D. This co^struction finished, we may again prove that FH
and K are equemultiplices to AB and C: and that FH the multiplex of the first
magnitude exceeds N the multiplex of the second magnitude^ and tha^ K t^^
^ultiplex of the third excedeth not the multiplex of the fourth. Wherefore we
may conclude that AB has unto D a greater proportion, then has C to D.

Now also I say, that the self same magnitude D has unto the less magnitude C
a greater proportion, the^ it has to the greater AB. The second part ^f this
proposition.
And this may plainly be gathered by the foresaid discourse, without changing
the order of the magnitudes and of the equemultiplices. For seeing that every
way it is before proved, that FH excedeth N, and K is exceeded of the self
same N: therefore conuersedly N excedeth K, but does not excede FH. But N is
multiplex to D that is to the first and third magnitude: and K is multiplex to
the second, namely, to C^ and FH is multiplex to the fourth, namely, to AB^
Wherefore the multiplex of the first excedeth the multiplex of the second: but
the multiplex of the third excedeth not the multiplex of the fourth. Wherefore
(by the 8. definition of this fifth book) D the first has unto C the second a
greater proportion, then has D the third to AB the fourth: which was required
to be proved.

The 9. Theoreme. The 9. Proposition. Magnitudes which have to one and the same
magnitude one and the same proportion: are equal the one to the other. And
those magnitudes unto whom one and the same magnitude has one and the same
proportion: are also equal.
SVppose that either of these two magnitudes A and B have to C one and the same
proportion. The first part of this Proposition demonstrated.
Then I say that A is equal unto B. For if it be not, then either of these A
and B should not have to C one and the same proportion (by the 8. of ye fifth)
but by supposition they have, wherefore A is equal unto B.

Again, The second part proved.
suppose that the magnitude C have to either of these magnitudes A and B one
and the same proportion. Then I say that A is equal unto B. For if it be not,
C should not have to either of these A and B one and the same proportion (by
the former proposition): but by supposition it has, wherefore A is equal unto
B. Wherefore magnitudes which have to one and the same magnitude one and the
same proportion, are equal the one to the other. And thos^ magnitudes unto
whom one and the same magnitude has one and the same proportion, are also
equal: which was required to be proved.

The 10. Theoreme. The 10. Proposition. Of magnitudes compared to one and the
same magnitude, that which has the greater proportion, is the greater. And
that magnitude whereunto one and the same magnitude has the greater proportion,
is the less.
SVppose that A have to C a greater proportion then B has to C. Then I say
that A is greater then B. The first part of this proposition proved.
For if it be not, then either A is equal unto B or less then it. But A
cannot be equal unto B, for then either of these A and B should have unto C one
and the same proportion (by the 7 of the fifth): but by supposition they have
not, wherefore A is not equal unto B. Neither also is A less then B, for the^
should A have to C a less proportion, then has B to C (by the 8. of the
fifth) but by supposition it has not. Wherefore A is not less then B. And it
is also proved that it is not equal, wherefore A is greater then B.

The second part demonstrated.
Again suppose that C have to B a greater proportion then C has to A. Then I
say that B is less then A. For if it be not, then is it either equal unto it
or else greater, but B cannot be equal unto A, for then should C have to either
of these A and B one and the same proportion (by the 7. of the fifth) but by
supposition it has not, wherefore B is not equal unto A. Neither also is B
greater then A, for then should C have to B a less proportion then it has to
A (by the 8. of the fifth) but by supposition it has not: wherefore B is not
greater then A. And it was proved that it is not equal unto A, wherefore B is
less then A. Wherefore of magnitudes compared to one and the same magnitude,
that which has y^ greater proportion, is the greater. And that magnitude
whereunto one and the same magnitude has the greater proportion, is the less.
Which was required to be proved.

The 11. Theoreme. The 11. Proposition. Proportions which are one and the self
same to any one proportion, are also the self same the one to the other.
SVpppose that as A is to B, so is C to D, and as C is to D, so is E to F. Then
I say that as A is to B, so is E to F. Construction.
Take equemultiplices to A, C and E, which let be G, H, K. And likewise to B, D
and F take any other equemultiplices, which let be L, M, and N. And because as
A is to B, so is C to D: and to A and G are taken equemultiplices G and H; and
to B and D are take certain other equemultiplices L and M. Demonstration^
If therefore G exceed L, then also H excedeth M, and if it be equal it is
equal, and if it be less it is less (by the converse of the 6^ definition of
the fifth). Again because that as C is to D, so is E to F: and to C and E are
taken ^^^em^ltiplices H ^^d K: and likewise to D and F are taken certain other
equemultiplices M and N. If therefore H exceed M, then also K excedeth N: and
if it be equal, it is equal, and if it be less, it is less (by the same
converse) But if K exceed M, then also G excedeth L: and if it be equal it is
equal, and if it be less, it is less (by the same converse) Wherefore if G
excede L, then K also excedeth N, and if it be equal it is equal, and if it be
less, it is less. But G and K are equemultiplices of A and E. And L and N are
certain other equemultiplices of B and F. Wherefore (by the 6. definition) as A
is to B, so is E to F. Proportions therefore which are one and the self same to
any one proportion, are also the self same one to the other: which was
required to be proved.

The 12. Theoreme. The 12. Proposition. If there be a number of magnitudes how
many soe^^r proportional: as one of the antecedentes is to one of the
co^sequentes, so are all the antecedentes to all the consequentes.
SVppose that there be a number of magnitudes how many soever, namely, A, B, C,
D, E, F, in proportion: so that as A is to B, so let C be to D, and E to F.
Then I say, that as A is to B, so (...) A, C, E, to B, D, F. Take
equemultiplices to A, C, and E. Constr^ction.
And let the same be G, H, K. And likewise to B, D, and F, ^ake any other
equemultiplices, which to be L, M, N. And because that (...) A is to B, so i^ C
to D, and E to F. Demonstration^
And to A, C, E, are taken ^quemultiplices G, H, K: and likewise to ^, D, F,
are taken certain other equem^^tipli^^s L, M, N. If therefore G exceed L, H
also exceeds M, and KN: and if it be equal, it is equal, and if it be
less, it is less (^y the converse of the six^ definition of the fifth).
Wherefore if G exceed L, then G, H, K, also exceed L, M, N: and if they be
equal, they are equal: and if they be less, they are less (by the same).
But G, and G, H, K, are equemultiplices to the magnitude A, and to the
magnitudes A, C, E. For (by the first of the fifth) (if there be a number of
magnitudes equemultiplices to a like number of magnitudes each to each, how
multiplex one magnitude, is to one, so multiplices are all the magnitudes, to
all). And by the same reason also L, and L, M, N, are equemultiplices to the
magnitude B, and to the magnitudes B, D, F: Wherefore as A is to B, so is A, C,
E, to B, D, F (by the sixth definition of the fifth). If therefore there be a
number of magnitudes how many soever, proportional: as one of the antecedentes
is to one of the consequentes, so are all the antecedentes to all the
consequentes: which was required to be proved.

The 13. Theoreme. The 13. Proposition. If the first have unto the second the
self same proportion that the third has to the fourth, and if the third have
unto the fourth a greater proportion the^ the fifth has to the sixth: the^
shall the first also have unto the second a greater proportion then has the
fifth to the sixth.
SVppose that there be six magnitudes, of which let A be the first, B the
second, C the third, D the fourth, E the fifth, and F the sixth. Suppose that A
the first have unto B the second, the self same proportion that C the third
has to D the fourth. And let C the third have unto D the fourth, a greater
proportion then has E the fifth to F the sixth. Then I say that A the first
has to B the second a greater proportion, then has E the fifth to F the sixth.
Construction.
For forasmuch as C has to D a greater proportion then has E to F, therefore
there are certain equemultiplices to C and E, and likewise any other
equemultiplices whatsoever to D and F, which being compared together, the
multiplex to C shall exceed the multiplex to D, but the multiplex to E shall
not exceed the multiplex to F (by the converse of the eight definition of this
book). Let those multiplices be taken, and suppose that the equemultiplices to
C and E, be G and H: and likewise to D and F take any other equemultiplices
whatsoever, and let the same be K and L, so that let G exceed K but let not H
exceed L. And how multiplex G is to C, so multiplex let M be to A. And how
multiplex K is to D, so multiplex also let N be to B. And because that as A is
to B, so is C to D: and to A and C are taken equemultiplices M and G.
Demonstration.
And likewise to B and D are taken certain other equemultiplices N and K: if
therefore M exceed N, G also excedeth K: and if it be equal it is equal, and
if it be less it is less (by the conversion of the sixth definition of the
fifth.) But by construction G excedet^ K, wherefore M also excedeth N, but H
excedeth not L. But M and H are equemultiplices to A and E: and N and L are
certain other equemultiplices^ whatsoever, to B and F. Wherefore A has unto B
a greater proportion then E has to F (by the 8. definition.) If therefore the
first have unto the second the self same proportion that the third has to the
fourth, and if the third have unto the fourth a greater proportion then the
fifth has to the sixth, then shall the first also have unto the second a
greater proportion then has the (...) to the sixth^ Which was required to be
proved.

An addition of Campane.
If there be four quantities, An addition of Campane
and if the first have unto the second a greater proportion the^ has the third
to the fourth: then shall there be some equemultiplices of the first and the
third, which being compared to some equemultiplices of the second and the
fourth, the multiplex of the first shall be greater then the multiplex of the
second, but the multiplex of the third shall not be greater then the multiplex
of the fourth.

Which is thus proved. Suppose that AB have unto C a greater proportion the^
has D to E. And let AF be to C as D is to E. Now then by this proposition and
the tenth, AF is less then AB. Let it be less then AB by the quantity FB.
And multiply FB until there be produced a quantity greater then C, which let
be GH: which also must be such a multiplex, as D being so oftentimes
multiplied, may produce a quantity not less the^ E^ which multiplex let be
K. And let LG be so multiplex to AF, as GH is to FB, or K to D. Now then by the
first of this book LH is equemultiplex to AB as K is to D. And let M be to E
the first multiplex greater then K^ and let N be equemultiplex to C as M is to
E. Now then N is the first multiplex to C greater then LG: For for that as D is
to E, so is AF to C, and K is equemultiplex to D as GL is to AF, also M is
equemultiplex to E, as N is to C: therefore (by the 4. of this book) as K is to
M, so is GL to N^ but K is to M the first multiplex less then M: wherefore also
GL is the first multiplex less then N: and GL by supposition is not less the^
C. Wherefore take the greatest multiplex of C under N: or a multiplex equal to
N, if peradventure N be the first of the multiplices of C, which let be O. Now
then then N shall consist of O and C. Wherefore forasmuch as LG is not less
then O, and GH is greater then C, therefore LH shall be greater then N. And
forasmuch as K is less then M, therefore that which was required to be proved,
is manifest.

Although this proposition here put by Campane needs no demonstration for that
it is but the converse of the 8. definition of this book, yet thought I it not
worthy to be omitted, for that it reaches the way to find out such
equemultiplices, that the multiplex of the first shall excede the multiplex of
the second, but the multiplex of the third shall not exceed the multiplex of
the fourth.

The 14. Theoreme. The 14. Proposition. If the first have unto the second the
self same proportion that the third has unto the fourth: and if the first be
greater then the third, the second also is greater then the fourth: and if it
be equal it is equal: and if it be less it is less.
SVppose that there be four magnitudes, of which let A be the first, B the
second, C the third, and D the fourth: and let A the first, have unto B the
second, the self same proportion that C the third has unto D the fourth. And
let A be greater then C. Then I say, that B also is greater then D. For
forasmuch as A is greater then C, and there is a certain other magnitude,
Demonstration.
namely, B, therefore (by the 8. of the fifth) A has unto B a greater
proportion then C has to B. And as A is to B, so is C to D. Wherefore C also
has unto D a greater proportion then C has to B. But that magnitude whereunto
one and the same magnitude has ye greater proportion, is the less (by the 10.
of the fifth). Wherefore D is less then B, and therefore B is greater then D.
And in like sort may we prove, that if A be equal unto C, D shall also be
equal unto D: and if A be less then C, B shall also be less then D. If
therefore the first have unto the second the self same proportion that the
third has unto the fourth, and if the first be greater then the third, the
second also is greater then the fourth, and if it be equal it is equal, and
if it be less it is less: which was required to be proved.

The 15. Theoreme. The 15. Proposition. Like parts of multiplices, and also
their multiplices compared together, have one and the same proportion.
SVppose that AB be equemultiplex to C, as DE is to F. Then I say, that as C is
to F, so is AB to DE. For forasmuch as how multiplex AB is to C, Construction.
so multiplex is DE to F: therefore how many magnitudes there are in AB equal
unto C, so many are there in DE equal unto F. Divide AB into the magnitudes
equal unto C, that is, into AG, GH, and HB: and likewise DE into the
magnitudes equal unto E, that is, into DK KL, and LE. Now then the multitude
of these AG, Demonstration.
GH, and HB, is equal to ye multitude of these DK KL, and LE. And forasmuch as
AG, GH, and HB, are equal the one to ye other and likewise DK, KL, and LE, are
also equal the one to ye other: therefore as AG is to DK, so is GH to KL, and
HB to LE. Wherefore (by the 12. of the fifth) as one of ye antecedentes is to
one of the consequentes, so are all the antecedentes to all the consequentes.
Wherefore as AG is to DK, so is AB to DE. But AG is equal unto C, and likewise
DK to F. Wherefore as C is to F, so is AB to DE. Like parts therefore of
multiplices and also their multiplices compared together, have one and the same
proportion that their equemultiplices have: which was required to be
demonstrated.

The 16. Theoreme. The 16. Proposition. If four magnitudes be proportional:
then alternately also they are proportional.
SVppose yt there be four magnitudes proportional, namely, A, B, C, D, so
that as A is to B, so let C be to D. Then I say, that alternately also they
shall be in proportion, Demo^stration of alternate proportion.
that is, as A is to C, so is B to D. Take equemultiplices unto A and B, and
let the same be E and F. And likewise to C and D take any other equemultiplices
what soever, Construction.
and let the same be G and H. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as how multiplex E is to A, so multiplex is F to B, but like
parts of multiplices and also their multiplices have one and the self same
proportion the one to the other (by the former Proposition). Wherefore as A is
to B, so is E to F. But as A is to B, so is C to D^ wherefore (by the 11. of
the fifth) as C is to D, so is E to F. Again, forasmuch as G and H are
equemultiplices to C and D, but like parts of multiplices and also their
multiplices have the one to the other one and the self same proportion (by the
15. of the fifth). Wherefore as C is to D, so is G to H. But as C is to D, so is
E to F. Wherefore as E is to F, so is G to H (by the 11. of the fifth). But if
there be four magnitudes in proportion, and if the first be greater then the
third, the second also is greater then the fourth: and if it be equal it is
equall^ and if it be less it is less (by the 14. of the fifth). If therefore E
excede G, F shall also exceed H: and if it be equal, it is equal: and if it
be less, it is less. But E and F are equemultiplices to A and B: and G and H
are certain other equemultiplices to C and D. Wherefore (by the 6. definition
of the fifth) as A is to C, so is B to D. If therefore there be four magnitudes
proportional, then alternately also they are proportional: which was required
to be proved.

The 17. Theoreme. The 17. Proposition. If magnitudes composed be
proportional, then also divided they shall be proportional.
SVppose that the magnitudes composed being proportional, be AB, BE, CD, DF,
so that as AB is to BE, so is CD to DF. Then I say, Demonstration of proportion
by division.
that divided also they shall be proportional, as AE is to BE, so is CF to DF.
Take equemultiplices unto AE, EB, CF, FD, and let ye same be GH, HK, LM, and
MN. Constr^ction^
And likewise to EB, and FD, take any other equemultiplices what soever, and
let the same be KO, and NP. And forasmuch as how multiplex GH is to AE,
Demons^ration.
so multiplex is KH to EB, therefore how multiplex GH is to AE, so multiplex is
GK to AB (by the first of the fifth). But how multiplex GH is to AE, so
multiplex is LM to CF: Wherefore how multiplex GK is to AB, so multiplex is LM
to CF (by the 11. of ye same). Again forasmuch as how multiplex LM is to CF,
so multiplex is MN to DF, therefore how multiplex LM is to CF, so multiplex is
LN to CD (by the first of the self same). But how multiplex LM is to CF so
multiplex is GK to AB. Wherefore how multiplex GK is to AB, so multiplex is LN
to CD. Wherefore GK and LN, are equemultiplices to^ AB and CD. Again forasmuch
as how multiplex HK the first is to EB the second, so multiplex is MN the third
to FD the fourth. And how multiplex KO the fifth is to EB the second, so
multiplex is NP the sixth to FD the fourth. Wherefore (by the second of the same)
how multiplex HO composed of the first and fifth is to EB, so multiplex is MP
composed of the third and sixth to FD. And for that as AB is to BE, so is CD to
DF: and to AB and CD are taken equemultiplices GK and LN, and likewise to EB
and FD are taken certain other equemultiplices, that is, HO, and MP. If
therefore GK exceed HO, then LN also exceeds MP: and if it be equal, it is
equal: and if it be less, it is less (by the conversion of the sixth
definition of the fifth). Let GK exceed HO: Wherefore KH common to them both
being taken away, the residue GH, shall exceed the residue KO. But if GK
exceed HO, then does LN exceed MP: Wherefore let LN excede MP: and MN which
is common to the both being taken away, y^ residue LM shall exceed the residue
NP. Wherefore if GH exceed KO, then shall LM exceed NP. And in like sort may
we prove, that if GH be equal unto KO, then LM shall be equal unto NP: and if
it be less, it shall be less: but GH and LM are equemultiplices to AE and GF:
and likewise KO and NP are certain other equemultiplices to EB, and FD.
Wherefore as AE is to EB, so ^CF to FD (by the six^ definition of the fifth). If
composed magnitudes therefore be proportional, then also divided they shall be
proportional: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 18. Theoreme. The 18. Proposition. If magnitudes divided be proportional:
then also composed they shall be proportional.
SVppose that the magnitudes divided being proportional, be AE, EB, CF, and
FD, so that as AE is to EB, so let CF be to FD. Demonstration of proportion by
composition.
Then I say, that composed also they shall be proportional, that is, as AB is
to BE, so is CD to DF. For if AB be not unto BE, as CD is to FD, then shall AB
be unto BE, This proposition is the converse of the former.
as CD is either unto a magnitude less then FD, on unto a magnitude greater.
Let it first be unto a less, namely, to DG. Demonstration ^e^aing to an
^mpossibility.
And forasmuch as, as AB is to BE, so is CD to DG: the composed magnitudes
therefore are proportional, wherefore divided also they shall be proportional
(by ye 17. of the first). Wherefore as AE is to EB, so is CG to GD. But by
supposition as AE is to EB, so is CF to FD. Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth)
as CG is to GD, so is CF to FD. Now then there are four magnitudes, CG, GD,
CF, and FD: of which the first CG is greater then the third CF. Wherefore (by
the 14. of the fifth) the second GD is greater then the fourth FD. But it is
also put to be less then it: which is impossible. Wherefore it can not be that
as AB is to BE, so is CD to a magnitude less then FD. In like sort may we
prove, that it can not be so to a magnitude greater then FD. For by the same
order of demonstration, it would follow that FD is greater then the said
greater magnitude: which is impossible. Wherefore it must be to the self same.
If therefore magnitudes divided be proportional, then also composed they shall
be proportional: which was required to be proved.

The 19. Theoreme. The 19. Proposition. If the whole be to the whole, as the
part taken away is to the part taken away: then shall the residue be unto the
residue, as the whole is to the whole.
SVppose that as the whole AB is to the whole CD, That which the fifth of this
book proved only touching multiplices, this proves generally of all
magnitudes.
so is the part taken away AE to the part taken away CF. Then I say, that the
residue EB shall be unto the residue FD, as the whole AB is to the whole CD.
For for that as the whole AB is to the whole CD, so is AE to CE, therefore
alternately also (by the 16. of the fifth) as AB is to AE, so is CD to CF. And
for that when magnitudes composed are proportional, the same divided also are
proportional (by the 17. of ye fifth)^ therefore as BE is to EA, so is DF to
FC, Wherefore alternately also (by the 16. of the fifth) as BE is to DF, so is EA
to FC. But as AE is to CF, so (by supposition) is the whole AB to the whole CD.
Wherefore the residue EB shall be unto the residue FD, as the whole AB is to
the whole CD. If therefore the whole be to the whole, as the part taken away is
to the part taken away, then shall the residue be unto the residue; as the
whole is to the whole: which was required to be proved.

ALemma or Assumpt.
And forasmuch as by supposition as AB is to CD, ALemma.
so is AE to CF: and alternately as AB is to AE, so is CD to CF. And now it is
proved, that as, AB is to CD, so is EB to FD. Wherefore again alternately, as
AB is to ^B, so is CD to FD. Wherefore it follows, that as AB is to AE, so is
CD to CF: and again, as the same AB is to EB, so is the same CD to DF.

Corollary.
And hereby it is manifest, A Corollary.
that if magnitudes composed be proportional, then also by conversion of
Proportion (which of some is called Proportion by Eversion, Conversion of
proportion.
and which is, as before it was defined, when the antecedent is compared to the
excess, wherein the antecedent exceeds the consequent) they shall be
proportional.

The 20. Theoreme. The 20. Proposition. If there be three magnitudes in one
order, and as many other magnitudes in an other order, which being taken two
and two in each order, are in one and the same proportion, and if of equality
in the first order the first be greater then the third, then in the second
order the first also shall be greater then the third: and if it be equal, it
shall be equal: and if it be less, it shall be less.
SVppose that there be three magnitudes in one order, This proposition
pertains to Proportion of equality inordinate proportionality.
namely, A, B, C, and let there be as many magnitudes in an other order, which
let be D, E, F, which being taken two and two in each order, let be in one and
the same proportion, that is, as A is to B, so let D be to E, and as B is to C,
so let E be to F.

And first of equality let A be greater then C. The first difference.
Then I say, that D also is greater then F: and if it be equal, it is equal,
and if it be less, it is less. For forasmuch as A is greater then C,
Demonstration.
and there is a certain other magnitude, namely, B, but the greater has to
one and the same magnitude a greater proportion then has the less (by the 8.
of the fifth). Wherefore A has unto B a greater proportion then C has to B.
But as A is to B, so is D to E: and as C is to B, so is F to E (by the
Cor^llary of the fourth of the fifth). Wherefore D has unto E a greater
proportion, then F has to E. But of magnitudes compared to one and the same
magnitude that which has the greater proportion is the greater (by the 10. of
the fifth). Wherefore D is greater then F.

But now if A be equal unto C, D also shall be equal unto F. For then A and C
have unto B one and the same proportion (by the first part of the seventh of
this book). The second difference.
And for that as A is to B, so is D to E, and as C is to B, so is F to E:
therefore D and F have unto E one and the same proportion. Wherefore by the
first part of the 9: of this book D is equal unto F.

But now suppose that A be less then C. Then also shall D be less then F. For
by the 8. of this book C shall have unto B a greater proportion then has A to
B. The third difference.
But as A is to B, so is D to E by supposition, and as C is to B, so have we
proved is F to E. Wherefore F has unto E a greater proportion then has D to
E. Wherefore by the first part of the 10. of this book F is greater then D. If
therefore there be three magnitudes in one order, and as many other magn^tudes
in an other order, which being taken two and two in each order, are in one and
the same proportion, and if of equality in the first order the first be
greater then the third, then in the second order also the first shall be
greater then ye third and if it be equal, it shall be equal: and if it be
less, it shall be less: which was required to be proved.

The 21. Theoreme. The 21. Proposition. If there be three magnitudes in one
order, and as many other magnitudes in an other order, which being taken two
and two in each order are in one and the same proportion, and their proportion
is perturbate: if of equality in the first order the first be greater then the
third, the^ in the second order the first also shall be greater then the third:
and if it be equal it shall be equal: and if it be less it shall be less.
SVppose yt there be three magnitudes in one order, Th^r proposition pertains
to Proportion of equality in perturbate proportionality.
namely, A, B, C, and let there be as many other magnitudes in an other, which
let be D, E, F: which being taken two and two in each order, let be in one and
the same proportion, and let their proportion be perturbate. So that as A is to
B, so let E be to F, and as B is to C, so let D be to E, and of equality let A
be greater then G. Then I say, that D also is greater th^n E: and if it be
equal it is equal: and if it be less it is less.

First let: A be greater then C. The first difference.
And for as much as A is greater then C, and there is a certain other
magnitude, namely, B: therefore (by the 8. of ye fifth) A has a greater
proportion unto B, then C has to B. But as A is to B, so is E to F: and again
as C is to B, so is E to D (by the Corellary of y^ fourth of the fifth) Wherefore
E has unto F a greater proportion, then E has to D. But that magnitude wherein
to one and the same magnitude has the greater proportion, is the less (by the
10. of the fifth) Wherefore F is less then D. Wherefore D is greater then F.

But now if A be equal unto C, The second difference.
we may also prove that D is equal unto F. For then (by the first part of the
7. of this book) A and C shall have unto B one and the same proportion. And
for that as A is to B, so is E to F, and as C is to B, so is E to D: therefore
E has to either of these D and F, one and ye same proportion. Wherefore by the
second part of the 9. of the fifth D is equal unto F.

The third difference.
Likewise, if A be less then C, D also is less then F. For then C shall have
unto B a greater proportion, then has A to B (by the 8. of the fifth. Wherefore
E also ^ath unto D a greater proportion then it ^ath to F. Where^ore by the
second part of the 10. of this book D is less then F. If therefore there be
three magnitudes in one order, and as many other magnitudes in an other order,
which being taken two and two in each order are in one and the same proportion,
and their proportion is perturbate, and if of equality in the first order the
first be greater then the third, then in the second order the first also shall
be greater then ye third^ and if it be equal it shall be equal: and if it be
less it shall be less: which was required to be proved.

The 22. Theoreme. The 22. Proposition. If there be a number of magnitudes, how
many soever in one order, and as many other magnitudes in an other order, which
being taken two and two in each order are in one and the same proportion, they
shall also of equality be in one and the same proportion.
Proportion of equality in ordinate proportionality.
SVppose that there be a certain number of magnitudes in one order. As for
example: A, B, C, and let there be as many other magnitudes in an other order,
which let be D, E, F, which being taken two and two let be in one and the same
proportion. So that as A is to B, so let D be to E, and as B is to C, so let E
be to F. Then I say, that of equality they shall be in the same proportion,
that is, as A is to C^ so is D to F. Construction.
Take unto A and D equemultiplices G and H, and likewise to B and E take any
other equemultiplices whatsoever, namely, K and L^ and moreover unto C and F
take any other equemultiplices also what soever, namely, M and N. And forasmuch
as, Demonstration.
as A is to B, so is D to E: and unto A and D are taken equemultiplices G and
H: and likewise unto B and E are taken certain other equem^ltiplices K and L:
therefore (by the 4. of the fifth) as G is to K^ so is H to L. And (by the same
reason) as K is to M, so is L to N. Seeing therefore yt there be in order three
magnitudes G, K, M, and as many other magnitudes in an other order, namely, H,
L, N, which being compared two to two are in one and the same proportion,
therefore of equality (by the 20. of the fifth) if N exceed M, then shall H
exceed G: and if it be equal it shall be equal: and if it be less it shall
be less. But G and H are equemultiplices unto A and D, and M and N are
certain other equemultiplices unto C and F: therefore (by the 6. definition of
the fifth) as A is to C, so is D to F.

So also if there be more magnitudes then three in ^ither order, When there are
more then three magnitudes in either order.
the first of the one order shall be to the last, as the first of the other
order is to the last. As if there were four in one order, namely, ABCD, and
other four in the other order, namely, EFGH, A^CDE^GH
we may with three magnitudes A, B, C, and E, F, G, prove that as A is to C, so
is E to G: And then leaving out in either order the second and taking the
fourth, as leaving out B and F, and taking D and H, we may prove by these three
and three A, C, D, and E, G, H, that as A is to D, so is E to H. And observing
this order, this demonstration will serve how many soever the magnitudes be in
either order. If therefore there be a number of magnitudes how many soever in
one order, and as many other magnitudes in an other order, which being taken
two and two in each order are in one and the same proportion, they shall also
of equality be in one and the same proportion: which was required to be
demonstrated.

The 23. Theoreme. The 23. Proposition. If there be three magnitudes in one
order, and as many other magnitudes in an other order, which being taken two
and two in each order are in one and the same proportion, and if also their
proportion be perturbate: then of equality they shall be in one and the same
proportion.
Proportion of equality in perturbate proprotionalitie.
SVppose yt there be in one order three magnitudes, namely, A, B, C, and let be
taken in an other order as many other magnituds, which let be D, E, F which
being taken two and two, in each order let be in one and the same proportion:
and suppose that their proportion be perturbate. So that as A is to B, so let E
be F, and as B is to C, so let D be to E. The^ I say that as A is to C so is D
to F. Take unto A, B, D, Construction.
equemultiplices, and let the same be GHK: and likewise unto C, E, F, take any
other equemultiplices whatsoever, and let ye same be LMN. And forasmuch as G
and H are equemultiplices unto A and B, but the parts of equemultiplices are
in the same proportion that their equemultiplices are (by ye 15. of the fifth)
wherefore as A is to B, so is G to H. Demonstration.
And by ye same reason also as E is to F, so is M to N. But as A is to B, so is
E to F. Wherefore (by y^ 11. of ye fifth) as G is to H, so is M to N. And
forasmuch as, as B is to C, so is D to E, and unto B and D are taken
equemultiplices H and K: and likewise unto C and E are taken certain other
equemultiplices L and M: therefore (by the 4. of the fifth) as H is to L, so is
K to M, and alternately also (by the 16. of the fifth) as B is to D, so is C to
E. And forasmuch as H and K are the equemultiplices of B and D, but the parts
of equemultiplices are in the same proportion that their equemultiplices are
(by the 15. of the fifth) therefore as B is to D, so is H to K. But as B is to D,
so is C to E, therefore (by the 11. of the first) as H is to K, so is C to E.
Again forasmuch as L and M are the equemultiplices of C and E, therefore as C
is to E, so is L to M. But as C is to E, so is H to K: therefore as H it to K,
so is L to M, and alternately (by the 16. of the fifth) as H is to L, so is K to
M.*

(But as A is to B so is E to F (by supposition) wherefore as G is to H, so is E
F, (by the 11. of the fifth.) Again for as much as M and N are equemultiplices
unto E and F, th^^efore again (by the 15. of the fifth) as ^ is to ^, so ^^ M
to N. But as E is to F, so have we proved is G to H, wherefore as G is to H, so
is M to N (by the 11. of the fifth) And for that ^^ ^ is to ^, so is D to E (by
supposition). And unto B and D are taken equemultiplices H and K: and unto C
and E are taken certain other equemultiplices L and M, therefore as H is to L
so is K to M, by the 4 of this book).

But it is proved that as G is to H, so is M to N. Seeing therefore that there
are in one orde three^ magnitudes, namely, G, H, L, and as many other
magnitudes in an other order, namely, K, M, N, which being taken two and two
in each order, are in one and the same proportion, and their proportion is
perturbate, therefore of equality (by the 21. of the fifth) if G excede L, then
shall K exceed N, and if it be equal, it shall be equal: and if it be less
it shall be less. But G and K are equemultiplices unto A and D, and L and N
are certain other equemultiplices unto C and F. Wherefore as A is to C, so is D
to F (by the 6. definition of the fifth). If therefore there be three
magnitudes in one order, and as many other magnitudes in an other order, which
being taken two and two in each order, are in one and the same proportion, and
if also their proportion be perturbate: then of equality they shall be in one
and the same proportion: which was required to be proved.

From this mark * first to the same mark again, you may if you will instead
of The^^^ argumente^ which seem somewhat intricate, read those arguments
following printed with an other letter, which are very perspicuous and brief,
and followed of the most interpre^ers.

This Proposition is also true if there be more then three magnitudes in either
order^ As for example, An addition of Campa^e.
let there be four. So that as A is to B, so let E be to F, and as B is to C,
so let D be to E, and as C is to P, so let Q be to D. Then I say that as A is
to P, so is Q to F. For forasmuch as it is before proved, that A is to C, as D
is to F taking away. B and E there shall be three m^gnitudes A, C, P, in one
order, and as many other in an other order, namely, Q^ D, F, which being taken
in each order two and two, are in one and the same proportion, and their
proportion is perturbate, wherefore by the former propositi^ A^^ to P as Q is to
F^ which was required to be demonstrated.

And even as by the demonstration in three magnitudes is taken the proof in
four magnitudes by leaving out one of Note.
the means: so by the demonstration in four magnitudes is taken the proof in
five magnitudes by leauyng out two of the means: and by the demonstration in
five, the proof in six, by leaving out three means. And so forward
continually, which is also to be understood in the former kind of proportion
of equality, which is in ordinate proportion.

The 24. Theoreme. The 24. Proposition. If the first have unto the second the
same proportion that the third has to the fourth, and if the fifth have unto
the second the same proportion that the sixth has to the fourth: then also the
first and fifth composed together shall have unto the second the same proportion
that the third and sixth composed together have unto the fourth.
SVppose that there be six magnitudes AB, C, DE, F, BG, and EH: of which let
AB be the first, C the second, DE the third, F ye fourth, BG the fifth, and EH
the sixth. And suppose that AB the first, have unto C the second, the same
proportion that DE the third has to F the fourth, That which the second
proposition of this book proved only touching multiplices, is here proved
generally touching magnitudes.
and let BG the fifth have unto C the second the same proportion that EH the
sixth has unto F the fourth. Then I say, that the first and fifth composed
together, namely, AG, has unto C the second the same proportion, that the
third and sixth composed together, namely, DH, has unto F the fourth. For, for
that as BG is to C, so is EH to F: then also by conversion (by ye Corollary of
the 4. of the fifth) as C is to BG, so is F to EH. And for that as AB is to C,
so is DE to F, but as C is to GB, so is F to EH: therefore of equality (by the
22. of the fifth) as AB is to BG, so is DE to EH. And forasmuch as when
magnitudes divided are proportional, they also composed are proportional (by
ye 18. of the fifth): therefore as AG is to GB, so is DH to HE: but as BG is to
C, so is EH to F: Wherefore again of equality (by the 22. of the fifth) as AG
is to C, so is DH to F. If therefore the first have unto the second the same
proportion that the third has to the fourth, and if the fifth have unto the
second the same proportion that ye sixth has to the fourth: then also the first
and fifth composed together shall have unto the second the same proportion that
the third and sixth composed together have unto the fourth: which was required
to be proved.

The 25. Theoreme. The 25. Proposition. If there be four magnitudes
proportional: the greatest and the least of them, shall be greater then the
other remaining.
SVppose that there be four magnitudes proportional AB, CD, E and F. So that
as AB is to CD, so let E be to F. And let the greatest of them be AB, and the
lest of them be F. Then I say, that these two magnitudes AB and F, are greater
then the two magnitudes CD and E. Forasmuch as AB is supposed to be the
greatest of all four, therefore it is greater then E. Therefore from the
greater AB cut of (by the 3. of the first) unto E an equal magnitude AG. and
likewise (by the same) from CD cut of unto F an equal magnitude CHAPTER (Which may
be done, for that the magnitude CD is greater then the magnitude E: for that as
AB is to CD, so is E to F, therefore alternately as AB is to E, so is CD to F
(by the 16. of the fifth). But AB is greater then E: Wherefore also CD is greater
then F: Which thing may also be proved by ye 14. of the same.) Now for that as
AB is to CD, so is E to F: but E is equal unto AG, and F is equal unto CH:
therefore as AB is to CD, so is AG to CH: and forasmuch, as the whole AB is to
the whole CD, so is the part taken away AG, to the part taken away CH:
therefore the residue GB (by the 1^. of the fifth) is unto the residue HD, as
the whole AB is to the whole CD. But AB the first is greater then CD the third:
Wherefore GB the second is greater then HD the fourth (by the 14. of the fifth).
And forasmuch as AG is equal unto E, and CH is equal unto F: therefore AG and
F are equal unto CH and E. And forasmuch as if unto things unequal be added
things equal, all shall be unequal (by the fourth common sentence):
therefore seeing that GB and DH are unequal, and GB is the greater, if unto GB
be added AG and F: and likewise if unto HD be added CH and E, there shall be
produced AB and F greater then CD and E. If therefore there be four magnitudes
proportional, the greatest and the least of them, shall be greater the^ the
other remaining: which was required to be demonstrated.

Here follow certain propositions added by Campane, which are not to be
contemned, and are cited even of the best learned, namely, of Johannes Regio
montanus, in the Epitome which he writes upon Ptolome.

The first Proposition.
If there be four quantities, and if the proportion of the first to the
second, be greater then the proportion of the third to the fourth: then
contrariwise by conversion, the proportion of the second to the first, shall be
less then the proportion of the fourth to the third.

Suppose that the proportion of A to B be greater then the proportion of C to
D. Then I say contrariwise by conversion, Demonstration leading to an
impossibility.
the proportion of B to A is less then the proportion of D to C. For if the
proportion of B to A be one and the same with the proportion of D to C, then
conuersedly the proportion of A to B is one and the same with the proportion of
C to D, which is contrary to supposition. But if the proportion of B to A be
greater then the proportion of D to C. Then let E be unto A, as D is to C. And
by the 13. of this book, the proportion of E to A shall be less then the
proportion of B to A. Wherefore (by the first part of the tenth of the same) E
is less the^ B. And therefore by the second part of the 8. of the same, A has
unto E a greater proportion then A has to B. And forasmuch as by converse
proportionalitie A is unto E as C is to D, therefore by the 13. of the same, C
has to D a greater proportion then has A to B, which is contrary to the
supposition. For A was supposed to have unto B a greater proportion then has C
to D. Wherefore the proportion of B to A is neither one and the same with the
proportion of C to D, nor greater then it. Wherefore it is less: which was
required to be proved.

An other demonstration of the same affirmatively.
It may also be demonstrated directly. For let E be unto B as C is to D. Then
co^uersedly B is to E as D is to C. And forasmuch as A is greater then E by the
first part of the tenth of this book, therefore by the second part of the 8 of
the same B has unto A a less proportion then has B to E. Wherefore by the 13.
of the same B has unto A ^ less proportion then has D to C: which was
required to be proved.

The second Proposition.
If there be four quantities, and if the proportion of the first to the second
be greater then the proportion of the third to the fourth, then alternately the
proportion of the first to the third, shall be greater then the proportion of
the second to the fourth.

Let A have unto B a greater proportion then has C to D. Then I say
alternately A has to C a greater proportion then has B to D. For one and the
same proportion it can not have: Demonstration leading to a^ impossibility.
for then alternately A should be to B as C is to D, which is contrary to the
suppositio^. But if it have a less proportion, let E be unto C as B is to D.
Now the^ by the 13. of this book E has unto C a greater proportion then has
A to C. Wherefore (by the first part of the tenth of the same) E is greater
the^ A. Wherefore by the first part of the 8. of the same, E has to B a
greater proportion then has A to B. And forasmuch as by suppositio^ E is unto
C, as B is to D, therefore alternately E is to B as C is to D. Wherefore by the
13. of the same, C has to D a greater proportion then has A to B, which is
contrary to the suppositio^. Wherefore the proportion of A to C is neither one
and the same with the proportion of B to D, no^ less then it, wherefore it is
greater. Which was required to be proved.

An other demonstration of the same affirmatively.
This may also be demonstrated affirmatively, let E be unto B as C is to D. Now
the^ by the first part of the tenth of this book, E is less then A: wherefore
by the first part of the 8. of the same, the proportion of A to C is greater
then the proportion of E to C. But alternately E is to C as B is to D. Wherefore
(by the 13. of the same) A has to C a (...)

The third Proposition.
If there be four quantities, and if the proportion of the first t^ the second
be greater, then the proportion of the third to the fourth: then by composition
also the proportion of the, f^^th and second to the second, shall be greater
then the proportion of the third and fourth^ to the fourth.

Suppose that the proportion of A to B be greater then the proportion of C to
D. Then I say that the proportion of (...) A^ to B i^ greater then the
proportion of the whole CD to D. For the proportion of AB to B can not be one
and the same with the proportion of CD to D^ Demonstration leading to an
impossibility.
for then by division also A should be unto B as C is D^ which is contrary to
the supposition. Neither also can it be less. For if it be possible let it be^
and let E^ ^e unto B as CD is to D. No^ then (by the 12. of this book EB has
unto B a greater proportion then has AB to B. Wherefore by the first part of
the 10. of the same EB is greater then the (...) AB. And by the common sentence
E is greater then A. Wherefore by the first part of the 8. of this book ^ has
to ^ a greater proportion then has A to B. But E is to B as C is to D by
division of proportion^ for EB is to B as CD is to D. Wherefore (by the 12. of
the same) C has to D a greater proportion the^ has A to B, which is co^^rary
to the supposition. Wherefore the proportion of AB to B is not one and the same
with the proportion of CD to D ^^ither also is it less then it. Wherefore it is
greater: which was required to be proved.

This may also be demonstrated a^firmat^^ely. An other demonstration of the
same.
Forasmuch as the proportion of A to B is greater then the proportion of C to
D: let E be unto B as C is to D. And so by the first part of the 10. of this
book, E shall be less then A. And therefore by the common sentence EB shall be
less then AB. Wherefore by the first part of the 8. of the same AB has unto B
a greater proportion then has EB to B. But by composition EB is to B as CD is
to D. For by supposition E is unto B as is to D. Wherefore (by the 12. of this
book) AB has to B a greater proportion then has CD to D: which was required
to be proved.

The fourth Proposition.
If there be four quantities, and if the proportion of the first and the
second to the second be greater then the proportion of the third and fourth to
the fourth: then by division also the proportion of the first to the second,
shall be greater th^n the proportion of the third to the fourth.

Suppose that the proportion of AB to B be greater then the proportion of CD to
D. Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
Then I say that by division also the proportion of A to B is greater then the
proportion of C to D. For it cannot be the same. For then by composition AB
should be to B as CD is to D. Neither also can it be less: for if the
proportion of C to D be greater then the proportion of A to B, then by the
former proposition, the proportion of CD to D should be greater then the
proportion of AB to B: which is contrary also to the suppositio^. Wherefore the
proportion of A to B is neither one and the same with the proportion of C to D,
(...) it: Wherefore it is greater then it: which was required to be proved.

An other demonstration of the same affirmatively.
The same may also be proved affirmatively. Suppose that EB be unto B as CD is
to D. Now then (by the first part of the 10. of the fifth) EB shall be less
then AB: and therefore by the common sentence, E is less then A, wherefore by
the first part of the 8. of this book, the proportion of E to B, is less then
the proportion of A to B, but as E is to B, so is C to D: wherefore the
proportion of C to D, is less then the proportion of A to B. Wherefore the
proportion of A to B is greater then the proportion of C to D: which was
required to be proved.

The fifth Proposition.
If there be four quantities, and if the proportion of the first and the
second to the second be greater then the proportion of the third and the fourth
to the fourth: then by euersion the proportion of the first and second to the
first, shall be less then the proportion of the third and fourth to the third.

Suppose that the proportion of AB to B be greater then the proportion of CD to
D. Then I say that by euersion the proportion of AB to A is less then the
proportion of CD to C. Demonstration.
For by division by the former proposition the proportion of A to B is greater
then the proportion of C to D. Wherefore by the first of these propositions
conuersedly, B has unto A a less proportion the^ has D to C. Wherefore by the
3. of the same by composition, the proportion of AB to A is less the^ the
proportion of CD to C: which was required to be proved.

The sixth Proposition.
If there be taken three quantities in one order, and as many in an other
order, and if the proportion of the first to the second in the first order, be
greater then the proportion of the first to the second in the latter order:
then also the proportion of the first to the third in the first order, shall be
greater then the proportion of the first to the third in the latter order.

Suppose that there be three qua^tities in one order A, B, C, and as many other
qua^tities in an other order D, E, F. And let the proportion of A to B in the
first order be greater then the proportion of D to E in the second order, and
let also the proportion of B to C in the first order, be greater then the
proportion of E to F in the second order. Then I say that the proportion of A
to C in the first order, is greater the^ the proportion of D to F in the second
order. Demonstration^
For let G be unto C as E is to F. Now then by the first part of the 10 of this
book G shall be less then B. And therefore by the second part of the 8. of
the ^^me, the propor^^on of A to G i^ greater th^n the proport^on of ^ to ^.
Wh^rfore the proportion of A to G is much greater th^n the proportion of D to
E. Now then let ^ be (...) D is to E. Wherefore by the first part of the 10^ of
the same, A is great^r the^ H. And therefore by the first part of the 8. of the
same, the proportion of A to C is greater then the proportion of H to C. But by
proportion of equality H is to C as D is to F (for H is to G as D i^ to E, and
G is to C as E is to F. Wherefore by the 12. of the same A has to C a greater
proportion then has D to F: which was required to be proved.

The seventh Proposition.
If there be taken three quantities in one order, and as many other in an other
order, and if the proportion of the second to the third in the first order be
greater then the proportion of the first to the second in the latter order, if
also the proportion of the first to the second in the first order be greater
then the proportion of the second to the third in the latter order: then shall
the proportion of the first to the third in the first order be greater, then
the proportion of the first to the third in the latter order.

Suppose that there be three qua^tities in one order A, B, C, and as many other
in an other order D, E, F. And let the proportion of B to C in the first order,
be greater then the proportion of D to E in the second order, and let also the
proportion of A to B in the first order, be greater then the proportion of E to
F in the second order. Then I say that A has to C a greater proportion then
has D to F. This pertains to proportion of equality. For let G be unto C,
as D is to E. And by the first part of the 10. of this boke^ G shall be less
the^ ^. And therefore by the second part of the 8. of the same, the proportion
of A to G is greater then the proportion of A to B. Wherefore A has unto G a
much greater proportion then has ^ to F. Now then let H be unto G as E is to
F. And by the first part of the 10. of the same, A shall be greater then H. And
by the first part of the 8. of the same, the proportion of A to C is greater
then the proportion of H to C. But by the 23. of the same the proportion of H
to C is as the proportion of D to F (for G is to C as D is to E, and H is to G
as E is to F.) Wherefore (by the 12. of the same) the proportion of A to C is
greater then the proportion of D to F, which was required to be proved.

The eight Proposition.
If the proportion of the whole to the whole, be greater th^n the proportion of
a part taken away, to a part taken away: the^ shall the proportion of the
residue unto the residue be greater then the proportion of the whole to the
whole.

Suppose that there be two quantities AB and C D: from which let there be cut
of these magnitudes AE and CF: and let the residue be EB and FD. And let the
proportion of AB to CD be greater then the proportion of AE to CF. Then I say
that the proportion of EB to FD is greater then the proportion of AB to CD. For
(by the second of these propositions now added) alternately the proportion of
A^ to A^ (...) greater then the proportion of CD to CF. And therefore by
euersion of proportion (by the 5. of the same) the proportion of AB to E^ is
less then the proportion of CD to FD. Wherefore again alternately the
proportion of AB to CD is less then the proportion of EB to FD: which was
required to be proved.

The ninth Proposition.
If quantities how many soever in one order be compared to as many other in an
other order, and if there be a greater proportion of every one that goes
before to that whereunto it is referred, then of any that follows to that
whereunto it is referred: the proportion of them all taken together unto all the
other taken together, shall be greater, then the proportion of any that
follows to that whereunto it is compared, and also then the proportion of all
them taken together to all the other taken together, but shall be less then
the proportion of the first to the first.

Suppose that there be three quantities in one order, A, B, C, and as many
other in an other order D, E, F. And let the proportion of A to D be greater
the^ the proportion of B to E, let also the proportion of B to E, be greater
then the proportion of C to F. The^ I say that the proportion of ABC taken al
together, to DEF taken altogether, is greater the^ the proportion of B to E,
and also then the proportion of C to F, and more over the^ the proportion of B
and C taken together, to OF taken together, but is less then the proportion of
A to D: Demonstration.
For forasmuch as A has to D a greater proportion the^ has B to E, therefore
alternately A has to B a greater proportion then has D to E: wherefore by
composition AB has to B a greater proportion the^ has DE to E. And again
alternately AB has to DE a greater proportion then has B to E. Wherefore by
the former proposition A has to ^ a greater proportion then has AB to DE. And
by the same reason may it be proved that has to E a greater proportion then
has BC to OF. Wherefore A has to D a greater proportion then has BC to OF.
Wherefore alternately A has to BC a greater proportion then has D to OF,
wherefore by composition ABC has to BC a greater proportion then has DEF to
OF. Wherefore again alternately ABC has to DEF a greater proportion then has
BC to OF. Wherefore (by the former proposition) the proportion of A to D is
greater then the proportion of ABC to DEF: Which was required to be proved.

The end of the fifth book of Euclides Elements.
The sixth book of Euclides Elements.
THIS SIXTH BOOK, is for use and practice, The argument of this sixth book.
a most special book. In it are taught the proportions of one figure to an
other figure, and of their sides the one to the other, and of the sides of one
to the sides of an other, likewise of the angles of the one to the angles of
the other. Moreover it teaches the description of figures like to ^igures
given, and marvelous applications of figures to lines, euenly, or with
decrease or excess, with many other Theoremes, not only of the propo^tions of
right lined figures, but also of sectors of circles, with their angles. On the
Theoremes and Problemes of this Book depend for the most part, the
compositions of all instruments of measuring length, breadth, or de^pe^es, and
also the reason of the use of the same instruments, as of the Geometrical
^quar^, This book necessary for the use of instruments of Geometry.
the Scale of the Astrolabe, the quadrant, the staff, and such other. The use
of which instruments, besides all other mechanical instruments of raising
up, of moving, and drawing huge things incredible to the ignorant, and
infinite other ginnes (which likewise have their grounds out of this Book)
are of wonderful and unspeakable profit, besides the inestimable pleasure
which is in them.

Definitions.
1. Like rectiline figures are such, The first definition.
whose angles are equal the one to the other, and whose sides about the equal
angles are proportional.
As if ye take any two rectiline figures. As for example, two triangles ABC,
and DEF: (...) of the one triangle be equal to the angles of the other,
namely, if the angle A be equal to the angle D, and the angle B equal to the
angle E, and also the angle C equal to the angle F. And moreover, i^ the sides
which contain the equal angles be proportional. As if the side AB have that
proportion to the side BC, which the side DE has to the side OF, and also if
the side BC be unto the side CA, as ^he side OF is to the side FD, and mor^ouer
if the side CA be to the side AB, as the side FD is to the side DE, then are
these two triangles said to be like: and so judge ye of any other kind of
figures. As if in the parallelogrammes ABCD and EFGH, the angle A be equal to
the angle E, and the angle B equal to the angle F, and the angle C equal to
the angle G, and the angle D equal to the angle H. And farthermore, if the
side AC have that proportion to the side CD which the side EG has to the side
GH, and if also the side CD be to the side DB as the side GH is to the side HF,
and moreover, if the side DB be to the side BA as the side HF is to the side
FE, and finally, if the side BA be to the side AC as the side FE is to the side
EG, then are these parallelogrammes like.

The second de^inition.
2. Reciprocal figures are those, when the terme^ of proportion are both
antecedentes and consequentes in either figure.
As if ye have two parallelogrammes ABCD and EFGH. If the side AB to the side
OF, an antecedent of the first figure to a consequent of the second figure,
have mutually the same proportion, which the side EG has to the side AC an
antecedent of the second figure to a consequent of the first figure: then are
these two figures Reciprocal. They are called of some, figures of mutual
sides, and that undoubtedly not amiss nor unaptly. Reciprocal figures called
mutual figures.
And to make this definition more plain, Campane and Pestitarius, and others^
thus put it: Reciprocal figures, are when the sides of other (...) mutually
proportional, as in the example and declaration before given. Among the
barbarous they are called Mutekesia, reserving still the Arabike word.

The third definition.
3. A right line is said to be divided by an extreme and mean proportion, when
the whole is to the greater part, as the greater part is to the less.
As if the line AB, be so divided in the point C, that the whole line AB have
the same proportion, to the greater part thereof, namely, to AC, which the same
greater part AC has to the less part thereof, namely, to CB, then is the line
AB divided by an extreme and mean proportion. Commonly it is called a line
divided by proportion ha^ing a mean and two extremes. How to divide a line in
such sort was taught in the 11. Proposition of the second Book, but not under
this form of proportion.

4. The alitude of a figure is a perpendicular line drawn from the top to
the base. The fourth definition.

As the altitude or hight of the triangle ABC, is the line AD being drawn
perpendicularly from the point A, being the top or highest part of the
triangle to the base thereof BC. So likewise in other figures as ye see in the
examples here set. That which here ^ee calls the altitude or height of a
figure, in the first book in the 35. Proposition and certain other following,
he taught to be contained within two equidistant lines: so that figures to have
one altitude and to be contained within two equidistant lines, is all one. So
in all these examples, if from the highest point of the figure ye draw an
equidistant line to the base thereof, and then from that point draw a
perpendicular to the same base that perpendicular is the altitude of the figure.

5. A Proportion is said to be made of two proportions or more, when the
quantities of the proportions multiplied the one into the other, produce an
other quantity. The fifth definition.

Of addition of proportions, has been somewhat said in the declaration of the
10. definition of the fifth book: which in substance is all one with that which
is here taught by Euclide. By the name of quantities of proportions, he
understands the denominations of proportions. So that to add two proportions
together, or more, and to make one of them all, is nothing else, but to multiply
their quantities together, that is to multiply ever the denominator of the one
by the denominator of the other. By the name of quantities is understood the
denominations of proportions.
This is true in all kinds of proportion, whether it be of equality, or of
the greater inequality, when the greater quantity is referred to the less:
or of the less inequality, when the less quantity is referred to the
greater: or of them mixed together. If the proportions be like, to add two
together is to double the one, to add 3. like is to triple the one, and so
forth in like proportions, as was sufficiently declared in the declaration of
the 10. and 11. definitions of the fifth Book. Where it was showed, that if
there be 3. quantities in like proportion, the proportion of the first to the
third, is the proportion of the first to the second doubled: and if there be
four quantities in like proportion; the proportion of the f^^st ^o the fourth
shall be the proportion of the first to the second ^^ipled^ which thing how to
do was there taught likewise in proportions unlike, the proportion of the first
extreme to the last is made of all the mean proportions set between them.
Suppose three quantities A, B, C, so that let A have to B sesquialtera
proportion, namely, 6. to 4. And let B to C have sesquitertia proportion,
namely, 4. to 3. Example of this definition.
Now the proportion of A to C, the first to the third, is made of the
proportion of A to B, and of the proportion of B to to C added together. If ye
will add them together, ye must by this definition multiply the quantity or
denominator of the one, by the quantity or denominator of the other. Ye must
first therefore seek the denominators of these proportions, by the rule before
given in the declaration of the definitions of the fifth Book. As if ye divide
A by B, namely, 6. by 4, so shall ye have in the quotient 1 ^/^ for the
denominator of the proportion of A to B: likewise if ye divide B by C, namely,
4. by 3. ye shall have in the quotient 1 ^/^ for the denominator of the
proportion of B to C, now multiply these two denominators 1 ^/^ and 1 ^/^ the
one into the other, by the rule before taught, namely, by multiplying the
numerator of the one into the numerator of the other, and also the denominator
of the one into the denominator of the other: the numerator of 1 ^/^ or of ^/^
which is all one, is 3, the denominator is 2: the numerator of 1 ^/^ which
reduced are ^/^ is 4, the denominator is 3: then multiply 3. by 4, numerator by
numerator, so have ye 12. for a new numerator: likewise multiply 2. by 3.
denominator by denominator, ye shall produce 6. for a new denominator: so have
you produced 12. and 6, between which there is dupla proportion. Which
proportion is also between A and C, namely, 6. to 3, the first quantity to the
third. Wherefore the proportion of A to C is said to be made of the proportion
of A to B and of the proportion of B to C, for that it is produced of the
multiplication of the quantity or denominator of the one, Example in numbers.
into the quantity or denominator of the other. And so of all others be they
never so many. As in these examples in numbers here set 2. 3. 15. 18. 2. 3. 15.
18.
In this example the less numbers are compared to the greater, as in the
former the greater were compared to the less: the denominator of the
proportion of 2. to 3. is 2/^ that is, subsesquialtera, the denomination
between 3. and 15. is ^/^ or 1/^ which is all one, that is, subquintupla,
between 15. and 18. the denomination of the proportion is 1/6 that is,
subsesquiquinta, multiply all these denominations together: first the
numerators: 2. into 1. produce 2, then 2. into 5. produce 10: which shall be a
new numerator. Then the denominators: 3. into 5. produce 15: and 15. into 6.
produce 90: which shall be a new denominator. So have you brought forth 10/9^
or 1/9 which is proportion subnoncupla: which is also the proportion of 2. to
18. Wherefore the proportion of 2. to 18. that is, of the extremes, namely,
subnoncupla, is made of the proportions of 2. to 3: of 3. to 15: and of 15. to
18: namely, of subsesquialtera, subquintupla, and subsesquiquinta.

An other example, where the greater inequality and the less inequality are
mixed together 6. 4. 2. 3. the denomination of the proportion of 6. to 4, is 1
^/^, An other example.
of 4. to 2, is ^/^, and of 2. to 3, is ^/^: now if ye multiply as you ought,
all these denominations together, ye shall produce 12. to 6, namely, dupla
proportion.

Forasmuch as so much has hitherto been spoken of addition of proportions it
shall not be unnecessary somewhat also to say of substraction of them. Of
substraction of proportion.
Where it is to be noted, that as addition of them, is made by multiplicatio^
of their denominations the one into the other: so is the substraction of the
one from the other done, by division of the denomination of the one by the
denomination of the other. As if ye will from sextupla proportion subtrahe
dupla proportion, take the denominations of them both. The denomination of
sextupla proportion, is 6, the denomination of dupla proportion, is 2. Now
divide 6. the denomination of the one by 2. the denomination of the other: the
quotient shall be 3: which is the denomination of a new proportion, namely,
tripla: so that when dupla proportion is subtrahed from sextupla, there shall
remain tripla proportion. And thus may ye do in all others.

6. A Parallelogramme applied to a right line, is said to want in form by a
parallelogramme like to one given: when the parallelogra^me applied wants to
the filling of the whole line, by a parallelogramme like to one given: The
sixth definition.
and then is it said to exceed, when it exceeds the line by a
parallelogramme like to that which was given.
As let E be a Parallelogra^me given, and let AB be a right line, to whom is
applied the parallelogramme ACDF. Now if it want of the filling of the line AB,
by the parallelogra^me DFGB being like to the parallelogramme given E, then is
the parallelogramme said to want in form by a parallelogramme like unto a
parallelogramme given.

Likewise if it exceed, as the parallelogramme ACGD applied to the lin^ AB^ if
it exceed it by the parallelogramme FGBD being like to the parallelogramme F
which was given, then is the parallelogramme ABGD, said to exceed in form by
a parallelogramme like to a parallelogramme given.

This definition is added by Flussates as it seems, it is not in any common
Greek book abroad, nor in any Commentary. It is for many Theoremes following
very necessary.

The 1. Theoreme. The 1. Proposition. Triangles and parallelogrammes which are
under one and the self same altitude: are in proportion as the base of the one
is to the base of the other.
SVppose that there be two triangles ABC and ACD, and two paralleiogrammes EC
and CF. Which let be set under one and the self same altitude, or
perpendicular line drawn from the top A to the base BD. Then I say that as
the base BC is to the base CD so is the triangle ABC to the triangle ACD: and
the parallelogramme EC to the parallelogramme CF. For forasmuch as the
parallelogrammes. Construction.
E C and CF are under one and the self same altitude, therefore the lines EA
and AF make both one right line, and so also do the lines BC and CD: and
therefore the line OF is a parallel unto the line BD. Produce the right line DB
on ^che side directly to the points H, L (by the 2. peticion of the first) And
unto the base BC (by the 2. of the first) put as many equal lines as you will,
as for example, two, namely, BG, and GH and unto the base CD on the other side
put as many equal as you did to the other base, which let be DK, and KL. Then
draw these right lines AG, AH, AK, and AL.

And forasmuch as the lines CB, BG, and GH are equal the one to the other,
Demonstration of the first part.
therefore the triangles also AHG, AGB and ABC, are (by the 38. of the first)
equal the one to the other. Wherefore how multiplex the base HC is to the base
BC, so multiplex also is the triangle AHC to the triangle ABC. And by the same
reason also, how multiplex the base LC is to the base DC, so multiplex also is
the triangle ALC to the triangle ADC. Wherefore if the base HC be equal unto
the base CL, then (by the 38. of the first) the triangle AHC is equal unto the
triangle ACL. And if the base HC exceed the base CL, then also the triangle
AHC excedeth the triangle ACL, and if the base be less, the tria^gle also
shall be less. Now then there are four magnitudes, namely, the two bas^s BC
and CD, and the two triangles ABC, and ACD, and to the base BC, and to the
triangle ABC, namely, to the first and the third, are taken equemul^iplices,
namely, the base HC and the triangle AHC, and likewise to ye base CD and to the
triangle ADC, namely, to the second and the fourth, are taken certain other
equemultiplices, that is, the base CL, and the triangle ALC. And it has been
proved that if the multiplex of the first magnitude, that is, the base HC, do
exceed the multiplex of the second, that is, the base CL, the multiplex also
of the third, that is, the triangle AHC excedeth the multiplex of ye fourth^
that is, the triangle ALC, and if the said base HC be equal to the said ba^^
CL, the triangle also AHC is equal to the triangle ALC, and if it be less it
i^ less. Wherefore by the sixth defini^ion of ye fifth, as the first of the
foresaid magnitudes is to the second, so is the third to the fourth. Wherefore
as the base BC is to the base CD, so is the triangle ABC to the triangle ACD.

And because (by the 41. of the first) the parallelogramme EC is double to the
triangle ABC, Demonst^ation of the second part.
and (by the same) the parallelogramme FC is double to the triangle ACD,
therefore the parallelogrammes EC and FC are equemultiplices unto the triangles
ABC and ACD. But the parts of equemultiplices (by the 15. of the fifth) have
one and the same proportion with their equemultiplices. Wherefore as the
triangle ABC is to the triangle ACD, so is the parallelograme EC to the
parallelogramme FC. And forasmuch as it has been demonstrated, that as the
base BC is to the base CD, so is the triangle ABC, to the triangle ACD, and as
the triangle ABC is to the triangle ACD so is the parallelogramme EC to the
parallelogramme FC. Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as the base BC is to
the base CD, so is the parallelogramme EC to the parallelogramme FC. The
parallelogrammes may also be demonstrated a part by themselves as the triangles
are, if we describe upon the bases BG, GH, and DK and KL parallelogrammes under
the self same altitude that the parallelogramme^ given are. Wherefore triangles
and parallelogrammes which are under one and the self same altitude, are in
proportion, as the base of the one is to ye base of the other: which was
required to be demonstrated.

Here Flussates adds this Corollary.
If two right lines being given, the one of them be divided how so ever: A
Corollary added by Flussates.
the rectangle figures contained under the whole line undivided, and each of
the segmentes of the line divided, are in proportion the one to the other, as
the segmentes are the one to the other. For imaginyng the figures BA and AD in
the former description, to be rectangled, the rectangle figures contained under
the whole right line AC, and the segments of the right line BD, which is cu^ in
the point C, namely, the parallelogrammes BA and AD, are in proportion the one
to the other, as the segme^tes BC and CD are.

The 2. Theoreme. The 2. Proposition. If to any one of the sides of a triangle
be drawn a parallel right line, it shall cut the sides of the same triangle
proportionally. And if the sides of a triangle be cut proportionally, a right
line drawn from section to section is a parallel to the other side of the
triangle.
SVppose that there be a triangle ABC, unto one of the sides whereof, namely,
unto BC, let there be drawn a parallel line DE cuttyng the sides AC and AB in
the points E and D. Then I say first that as BD is to DA, so is CE to EA. The
first part of this Theoreme.
Draw a line from B to E, and also from C to D. Wherefore (by the 37. of the
first) the triangle BDE is equal unto the triangle CDE: for they are set upon
one and the same base DE, and are contained within the self same parallels DE
and BC. Consider also a certain other triangle ADE. Now things equal (by the
7. of the fifth) have to one self thing one and the same proportion. Wherefore
as ye triangle BDE is to ye triangle ADE, so is ye triangle CDE to the triangle
ADE. But as ye triangle BDE is to ye triangle ADE, so is ye base BD to ye base
DA (by the first of this book.) For they are under one and the self same
top, namely, E, and therefore are under one and the same altitude. And by the
same reason as the triangle CDE is to the triangle ADE, so is the line CE to
the line EA. Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as the line BD is to the line
DA, so is the line CE to the line EA.

But now suppose that in ye triangle ABC the sides AB and AC be cut
proportionally so yt as BD is to DA, so let CE be to EA, and draw a line from D
to E. Then secondly I say yt the line DE is a parallel to ye line BC.
Demonstration of the second part.
For the same order of construction being kept, for yt as BD is to DA, so is CE
to EA, but as BD is to DA, so is ye triangle BDE to ye triangle ADE (by the 1.
of the sixth) and as CE is to EA, so (by ye same) is the triangle CDE to ye
triangle ADE: therefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as the triangle BDE is to the
triangle ADE, so is the triangle CDE to the triangle ADE. Wherefore either of
these triangles BDE and CDE have to the triangle ADE one and the same
proportion. Wherefore (by the 9. of the fifth) the triangle BDE is equal unto
the triangle CDE, and they are upon one and the self base, namely, DE. But
triangles equal and set upon one base, are also contained within the same
parallel lines (by the 39. of the first.) Wherefore the line DE is unto the line
BC a parallel. If therefore to any one of the sides of a triangle be drawn a
parallel line, it cutteth the other sides of the same triangle proportionally.
And if the sides of a triangle be cut proportionally, a right line drawn from
section to section, is parallel to the other side of the triangle: which thing
was required to be demonstrated.

Here also Flussates adds a Corollary.
If a line parallel to one of the sides of a triangle do cut the triangle, it
shall cut of from the whole triangle a triangle like to the whole triangle. A
Corollary added by Flussates.
For as it has been proved it deuideth the sides proportionally. So that as EC
is to EA, so is BD to DA, wherefore by the 18. of the fifth, as AC is to AE, so
is AB to AD. Wherefore alternately by the 16. of the fifth as AC is to AB, so is
AE to AD: wherefore in the two triangles EAD and CAB the sides about the common
angle A are proportional. The said triangles also are equiangle. For forasmuch
as the right lines AEC and ADB do fall upon the parallel lines ED and CB,
therefore by the 29. of the first they make the angles AED and ADE in the
triangle ADE equal to the angles ACB and ABC in the triangle ACB. Wherefore by
the first definition of this book the whole triangle ABC is like unto the
triangle cut of ADE.

The 3. Theoreme. The 3. Proposition. If an angle of a triangle be divided into
two equal parts, and if the right line which deuideth the angle divide also
the base: the segmentes of the base shall be in the same proportion the one to
the other, that the other sides of the triangle are. And if the segme^tes of
the base be in the same proportion that the other sides of the said triangle
are: a right drawn from the top of the triangle unto the section, shall
divide the angle of the triangle into two equal parts.
SVppose that there be a triangle ABC, and (by the 9. of the first) let the
angle BAC be divided into two equal parts by the right line AD, which let cut
also the base BC in the point D. Then I say that as the segment BD is to ye
segment DC, so is the side BA to the side AC. Construction.
For by the point C (by the 31. of the first) draw unto the line DA a parallel
line CE and extend the line BA till it concur with the line CE in the point
E, and do make the triangle BEC. Demonstration of the first part.
But the line BA shall concur with the line CE (by the 5. peticion) for that
the angles EBC, and BCE are less then two right angles. For the angle ECB is
equal to the outward and opposite angle ADB (by the 29. of the first.) And
the two angles ADB and DBA of the triangle BAD are less then two right angles
(by the 17. of the first) Now forasmuch as upon the parallels AD and EC falls
the right line AC, therefore by the 29. of the first) the angle ACE is equal
unto the angle CAD. But unto the angle CAD is the angle BAD supposed to be
equal. Wherefore the angle BAD is also equal unto the angle ACE. Again
because upon the parallels AD and EC falls the right line BAE, the outward
angle BAD (by the 28. of the first) is equal unto the inward angle AEC. But
before it was prouell that ye angle ACE is equal unto ye angle BAD, wherefore
ye angle ACE is equal unto ye angle AEC. Wherefore (by ye 6. of ye first) ye
side AE is equal unto the side AC. And because to one of ye sides of ye
triangle BCE, namely, to EC is drawn a parallel line AD, therefore (by ye 2. of
ye sixth) as BD is to DC, so is BA to AE. But AE is equal unto AC, therefore as
BD is to DC, so is BA to AC. But now suppose that as the segment BD is to the
segment DC, Demonstrati^n of the second part, which is the converse of the
first.
so is the side BA to the side AC, and draw a line from A to D. Then I say that
the angle BAC is by ye right line AD divided into two equal parts. For the
same order of construction remaining, for that as BD is to DC, so is BA to AC,
but as BD is to DC, so is BA to AE (by the 2. of the sixth) for unto one of the
sides of the triangle BCE, namely, unto the side EC is drawn a parallel line
AD. Wherefore also as BA is to AC, so is BA to AE (by the 11. of the fifth)
Wherefore (by the 9. of the fifth) AC is equal unto AE. Wherefore also (by the
5. of the first) the angle AEC is equal unto the angle ACE, but the angle AEC
(by the 29. of the first) is equal unto the outward angle BAD: and the angle
ACE is equal unto the angle CAD which is alternate unto him: wherefore the
angle BAD is equal unto the angle CAD. Wherefore the angle BAC is by the right
line AD divided into two equal parts. Wherefore if an angle of a triangle be
divided into two equal parts, and if the right line which deuideth the angle
cut also the base, the segmentes of the base shall be in the same proportion
the one to the other, that the other sides of the said triangle are. And if the
segmentes of the base be in the same proportion that the other sides of the
said triangle are, a right line drawn from the top of the triangle unto the
section deuideth the angle of the triangle into two equal parts.

This construction is the half part of that Gnomical figure described in the
43. proposition of the first book, which Gnomical figure is of great use in a
manner in all Geometrical demonstrations.

The 4. Theoreme. The 4. Proposition. In equiangle triangles, the sides which
co^taine the equal angles are proportional, and the sides which are subtended
under the equal angles are of like proportion.
SVppose that there be two equiangle triangles ABC and DCE: and let the angle
ABC of the one triangle, be equal unto ye angle DCE of the other triangle, and
the angle BAC equal unto ye angle CDE, and moreover, the angle ACB equal unto
the angle DEC. Then I say, that those sides of ye triangles ABC, and DCE, which
include the equal angles, are proportional, and the side which are subtended
under the equal angles are of like proportion. Construction.
For let two sides of the said triangles, namely, two of those sides which are
subtended under equal angles: as for example the sides BC and CE, be so set
that they both make one right line. And because the angles ABC and ACB are
less then two right angles (by the 17. of the first): but the angle ACB is
equal unto the angle DEC: therefore ye angles ABC and DEC are less the^ two
right angles. Wherefore the lines BA and ED being produced, will at the length
meet together. Let them meet and join together in the point F. Demonstration.
And because by supposition the angle DCE is equal unto the angle ABC,
therefore the line BF is (by the 28. of the first) a parallel unto the line CD.
And forasmuch as by supposition the angle ACB is equal unto the angle DEC,
therefore again (by the 28. of the first) the line AC is a parallel unto the
line FE. Wherefore FADC is a parallelogramme. Wherefore the side FA is equal
unto the side DC: and the side AC unto the side FD (by the 34. of the first).
And because unto one of the sides of the triangle BFE, namely, to FE is drawn
a parallel line AC, therefore as BA is to AF, so is BC to CE (by the 2. of the
sixth). But AF is equal unto CD. Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as BA is to
CD, so is BC to CE, which are sides subtended under equal angles. Wherefore
alternately (by the 16. of the fifth) as AB is to BC, so is DC to CE. Again
forasmuch as CD is a parallel unto BF, therefore again (by the 2. of the
sixth) as BC is to CE, so is FD to DE. But FD is equal unto AC. Wherefore as BC
is, to CE, so is AC to DE, which are also sides subtended under equal angles.
Wherefore alternately (by the 16. of the fifth) ^s BC is to CA, so is CE to ED^
Wherefore forasmuch as it has been demonstrated, that as AB is unto BC^ so is
DC unto CE^ but as DC is unto CA, so is CE unto ED^ it follows of equality
(by the 22. of the fifth) that ^s BA is unto AC so is CD unto DE^ Wherefore in
eq^iangle triangle^, ye sides which include ye equal angles are proportional:
and ye sides which are subt^nded under the equal angles are of like proportion
which was required to be demonstrated.

The 5. Theoreme. The 5. Proposition. If two triangles have their sides
proportional, the triang^^s are equiangle, and those angles in the^ are
equal, under which are subtended sides of like proportion.
SVppose that there be two triangles ABC, and DEF, having their sides
proportional, as AB is to BC, so let DE be to OF: This is the converse of the
former proposition.
and as BC is to AC, so let OF be to DF: and moreover, as BA is to AC, so let
ED be to DF. Then I say, that the triangle ABC is equiangle unto the triangle
DEF: and those angles in them are equal under which are subtended sides of
like proportion, that is, the angle ABC is equal unto the angle DEF: and the
angle BCA unto the angle EFD: and moreover, the angle BAC to ye angle EDF. Upon
the right line OF, Construction
and unto the points in it E and F, describe (by the 23. of the first) angles
equal unto the angles ABC and ACB, which let be FEG and EFG, namely, let the
angle FEG be equal unto the angle ABC, and let the angle EFG be equal to the
angle ACB. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the angles ABC and ACB are less then two right angles (by
the 17. of the first): therefore also the angles FEG and EFG are less then two
right angles. Wherefore (by the 5. petition of ye first) ye right lines EG and
FG shall at ye length concur. Let the^ concur in the point G. Wherefore EFG
is a triangle. Wherefore the angle remaining BAC is equal unto the angle
remaining EGF (by the first Corollary of the 32. of the first). Wherefore the
triangle ABC is equiangle unto the triangle GEF. Wherefore in the triangles ABC
and EGF the sides, which include the equal angles (by the 4. of the sixth) are
proportional, and the sides which are subtended under the equal angles are of
like proportion. Wherefore as AB is to BC, so is GE to OF. But as AB is to BC,
so by supposition is DE to OF. Wherefore as DE is to OF, so is GE to OF (by the
11. of the fifth). Wherefore either of these DE and EG have to OF one and the
same proportion. Wherefore (by the 9. of the fifth) DE is equal unto EG. And by
the same reason also DF is equal unto FG. Now forasmuch as DE is equal to EG
and OF is common unto them both, therefore these two sides DE and OF, are
equal unto these two sides GE and OF, and ye base DF is equal unto the base
FG. Wherefore the angle DEF (by the 8. of the first) is equal unto the angle
GEF: and the triangle DEF (by the 4. of the first) is equal unto the triangle
GEF: and the rest of the angles of the one triangle are equal unto the rest of
the angles of the other triangle the one to ye other, under which are subtended
equal sides. Wherefore the angle DFE is equal unto the angle GFE: and the
angle EDF unto the angle EGF. And because^ the angle FED is equal unto the
angle GEF: but the angle GEF is equal unto the angle ABC: therefore the angle
ABC is also equal unto the angle FED. And by the same reason the angle ACB is
equal unto ye angle DFE^ and moreover, the angle BAC unto the angle EDF.
Wherefore the triangle ABC is equiangle unto the triangle DEF. If two triangles
therefore have their sides proportional, the triangles shall be equiangle, and
those angles in them shall be equal, under which are subtended sides of like
proportion: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 6. Theoreme. The 6. Proposition. If there be two triangles whereof the one
has one angle equal to one angle of the other, and the sides including the
equal angles be proportional: the triangles shall be equiangle, and those
angles in them shall be equal, under which are subtended sides of like
proportion.
SVppose that there be two triangles ABC, and DEF, which let have the angle BAC
of the one triangle equal unto the angle EDF of the other triangle, and let
the sides including the equal angles be proportional, that is, as BA is to
AC, so let ED be to DF. Then I say, that ye triangle ABC is equiangle unto the
triangle DEF: and the angle ABC is equal unto the angle DEF, and the angle ACB
equal unto the angle DFE, which ^ngles are subte^ded to sides of like
proportion. Unto the right line DF, and to the point in it D (by the 23. of the
first) describe unto either of ye angles BAC and EDF, Constructio^.
an equal angle FDG. And unto the right line DF, and unto the point in it F
(by ye same) describe unto ye angle AC^ an equal angle DFG. And forasmuch as
the two angles BAC and ACB, are (by the 17. of the first) less then two right
angles: therefore also the two angles EDG and DFG, are less then two right
angles. Wherefore ye lines DG and FG being produced, shall co^curre (by the 5.
petition). Let the^ concur in the point G. Wherefore DFG is a triangle.
Wherefore the angle remaining ABC is equal unto the angle remaining DGF (by
the 32. of the first). Wherefore the triangle ABC is equiangle unto the
triangle DGF. Wherefore as BA is in proportion to AC, so is GD to DF (by the 4.
of the sixth). But it is supposed, that as BA is to AC, so is ED to DF.
Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as ED is to DF, so is GD to DF. Wherefore
(by the 9. of the fifth) ED is equal unto DG. And DF is common unto them both.
Now then there are two sides ED and DF equal unto two sides GD and DF: and the
angle EDF (by supposition) is equal unto the angle GDF. Wherefore (by the 4.
of the first) the base OF is equal unto the base GF, and the triangle DEF is
(by the same) equal unto the triangle GDF, and the other angles remaining in
them are equal the one to the other, under which are subtended equal sides.
Wherefore the angle DFG is equal unto the angle DFE: and the angle DGF unto
the angle DEF. But the angle DFG is (by construction) equal unto ye angle ACB.
And the angle DGF is as it has been proved, equal to ye angle ABC. Wherefore
also ye angle ACB is equal unto the angle DFE. And ye angle ABC is equal to
the angle DEF. But by supposition the angle BAC is equal unto the angle EDF.
Wherefore the triangle ABC is equiangle unto the triangle DEF. If therefore
there be two triangles, whereof the one has one angle equal to one angle of
the other, and if also the sides including the equal angles be proportional:
then shall the triangles also be equiangle, and those angles in them shall be
equal, under which are subtended sides of like proportion: which was required
to be proved.

The 7. Theoreme. The 7. Proposition. If there be two tria^gles, whereof the one
has one angle equal to one angle of the other, and the sides which include the
other angles, be proportional, and if either of the other angles remaining be
either less or not less then a right angle: the^ shall the triangles be
equiangle, and those angles in them shall be equal, which are contained under
the sides proportional.
SVppose that there be two triangles ABC and DEF, which let have one angle of
the one, equal to one angle of the other, namely, the angle BAC equal unto
the angle EDF. And let the sides which include the other angles, namely, the
angles ABC and DEF be proportional, so that as AB is to BC, so let DE be to
OF. And let the other angles remaining, namely, ACD and DFE be first either of
them less then a right angle. Then I say that the triangle ABC is equiangle
unto the triangle DEF. And that the angle ABC is equal unto the angle DEF, The
first part of this proposition.
namely, the angles which are contained under the sides proportional, and that
the angle remaining, namely, ye angle C is equal unto the angle remaining,
namely, to ye angle F. For first the angle ABC is either equal to the angle
DEF, or else unequal. If the angle ABC be equal to the angle DEF,
Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
then the angle remaining, namely, ACB, shall be equal to the angle remaining
DFE (by the corollary of the 32. of the first) And therefore the triangles ABC
and DEF are equiangle. But if the angle ABC be unequal unto the angle DEF,
then is the one of them greater then the other. Let the angle ABC be the
greater, and unto the right line AB and unto the point in it B (by the 23. of
the first) describe unto the angle DEF an equal angle ABG. And forasmuch as
the angle A is equal unto the angle D, and the angle ABG is equal unto the
angle DEF, therefore the angle remaining AGB is equal unto the angle remaining
DFE (by the corollary of the 32. of the first. Wherefore the triangle ABG is
equiangle unto the triangle DEF. Wherefore (by the 4. of the sixth) as the side
AB is to the side BG, so is the side DE to the side OF. But by suppposition the
side DE is to the side OF, as the side AB is to the side BC. Wherefore (by the
11. of the fifth) as the side AB is to the side BC so is the same side AB to
the side BG. Wherefore AB has to either of these BC and BG one and the same
proportion, and therefore (by the 9. of the fifth) BC is equal unto BG.
Wherefore (by the 5. of the first) ye angle BGC is equal unto ye angle BCG:
but by supposition ye angle BCG is less then a right angle. Wherefore the angle
BGC is also less then a right angle. Wherefore (by the 13. of the first) the
side angle unto it, namely, AGB is greater then a right angle, and it is
already proved that the same angle is equal unto the angle F. Wherefore the
angle F is also greater then a right angle. But it is supposed to be less
which is absurd. Wherefore the angle ABC is not unequal unto the angle DEF,
wherefore it is equal unto it. And the angle A is equal unto the angle D by
supposition. Wherefore the angle remaining, namely, C, is equal unto the angle
remaining, namely, to F (by the corollary of the 32. of the first) Wherefore the
triangle ABC is equiangle unto the triangle DEF. The second part of this
proposition.


But now suppose that either of the angles ACB and DFE be not less then a
right angle. That is, let either of them be a right angle, or either of them
greater then a right angle. Then I say again that in that case also the
triangle ABC is equiangle unto the triangle DEF. For if either of them be a
right angle, forasmuch as all right angles are (by the 4. peticion) equal the
one to the other, straight way will follow the intent of the proposition. But
if either of them be greater then a right angle, then the same order of
construction that was before being kept, we may in like sort prove that the
side BC is equal unto the side BG. Wherefore also the angle BCG is equal unto
the angle BGC. But the angle BCG is greater then a right angle. Wherefore also
the angle BGC is greater the^ a right angle. Wherefore two angles of the
triangle BGC are greater then two right angles: which (by the 17. of the first)
is impossible. Wherefore the angle ABC is not unequal unto the angle DEF. And
therefore is it equal: but the angle A is equal unto the angle D (by
supposition) Wherefore the angle remaining, namely, C is equal unto the angle
remaining, namely, to F (by the corollary of the 32. of the first). Wherefore
the triangle ABC is equiangle unto the triangle DEF. If therefor there be two
triangles whero^ the one has one angle equal to one angle o^ the other, and
the sides which include the other angle be proportional, and if either of the
other angles remaining be either less or not less then a right angle, the
triangle shall be equiangle, and those angles in them shall be equal which are
contained under sides proportional: which was required to be proved.

The 8. Theoreme. The 8. Proposition. If in a rectangle triangle be drawn from
the right angle unto the base a perpendicular line, the perpendicular line
shall divide the triangle into two triangles like unto the whole, and also like
the one to the other.
SVppose that there be a rectangle triangle ABC, whose right angle let be BAC:
and (by the 12. of the first) from the point A to the line BC let there be
drawn a perpendicular line AD, Construction.
which perpendicular line let divide the whole triangle ABC into these two
triangles ABD and ADC. (Note that this perpendicular line AD, drawn from the
right angle to the base, must needs fall within the triangle ABC, and so
divide the triangle into two triangles. For if it should fall without, then
producing the side BC unto the perpendicular line, there should be made a
triangle, whose outward angle being an acute angle, should be less then the
inward and opposite angle which is a right angle: which is contrary to the 16.
of the first. Neither can it fall upon any of the sides AB or AC for th^n two
angles of one and the self same triangle should not be less than ^wo right
angles, contrary to the self same 17. of the first. Wherefore it fall^^h
within the triangle ABC)^ Then I say, that either of these triangles ABD and
ADC, are like unto the whole triangle ABC, and moreover, that they are like the
one to the other. First that the triangle ABD is like unto the whole triangle
ABC is thus proved. Demonstration.
Forasmuch as (by the 4. petition) the angle BAC is equal unto the angle ADB,
for either of them is a right angle. And in the two triangles ABC and ABD the
angle B is common. Wherefore the angle remaining, namely, ACB is (by the
Corollary of the 32. of the first) equal unto the angle remaining, namely, to
BAD. Wherefore the triangle ABC is equiangle unto the triangle ABD. Wherefore
the sides which contain the equal angles, are (by the 4. of the sixth)
proportional. Wherefore as the side CB^ which subtendeth ye right angle of the
triangle ABC, is unto the side BA which subtendeth the right angle of the
triangle ABD, so is the same side AB which subtendeth the angle C of the
triangle ABC, unto the side BD which subtendeth ye angle BAD of the triangle
ABD, which is equal unto the angle C: and moreover, the side AC unto the side
AD which subtend the angle B common to both the triangles. Wherefore the
triangle ABC is like unto the triangle ABD (by the 1. definition of the sixth).
In like manner also may we prove, that the triangle ADC is like unto the
triangle ABC. For the right angle ADC is equal to the right angle BAC, and the
angle at the point C is common to either of those triangles. Wherefore the
angle remaining, namely, DAC is equal to the angle remaining^ namely, to ABC
(by ye Corollary of the 32. of the first). Wherefore the triangles ABC and ADC
are equiangle. And therefore (by the 4. of the sixth) the sides which are about
the equal angles are proportional. Wherefore as in the triangle ABC the side
BC is to the side CA, so in the triangle ADC is the side AC to the side DC: and
again, as in the triangle ABC the side CA is to the side AB, so in the
triangle ADC is the side CD to the side DA. And moreover, as in the triangle
ABC the side CB is to the side BA, so in the triangle ADC is the side CA to the
side AD. Wherefore the triangle ADC is like unto the whole triangle ABC.
Wherefore either of these triangles ABD, and ADC is like unto ye whole triangle
ABC.

I say also, that the triangles ABD and ADC are like the one to the other. For
forasmuch as the right angle BDA is equal unto ye right angle ADC (by the 4.
petition) and as it has already been proved, the angle BAD is equal unto the
angle C: therefore the angle remaining, namely, B is equal unto the angle
remaining, namely, to DAC (by the Corollary of the 3^. of the first). Wherefore
the triangle ABD is equiangle unto the triangle ADC. Wherefore as the side BD
which in the triangle ABD subtendeth the angle BAD is unto the side DA which in
the triangle ADC subtendeth the angle C which is equal unto the angle BAD, so
is the side AD which in ye triangle ABD subtendeth the angle B, unto the side
DC which in the triangle ADC subtendeth the angle DAC which is equal unto the
angle B: and moreover, so is the side BA unto the side AC which subtende the
right angles. Wherefore the triangle ABD is like unto the triangle ADC. If
therefore in a rectangle triangle be drawn from the right angle unto the base
a perpendicular line, the perpendicular line shall divide the triangle into two
triangles like unto the whole, and also like the one to the other: which was
required to be proved.

Corollary.
Hereby it is manifest, that if in a rectangle triangle be drawn from the
right angle unto the base a perpendicular line, the same line drawn is a mean
proportional between the sections of the base: and moreover, between the whole
base and either of the sections, the side annexed to the said section is the
mean proportional. For is was proved, that as CD is to DA, so is DA to DB:
and moreover, as CB is to BA, so is BA to BD: and finally, as BC is to CA, so
is CA to CD.

The 1. Problem. The 9. Proposition. A right line being given, to cut of from
it any part appointed.
LEt the right line given be AB. It is required that from the same line AB be
cut of any part appointed. Suppose that a third part be appointed to be cut of.
Construction.
From ye point A draw a right line AC making with the line AB an angle: and in
the line AC take a point at all adventures, which let be D. And beginning at D
put unto AD two equal lines DE and EC (by the 2. of the first). And draw a
right line from B to C: and by the point D (by the ^1. of the first) draw unto
BC a parallel line DF. Demonstration.
Now forasmuch as unto one of y^ sides of the triangle ABC, namely, unto ye
side BC is drawn a parallel line FD, it follows by ye 2. of this book,
that as CD is in proportion unto DA, so is BF to FA. But (by construction) CD
is double to DA. Wherefore y^ line BF is also double to the line FA. Wherefore
the line BA is treble unto the line AF. Wherefore from the right line^ given AB,
is cut of a third part appointed, namely, AF: which was required to be done.

The 2. Problem. The 10. Proposition. To divide a right line given not
divided, like unto a right line given being divided.
SVppose that the right line given not divided be AB, and the right line given
being divided, let be AC. It is required to divide ye line AB which is not
divided like unto the line AC which is divided. Construction.
Suppose the line AC be divided in the points D and E, and let y^ lines AB and
AC so be put, that they make an angle at all adventures, and draw a line from B
to C, and by the points D and E draw unto the line BC (by the 31. of the
first) two parallel lines DF and EG: and by the point D unto the line AB (by
the same) draw a parallel line DHK. Wherefore either of these figure^ FH and HB
are parallelogrammes. Wherefore the line DH is equal unto the line FG, and the
line HK is equal unto the line GB. Demonstration.
And because to one of the sides of the triangle DKC, namely, to the side KC is
drawn a parallel line HE, therefore the line CE (by the 2. of the sixth) is in
proportion unto the line ED as the line KH is to the line HD: but the line KH
is equal unto the line BG, and the line HD is equal unto the line GF. Wherefore
(by the 11. of the fifth) as CE is unto ED, so is BG to GF. Again because to
one of the sides of the triangle AGE, namely, to GE is drawn a parallel line
FD, therefore the line ED (by the 2. of the sixth) is in proportion unto the
line DA, as the line GF is to the line FA. And it is already proved that as CE
is to ED, so is BG to GF. Wherefore as CE is to ED, so is BG to GF, and as ED
is to DA, so is GF to FA. Wherefore the right line given not divided, namely,
AB is divided like unto the right line given being divided, which is AC: which
was required to be done.

A Corollary out of Flussates. A Corollary out of Flussates.

By this Proposition we may divide any right line given, according to the
proportion of any right lines given. For let those right lines having
proportion be joined together directly, that they may make all one right line,
and then join them to the line given anglewise. And so proceed as in the
proposition, where you see that the right line given AB is divided into the
right lines AF, FG and GB which have the self same proportion that the right
lines AD, DE, and EC have.

By this and the former proposition also may a right line given be easily
divided into what parts so ever you will name. By this and the former
propo^ition may a right line be divided into what parts soever you will.
As if you will divide the line AB into three equal parts, let the line DE be
made equal to the line AD, and the line EC made equal to the same by the
third of the first. And then using the self same manner of construction that
was before: the line AB shall be divided into three equal parts. And so of
any kind of parts whatsoever.

The 3. Problem. The 11. Proposition. Unto two right lines given, to find a
third in proportion with them.
SVppose that there be two right lines given BA and AC, and let them be so put
that they comprehend an angle howsoever it be. It is required to find unto BA
and unto AC a third line in proportion. Construction.
Produce ye lines AB and AC unto the points D and E. And unto the line AC (by
the 2. of the first) put an equal line BD, and draw a line from B to C. And by
the point D (by the 31. of the first) draw unto the line BC a parallel line
DE, which let concur with the line AC in the point E. Demonstration.
Now forasmuch as unto one of the sides of the triangle ADE, namely, to DE is
drawn a parallel line BC: therefore as AB is in proportion unto BD, so (by the
2. of the sixth) is AC unto CE. But the line BD is equal unto the line AC.
Wherefore as the line AB is to the line AC, so is the line AC to the line CE.
Wherefore unto the two right lines given AB and AC is found a third line CE in
proportion with them: which was required to be done.

An other way after Pelitarius.
Let the lines AB and BC be set directly in such sort that they both make one
right line. An other way after Pelitarius.
Then from the point A erect the line AD making with the line AB an angle at
all adventures. And put the line AD equal to the line BC. And draw a right
line from D to B which produce beyond the point B unto the point E. And by the
point C draw unto the line DA a parallel line CE concurring with the line DE in
the point E. Then I say that the line CE is the third line proportional with
the lines AB and BC. For for^asmuch as by the 15. of the first, the angle B of
the triangle ABD is equal to the angle B of the triangle CBE, and by the 29.
of the same, the angle A is equal to the angle C, and the angle D to the angle
E: therefore by the 4. of this book AB is to DA, as BC is to CE. Wherefore (by
the 11. of the fifth) AB is to BC as BC is to CE: which was required to be done.

An other way also after Pelitarius.
Let the lines AB and BC be so joined together, An ot^e^ way after Pelitarius.
that they may make a right angle, namely, ABC. And draw a line from A to C,
and from the point C draw unto the line AC a perpendicular CD (by the 11. of
the first) And produce the line CD till it concur with the line AB produced
unto the point D. Then I say that the line BD is a third line proportional
with the lines AB and BC: which thing is manifest by the corollary of the 8. of
this book.

The 4. Problem. The 12. Proposition. Unto three right lines given to find a
fourth in proportion with them.
SVppose that the three right lines given be A, B, C. It is required to find
unto A, B, C, a fourth line in proportion with them. Let there be taken two
right lines DE and DF comprehending an angle as it shall happen, namely, EDF.
Construction.
And (by the 2. of the first) unto the line A put an equal line DG. And unto
the line B (by the same) put an equal line GE. And moreover, unto ye line C
put an equal line DH. Then draw a line from G to H. And by the point E (by the
31. of the first) draw unto the line GH a parallel line OF. Now forasmuch as
unto one of the sides of the triangle DEF, Demonstration.
namely, unto y^ side OF is drawn a parallel line GH: therefore (by the 2. of
the sixth) as the line DG is to the line GE, so is the line DH to the line HF.
But the line DG is equal unto the line A, and the line GE is equal unto the
line B, and the line DH unto the line C. Wherefore as the line A is unto the
line B, so is the line C unto the line HF. Wherefore unto the three right lines
given A, B, C, is found a fourth line HF in proportion with them: which was
required to be done.

An other way after Campane.
Suppose that there be three right lines AB, BC, and BD. It is required to add
unto them a fourth line in proportion with them. An other way after Campane.
Join AB the first, with BD the third, in such sort that they both make one
right line, namely, AD. And upon the said line AB erect from the point B the
second line BC making an angle at all adventures. And draw a line from A to C.
Then by the point D draw the line DE parallel to the line AC, which produce
until it concur in the point E, with the line CB being likewise produced to
the point E. Then I say that the line BE is the fourth line in proportion with
the lines AB, BC, and BD: so that as AB is to BC, so is BD to BE. For forasmuch
as by the 15 and 29. of the first the two triangles ABC and DBE are equiangle,
therefore (by the 4. of this book) AB is to BC, as BD is to BE: which was
required to be done.

The 5. Problem. The 13. Proposition. Unto two right lines given, to find out
a mean proportional.
SVppose the two right lines given to be AB and BC. It is required between
th^se two lines AB and BC to find out a mean line proportional. Let the
lines AB and BC be so joined together that they both make one right line,
namely, AC. Construction.
And upon the line AC describe a semicircle ADC, and from the point B raise up
unto the line AC (by the 11. of the first) a perpendicular line BD, cutting the
circumference in the point D: and draw a line from A to D, and an other from D
to C. Now forasmuch as (by the 31. of the third) the angle in the semicircle
ADC is a right angle, Demonstration.
and for that in the rectangle triangle ADC is drawn from the right angle unto
the base a perpendicular line DB: therefore (by the Corollary of the 8. of the
sixth) the line DB is a mean proportional between the segme^tes of the base AB
and BC. Wherefore between the two right lines given, AB and BC, is found a
mean proportional DB: which was required to be done.

A Proposition added by Pelitarius.
A mean proportional being given, to find out in a line given the two
extremes. A proposition added by Pelitarius.
Now it behooves that the mean given be not greater then the half of the line
given.

Suppose that the mean given be AB, and let the right line given be BC. It is
required in the line BC to find out two extremes, between which AB shall be the
mean^ proportional. So that yet the line AB be not greater then the half part
of the line BC. For so could it not be a mean. Join the lines AB and BC
directly in such sort, that they both make one right line, namely, AC. Then
upon the line BC describe the semicircle BEC. And from the point A erect unto
the line AC a perpendicular line AD: which line AD put equal unto the line AB.
And by the point D draw unto the line AC a parallel line DE, which undoubtedly
shall either cut or touch the semicircle, as in the point E, for that the line
AD is not greater then the semidiameter. Then from the point E draw unto the
line BC a perpendicular line OF (by the 12. of the first) Then I say that the
line BC is so divided in the point F, that the line AB is a mean proportional
between the lines BF and FC. Which thing is manifest (by the 31. of the third)
and corollary of the 8. of this book. For the line FE is equal to the line AD
by the 34. of the first, and so is equal to the line AB: then if we draw the
right lines BE and CE, there shall be made a rectangle triangle BEC. And so by
the said corollary, the line BF shall be to the line FE (and therefore to the
line AB) as the line FE is to the line FC: which was required to be done.

Flussates puts this Proposition added by Pelitarius as a corollary
following of this 13. proposition.

The 9. Theoreme. The 14. Proposition. In equal parallelogrammes which have
one angle of the one equal unto one angle of the other, the sides shall be
reciprokall, namely, those sides which contain the equal angles. And if
parallelogrammes which having one angle of the one, equal unto one angle of the
other, have also their sides reciprokal, namely, those which contain the
equal angles, they shall also be equal.
SVppose that there be two equal Parallelogrammes AB and BC, having the angle
B of the one equal unto the angle B of the other. The first part of this
proposition.
And let the lines DB and DE be set directly in such sort that they both make
one right line, namely, DE. And then (by the 14. of the first) shall the lines
FB and BG be so set that they shall make also one right line, namely, GF. Then
I say, that the sides of the parallelogrammes AB and BC, which contain the
equal angles, are reciprocally proportional: that is, as BD is to BE, so is
GB to BF. Make complete the parallelogramme FE by producing the sides AF and
CE, till they concur in the point H. Now forasmuch as the parallelogramme AB
is (by supposition) equal unto the parallelogramme BC, and there is a certain
other parallelogramme FE: Demonstration of the of the same.
therefore (by the 7. of the fifth) as the parallelogra^me AB is to the
parallelogramme FE, so is the parallelogramme BC to the parallelogramme FE. But
as the parallelogramme AB is to ye parallelogramme FE, so is the side DB to the
side BE (by the first of this book). And (by the same) as the parallelogramme
BC is to the parallelogramme FE, so is the side GB to the side BF. Wherefore
also (by the 11. of the fifth) as the side DB is to the side BE, so is the side
GB to the side BF. Wherefore in the parallelogrammes AB and BC the sides which
contain the equal angles, are reciprokally proportional: which was first
required to be proved.

But now suppose that the sides about the equal angles be reciprokally
proportional so that as the side DB is to the side BE, The second part which
is the converse of the first.
so let the side GB be to the side BF. Then I say, yt the parallelogramme AB is
equal unto ye parallelogramme BC. For, for that as the side DB is to the side
BE, so is the side GB to the side BF: but as the side DB is to the side BE, so
(by the 1. of the sixth) is the parallelogramme AB to the parallelogramme FE:
and as the side GB is to the side BF, so is the parallelogramme BC to the
parallelogramme FE. Wherefore also (by the 11. of the fifth) as the
parallelogramme AB is to the parallelogra^me FE, so is the parallelogramme BC
to the same parallelogramme FE. Wherefore the parallelogramme AB is equal unto
the parallelogramme BC (by the 9. of the fifth). Wherefore in equal and
equiangle parallelogrammes the sides which contain the equal angles are
reciprokall: and if in equiangle parallelogrammes the sides which contain the
equal angles be reciprokall, the parallelogrammes also shall be equal: which
was required to be proved.

The 10. Theoreme. The 15. Proposition. In equal triangles which have one angle
of the one equal unto one angle of the other, those sides are reciprokal,
which include the equal angles. And those tria^gles which having one angle of
the one equal unto one angle of the other, have also their sides which include
the equal angles reciprokal, are also equal.
SVppose that there be two equal triangles ABC, and ADE having one angle of
the one equal unto one angle of the other, namely, the angle BAC equal unto
the angle DAE. Then I say that in those triangles ABC and ADE, the sides which
include ye equal angles, are reciprokallie proportional, The first part of
this proposition.
that is, as the side CA is to the side AD, so is the side EA to the side AB.
For let ye lines CA and AD be so put, yt they both make directly one right
line. And so also the lines EA and AB shall both make one right line (by the 14.
of the first) And draw a line from B to D. Now forasmuch as (by supposition)
the triangle ABC is equal unto the triangle ADE. Demonstration of the same.
And there is a certain other triangle BAD, unto which the two equal
triangles being compared, it will follow by the 7. of the fifth, that as the
triangle ABC is unto the triangle BAD, so is ye triangle EAD to the same
triangle BAD. But as the triangle ABC is to the tria^gle BAD, so by the 1. of
the sixth, is the base CA to the base AD: and as the triangle EAD is to the
triangle BAD, so (by the same) is the base EA to the base AB. Wherefore (by the
11. of the fifth) as the side CA is to the side AD, so is the side EA to the
side AB. Wherefore in the triangles ABC and ADE the sides which include the
equal angles are reciprokally proportional.

But now suppose that in the triangles ABC and ADE, the sides which include the
equal angles, be reciprokally proportional, The second part which is the
converse of the first.
so that as the side CA is to the side AD, so let the side EA be to the side
AB. Then I say that the triangle ABC is equal unto the triangle ADE. For
again draw a line from B to D. And for that as the line CA is to the line AD,
so is the line EA to the line AB, but as the line CA is to the line AD, so is
the triangle ABC to the triangle BAD, and as the line EA is to the line AB so
is the triangle EAD to the triangle BAD. Wherefore as the triangle ABC is to the
triangle BAD so is the triangle EAD to ye same triangle BAD. Wherefore either of
these triangles ABC and EAD have unto y^ triangle BAD one and y^ self same
proportion. Wherefore (by the 9. of the fifth) the triangle ABC is equal unto
the triangle EAD. If therefore there be taken equal triangles having one angle
of the one equal unto one angle of the other, those sides in them shall be
reciprokal, which include the equal angles. and those triangles which having
one angle of the one equal unto one angle of the other, have also their sides
which include the equal angles reciprokal, shall also be equal: which was
required to be proved.

The 11. Theoreme. The 16. Proposition. If there be four right lines in
proportion, the rectangle figure comprehended under the extremes: is equal to
the rectangle figure contained under the means. And if the rectangle figure
which is contained under the extremes, be equal unto the rectangle figure
which is contained under the means: then are those four lines in proportion.
SVppose that there b^ four right lines in proportion, namely, AB, CD, E, and
F: so that as the line AB is to the line CD, so let the line E be to the line
F. Then I say, that the rectangle figure comprehended under the extremes AB and
F, Demonstration of the first part.
is equal unto the rectangle figure contained under the means CD and E. From
the point A (by the 11. of the first) raise up unto the right line AB a
perpendicular line AG. And (by the same) from the point C unto the right line
CD raise up a perpendicular line CHAPTER And (by the 2. of the first) put the line
AG equal unto the line F, and put also ye line CH equal unto the line E, and
make complete the parallelogrammes GB and HD. Now for that by supposition as
the line AB is to the line CD, so is the line E to the line F. But the line E
is equal unto the line CH, and the line F unto the line AG, therefore as the
line AB is to the line CD, so is the line CH to the line AG. Wherefore in the
parallelogra^mes BG and DH the sides which include ye equal angles, are
reciprokally proportional. But equiangle parallelogrammes whose sides which
include the equal angles, are reciprokall, are also equal (by the 14. of the
sixth). Wherefore the parallelogramme BG is equal unto the parallelogra^me DH.
But the parallelogramme BG is that which is contained under the lines AB and F,
for the line AG is put equal unto the line F. And the parallelogramme DH is
that which is contained under the lines CD and E, for the line CH is put equal
unto the line E. Wherefore the rectangle figure contained under the lines AB
and F, is equal unto the rectangle figure contained under the lines CD and E.
The second part which is the converse of the first.


But now suppose that the rectangle figure comprehended under the lines AB and
F, be equal unto the rectangle figure comprehended under ye lines CD and E.
Then I say, that the four right lines AB, CD, E and F, are proportional, that
is, as the line AB is to the line CD, so is the line E to the line F. The same
order of construction that was before being kept, forasmuch as that which is
contained under the lines AB and F is equal unto that which is contained under
the lines CD and E, but that which is contained under the lines AB and F is the
parallelogramme BG, for the line AG is equal unto the line F. And that also
which is contained under the lines CD and E is the parallelogramme DH, for the
line CH is equal unto the line E. Wherefore the parallelogramme BG is equal
unto the parallelogramme DH, and they are also equiangle. But in
parallelogrammes equal and equiangle the sides which include the equal angles
are reciprokall (by the 14. of the sixth). Wherefore as the line AB is to the
line CD, so is the line CH to the line AG, but the line CH is equal unto the
line E, and the line AG is equal unto ye line F. Wherefore as the line AB is
to the line CD, so is the line E to the line F. If therefore there be four
right lines in proportion, the rectangle figure comprehended under the
extremes, is equal to the rectangle figure contained under the means. And if
the rectangle figure which is contained under the extremes, be equal unto the
rectangle figure which is contained under the means, then are those four
lines in proportion^ which was required to be proved.

The 12. Theoreme. The 17. Proposition. If there be three right lines in
proportion, the rectangle figure comprehended under the extremes, is equal
unto the square that is made of the mean. And if the rectangle figure which is
made of the extremes, be equal unto the square made of the mean, then are
those three right lines proportional.
SVppose that there be three lines in proportion A, B, C, so that as A is to B,
so let B be to C. Then I say that the rectangle figure comprehended under ye
lines A and C is equal unto ye square made of the line B. The first part of
th^^ Theoreme.
Unto the line B (by the 2. of the first) put an equal line D. And because by
supposition) as A is to B, so is B to C, but B is equal unto D, wherefore (by
the 7. of the fifth) as A is to B, so is D to C, but if there be four right
lines proportional, the rectangle figure comprehended under the extremes is
equal unto the rectangle figure comprehended under the means (by the 16. of
the sixth). Wherefore that which is contained under the lines A and C is equal
unto that which is comprehended under the lines B and D. But that which is
contained under the lines B and D, is the square of the line B, for the line B
is equal unto the line D. Wherefore the rectangle figure comprehended under the
lines A and C is equal unto the square made of the line B.

The second part which is the converse of the first.
But now suppose that that which is comprehended under the lines A and C be
equal unto the square made of the line B. Then also I say, that as the line A
is to the line B, so is the line B to the line C. The same order of
construction that was before, being kept, forasmuch as yt which is contained
under the lines A and C is equal unto the square which is made of the line B.
But the square which is made of the line B is that which is contained under ye
lines B and D, for the line B is put equal unto the line D. Wherefore that
which is contained under the lines A and C is equal unto that which is
contained under the lines B and D. But if the rectangle figure comprehended
under the extremes, be equal unto the rectangle figure comprehended under the
mean lines, the four right lines shall be proportional (by the 16. of the
sixth) Wherefore as the line A is to the line B, so is the line D to the line C.
But the line B is equal unto the line D. Wherefore as the line A is to the line
B, so is B to the line C. If therefore there be three right lines in
proportion, the rectangle figure comprehended under the extremes, is equal
unto the square that is made of the mean. And if the rectangle figure which is
contained under the extremes, be equal unto the square made of the mean, then
are those three right lines proportional: which was required to be demonstrated.

A Co^ollary.
Corollary added by Flussates.
Hereby we gather that every right line is a mean proportional between every
two right lines which make a rectangle figure equal to the square of the same
right line.

The 6. Problem. The 18. Proposition. Upon a right line given, to describe a
rectiline figure like, and in like sort situate unto a rectiline figure given.
SVppose that the ri^ht line given be AB^ and let the rectiline figure given be
EG. It is required upon the right line given AB to describe a rectiline figure
like, and in like sort situate unto the rectiline figure given GE. Draw a line
from H to F, and unto the right line AB and to ye p^i^t in it A, Description of
the rectiline figure r^quired.
make unto the angle E an equal angle DAB (by the 23. of the first) and unto
the right line AB and unto the point in it B (by the same) make unto the angle
EFH an equal angle ABD. Wherefore ye angle remaining EHF is equal unto the
angle remaining ADB. Wherefore the triangle HEF is equiangle unto the triangle
DAB. Wherefore (by the 4. of the sixth) as the side HF is in proportion to the
side DB, so is the side HE to the side DA, and y^ side OF to the side AB.
Again (by the 23. of the first) unto the right line BD and unto ye point in it
D, make unto the angle FHG an equal angle BDC, and (by the same) unto the
right line BD and unto the point in (...) B, make unto the angle HFG an ^quall
angle DBC. Demonstration.
Wherefore the angle remaining, namely, G, is equal unto the angle remaining,
namely, to C. Wherefore the triangle HFG is equiangle unto the triangle DBC.
Wherefore (by the 4. of the sixth) as the side HF is in proportion to the side
DB, so is the side HG to the side DC, and the side GF to the side CB. And it is
already proved that as HF is to DB, so is HE to DA, and OF to AB. Wherefore (by
the 11. of the fifth) as EH is to AD, so is OF to AB, and HG to DC, and
moreover, GF to CB. And forasmuch as the angle EHF is equal unto the angle
ADB, and the angle FHG is equal unto the angle BDC: therefore the whole angle
EHG is equal unto the whole angle ADC, and by the same reason the angle EFG is
equal unto the angle ABC. But (by construction) the angle E is equal unto the
angle A, and the angle G is proved equal unto the angle C. Wherefore the
figure AC is equiangle, unto the figure EG, and those sides which in it include
the equal angles are proportional, as we have before proved. Wherefore the
rectiline figure AC is (by the first definition of the sixth) like unto the
re^^^line figure given EG^ Wherefore upon the right line given AB is described
a rectiline figure AC like and in like sort ^^^uat^ unto the rectiline figure
given EG: which was required to be done.

The 13. Theoreme. The 19. Proposition. Like triangles are one to the other in
double proportion that the sides of like proportion are.
SVppose the triangles like to be ABC and DEF, having the angle B of the one
triangle, equal unto the angle E of the other triangle, and as AB is to BC, so
let DE be to OF, so that let BC and OF be sides of like proportion. Then I say
that the proportion of the triangle ABC unto the triangle DEF is double to the
proportion of the side BC to the side OF. Unto the two lines BC and OF (by the
10. of the sixth) make a third line in proportion BG, so that as BC is to OF,
so let OF be to BG, and draw a line from A to G. Now forasmuch as AB is to BC,
as DE is to OF, therefore alternately (by the 16. of the fifth) as AB is to DE,
so is BC to OF. Demonstration.
But as BC is to OF, so is OF to BG, wherefore also (by the 11. of the fifth) as
AB is to DE, so is OF to BG. Wherefore the sides of the triangles ABG and DEF,
which include ye equal angles are reciprokally proportional. But if in
triangles having one angle of the one equal to one angle of ye other, the
sides which include ye equal angles, be reciprokal, the triangles also (by ye
15. the sixth) shall be equal. Wherefore the triangle ABG is equal unto ye
triangle DEF. And for yt as y^ line BC is to ye line OF, so is the line OF to
ye line BG: but if there be three lines in proportion, the first shall have to
the third double proportion that it has to the second (by the 10. definition
of the fifth) therefore the line BC has unto the line BG double proportion that
it has to the line OF. But as BC is to BG, so (by the 1. of the sixth) is the
triangle ABC to the triangle ABG. Wherefore the tiangle ABC is unto the triangle
ABG in double proportion that the side BC is to the side OF. But the triangle
ABG is equal to the triangle DEF. Wherefore also the triangle ABC is unto the
triangle DEF in double proportion that the side BC is to the side OF. Wherefore
like triangles are one to the other in double proportion that the sides of like
proportion are: which was required to be proved.

Corollary.
A Corollary.
Hereby it is manifest that if there be three right lines in proportion, as the
first is to the third, so is the triangle described upon the first, unto the
triangle described upon the second, so that the said triangles be like, and in
like ^ort described, for it has been proved that as the line CB is to the line
BG, so is the triangle ABC to the triangle DEF: which was required to be
demonstrated.

The 14. Theoreme. The 20. Proposition. Like Poligonon figures, are divided
into like triangles and equal in number, and of like proportion to the whole.
And the one Poligonon fig^re is to the other Poligonon figure in double
proportion that one of the sides of like proportion is to one of the sides of
like proportion.
SVppose yt the like Poligonon figures be ABCDE, and FGHKL, having the angle at
the point F equal to the angle at the point A, and the angle at the point ^
equal to the angle at the point B, and the angle at the point H equal to y^
angle at the point C: and so of the rest. And moreover, as the side AB is to
the side BC, so let the side FG be to the side GH, and as the side BC is to the
side CD, so let the side GH be to the side HK and so forth. And let the sides
AB and FG be sides of like proportion. Then I say first, The first part of this
Theoreme.
that these Poligonon figures ABCDE and FGHKL, are divided into like triangles
and equal in number. For draw these right lines, AC, AD, FH, and FK^ And
forasmuch as (by supposition, that is, by reason the figure ABCDE is like unto
the figure FGHKL) the angle B is equal unto the angle G, and as the side AB is
to the side BC, so is the side FG to the side GH, it follows that the two
triangles ABC and FGH have one angle of the one equal to one angle of the
other, and have also the sides about the equal angles proportional. Wherefore
(by the 6. of the sixth) the triangle ABC is equiangle unto the triangle FGH.
And those angles in the^ are equal, under which are subtended sides of like
proportion: namely, the angle BAC is equal to the angle GFH, and the angle BCA
to the angle GHF. Wherefore (by the 4. of the sixth) the sides which are about
the equal angles are proportional: and the sides which are subtended under
the equal angles are of like proportion. Wherefore as AC is to BC, so is FH to
GH. But by supposition as BC is to CD, so is GH to HK. Wherefore of equality
(by the 22. of the fifth) as AC is to CD, so is FH to HK. And forasmuch as by
supposition the whole angle BCD is equal to the whole angle GHK, and it is
proved that the angle BCA is e^^all to the angle GHF: therefore the angle
remaining ACD is equal to the angle remaining FHK (by the 3. common sentence).
Wherefore the ^ria^gl^s ACD, and FHK, have again one angle of the one equal
to one angle of the other, and the sides which are about the equal sides are
proportional. Wherefore (by the ^ame sixth of this book) the triangles ACD and
FHK are equiangle. And (by the 4. of this book) the sides, which are about the
equal angles (...) proportional. And by the same reason may we prove that the
triangle AD^ is equiangle unto the triangle FKL. And that the sides which are
about the equal angles are proportional. Wherefore the triangle ABC is like
to ye triangle FGH, and the triangle ACD to the triangle FHK, and also the
triangle ADE to the triangle FKL (by the first definition of this sixth book).
Wherefore the Poligonon figures given ABCDE, and FGHKL, are divided into
triangles like and equal in number.

The second part demonstrated.
I say moreover, that the triangles are the one to the other, and to the whole
Poligonon figures proportional: that is, as the triangle ABC is to the
triangle FGH, so is the triangle ACD to the triangle FHK, and ye triangle ADE
to the triangle FKL: and as the triangle ABC is to the triangle FGH, so is the
Poligonon figure ABCDE to the Poligonon figure FGHKL. For forasmuch as the
triangle ABC is like to the triangle FGH, and AC and FH are sides of like
proportion, therefore the proportion of the triangle ABC to the triangle FGH is
double to the proportion of the side AC to the (...) FH (by ye former
Proposition). And therefore also the proportion of the triangle ACD to the
triangle FKH, is double to the proportion that the same side AC has to the
side FH. Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as the triangle ABC is to the
triangle FGH, so is the triangle ACD to the triangle FHK. Again, forasmuch as
the triangle ACD is like to the triangle FHK, and the sides AD and FK are of
like proportion: therefore the proportion of the triangle ACD to the triangle
FHK is double to the proportion of the side AD to the side FK (by the foresaid
19. of the sixth). And by the same reason the proportion of the triangle ADE to
ye triangle FKL, is double to the proportion of the same side AD to the side
FK. Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as the triangle ACD is to the triangle
FHK, so is the triangle ADE to the triangle FKL. But as the triangle ACD is to
the triangle FHK, so is it proved that the triangle ABC is to the triangle FGH.
Wherefore also (by the 11. of the fifth) as the triangle ABC is to the triangle
FGH, so is the triangle ADE to the triangle FKL. Wherefore the foresaid
triangles are proportional: namely, as ABC is to FGH, so is ACD to FHK, and
ADE to FKL. Wherefore (by the 12. of the fifth) as one of the antecedentes is to
one of the consequentes, so are all the antecedentes to all the consequentes.
Wherefore as the triangle ABC is to the triangle FGH, so is the Poligonon
figure ABCDE to the Poligonon figure FGHKL. Wherefore the triangles are
proportional both the one to the other, and also to the whole Poligonon
figures.

Lastly I say, The third part.
that the Poligonon figure ABCDE has to the Poligonon figure FGHKL a double
proportion to that which the side AB has to the side FG: which are sides of
like proportion. For it is proved, that as the triangle ABC is to the triangle
FGH, so is the Poligonon figure ABCDE to the Poligonon figure FGHKL. But the
triangle ABC has to the triangle FGH a double proportion to that which the
side AB has to the side FG (by the former 19. Proposition of this book): for
it is proved, that ye triangle ABC is like to the triangle FGH. Wherefore the
proportion of the Poligonon figure ABCDE to the Poligonon figure FGHKL is
double to the proportion of the side AB to the side FG: which are sides of like
proportion. Wherefore like Poligonon figures are divided. etc. as before^ which
was required to be proved.

The first Corollary.
Hereby it is manifest, that all like rectiline figures what soever, are the
one to the other in double proportion that the sides of like proportion are.
The first Corollary.
For any like rectiline figures whatsoever are by this Proposition divided into
like triangles and equal in number.

The second Corollary.
Hereby also it is manifest, that if there be three right lines proportional,
The second Corollary.
as the first is to the third, so is the figure described upon the first to
the figure described upon the second, so that the said figures be like and in
like sort described. For it is proved, that the proportion of the Poligonon
figure ABCDE to the Poligonon figure FGHKL is double to ye proportion of the
side AB to the side FG. And if (by the 11. of the sixth) unto the lines AB and
FG we take a third line in proportion, namely, MN, the first line, namely, AB
shall have unto the third line, namely, to MN, double proportion that it has
to the second line, namely, to FG (by the 10. definition of the fifth). Wherefore
as ye line AB is to the line MN, so is the rectiline figure ABC to the
rectiline figure FGH, the said rectiline figures being like and in like sort
described.

The 15. Theoreme. The 21. Proposition. Rectiline figures which are like unto
one and the same rectiline figure, are also like the one to the other.
SVppose there be two rectiline figures A and B like unto the rectiline figure
C. Then I say that the figure A is also like unto the figure B. For forasmuch
as the figure A is like unto the figure C, Demonstration.
it is also equiangle unto it (by the conversion of the first definition of the
sixth) and the sides including the equal angles shall be proportional. Again
forasmuch as the figure B is like unto the figure C, it is also (by the same
definition) equiangle unto it, and the sides about the equal angles are
proportional. Wherefore both these figures A and B are equiangle unto the
figure C, and the sides about the equal angles are proportional. Wherefore (by
the first common sentence) the figure A is equiangle unto the figure B, and the
sides about the equal angles are proportional, wherefore the figure B is like
unto the figure A, which was required to be proved.

The 16. Theoreme. The 22. Proposition. If there be four right lines
proportional, the rectiline figures also described upon them being like, and
in like sort situate, shall be proportional. And if the rectiline figures
upon them described be proportional, those right lines also shall be
proportional.
SVppose there be four right lines AB, CD, OF, and GH, and as AB is to CD, so
let OF be to GH. And upon the lines AB and CD (by the 1^. of the sixth) let
there be described two rectiline figures KAB, and LCD like the one to the
other, and in like sort situate. And upon the lines OF and GH (by the same) let
there be described also two rectiline figures MF and NH like the one to the
other, and in like sort situate. The first part of this proposition.
Then I say that as the ^igure KAB is to the figure LCD, so is the figure MF to
the figure NH. Unto the lines AB and CD (by the 11. of the sixth) make a third
line in proportion, namely, O: and unto the lines OF and GH in like sort make a
third line in a line proportion, namely, P. And for that as the line AB is to
the line CD, so is the line OF to the line GH, but as the line CD is to the
line O, so is the line GH to the line P. Wherefore of equality (by the 22. of
the fifth) as the line AB is unto the line O, so is the line OF to the line P.
But as the line AB is to the line O, so is the figure KAB to the figure LCD (by
the second corollary of the 20. of the sixth). And as the line OF is to the
line P, so is the figure M F to the figure NH. Wherefore (by the 11. of the
fifth) as the figure KAB is to the figure LCD, so is the figure M F to the
figure NH.

But now suppose that as the figure KAB is to the figure LCD, The second part
which is the converse of the first.
so is the figure M F to the figure NH, then I say that as the line AB is to
the line CD, so is the line OF to the line GH. As the line AB is to the line
CD, so (by the 1^. of the sixth) let the line OF be to the line QR, and upon
the line QR (by the 18. of the sixth) describe unto either of these figures MF
and NH a like figure, and in like sort situate SR. Now forasmuch as the line AB
is to the line CD, so is the line OF to the line QR, and upon the lines AB and
CD are described two figures like, and in like sort situate KAB and LCD, and
upon the lines OF and QR are described also two figures like, and in like sort
situate MF and SR, therefore as the figure KAB is to the figure LCD, so is the
figure MF to the figure SR: wherefore also (by the 11. of the fifth) as the
figure MF is to the figure SR, so is the figure MF to the figure NH, wherefore
the figure M F has to either of these figures NH, and SR one and the same
proportion, wherefore by the 9. of the fifth, the figure NH is equal unto the
figure SR. And it is unto it like, and in like sort situate. Note that this is
proved in the assumpt following.
But in like and equal rectiline figures being in like sort situate, the sides
of like proportion on which they are described are equal. Wherefore ye line GH
is equal unto the line QR. And because as the line AB is to the line CD, so is
the line OF to the line QR, but the line QR is equal unto the line GH,
therefore as the line AB is to he line CD, so is the line OF to the line GH. If
therefore there be four right lines proportional, the rectiline figures also
described upon them being like and in like sort situate shall be proportional
And if the rectiline figures upon them described being like and in like sort
situate be proportional, those right lines also shall be proportional: which
was required to be proved.

An Assumpt.
And now that in like and equal figures, being in like sort situate, the sides
of like proportion are also equal (which thing was before in this proposition
taken as granted) may thus be proved. An Assumpt.
Suppose yt the rectiline figures NH and SR be equal and like, and as HG is to
GN, so let RQ be to QS, and let GH and QR be sides of like proportion. Then I
say that the side RQ is equal unto the side GH. For if they be unequal, the
one of them is greater then the other, let the side RQ be greater then the side
HG. And for that as the line RQ is to the line QS, so is the line HG to the
line GN, and alternately also (by the 16. of the fifth) as the line RQ is to
the line HG, so is the line QS, to the line GN, but the line RQ is greater then
the line HG. Wherefore also the line QS is greater then ye line GN. Wherefore
also ye figure RS is greater then the figure HN but (by supposition) it is
equal unto it, which is impossible. Wherefore ye line QR is not greater then ye
line GH. In like sort also may we prove that it is not less then it, wherefore
it is equal unto it: which was required to be proved.

Flussates demonstrateth this second part more briefly, An other demo^stration
of the second part after Flussates.
by the first corollary of the ^0. of this book, thus. Forasmuch as the
rectiline figures are by supposition in one and the same proportion, and the
same proportion is double to the proportion of the sides AB to CD, and OF to GH
(by the foresaid corollary) the proportion also of the sides shall be one and
the self same (by the 7. common sentence) namely, the line AB shall be unto
the line CD as the line OF is to the line GH.

The 17. Theoreme. The 23. Proposition. Equiangle Parallelogrammes have the one
to the other that proportion which is composed of the sides.
SVppose the equiangle Parallelogrammes to be AC and CF, having the angle BCD
of the one equal to the angle ECG of the other. Then I say, that the
parallelogramme AC is unto the parallelogramme CF in that proportion which is
composed of the proportion of their sides, that is, of that which the side BC
has to the side CG, and of that which the side DC has to the side CE. Let the
lines BC and CG be so put that they both make one right line (by the 14. of the
first). Wherefore (by the same) the lines DC and CE shall make also one right
line. Make complete the parallelogramme DG by producing the sides AD and FG
till they concur in the point H, and let there be put a certain right line
K. And as the line BC is to the line CG, so (by the 12. of the sixth) put unto
the line K a line in the same proportion which let be L^ and as DC is to CE, so
unto L put a line in the same proportion, namely, M. Wherefore the proportions
of the lines K to L, and L to M, are one and ye same with the proportions of
the sides BC to CG, and D^ to CE: but the proportion of K to M, is composed of
the proportions of K to L, and L to M: Demonstration.
Wherefore the proportion of K to M, is composed of the proportions of the
sides BC to CG, and EC to CD. And for that as the line BC is to the line CG, so
is the parallelogramme AC to the parallelogra^me CH (by the 1. of the sixth).
But as the line BC is to the line CG, so is the line K to the line L. Wherefore
also (by the 11. of the fifth) as the line K is to the line L^ so is the
parallelogramme AC to the parallelogramme CHAPTER Again, for that as the line DC
is to the line CE, so is the parallelogramme CH to the parallelogramme CF: but
as the line DC is to the line CE, so is the line L to the line M: Wherefore
also (by ye same) as the line L is to the line M, so is the parallelogramme CH
to the parallelogramme CF. And forasmuch as it is proved, that as the line K is
to the line L, so is the parallelogramme AC to the parallelogramme CH, and as
the line L is to the line M, so is the parallelogramme CH to the
parallelogramme CF: therefore of equality (by the 22. of the fifth) as the line
K is to the line M, so i^ the parallelogramme AC to the parallelogramme CF. But
as it has before been proved, the proportion of the line K to the line M, is
composed of the proportions of the sides BC to CG, and DC to CE. Wherefore also
the proportion of the parallelogramme AC to the parallelogramme CF, is composed
of the proportions of the sides BC to CG, and DC to CE. Wherefore equiangle
parallelogrammes have the one to the other that proportion which is composed of
the proportions of the sides: which was required to be proved.

Flussates demonstrateth this Theoreme without taking of these three lines, K,
L, M, after this manner.

An other demonstration after flussates.
Forasmuch as (says he) it has been declared upon the 10. definition of the
fifth book, and ^ift definition of this book, that the proportions of the
extremes consist of the proportions of the means, let us suppose two equiangle
parallelogra^mes ABGD, and GEZI, and let the angles at the point G in either be
equal. And let the lines BG and GI be set directly that they both make one
right line, namely, BGI. Wherefore EGD also shall be one right line by the
converse of the 15. of the first. Make complete the parallelogramme GT. Then I
say, that the proportion of the parallelogrammes AG and GZ is composed of the
proportions of the sides BG to GI, and DG to GE. For forasmuch as that there
are three magnitudes, AG, GT, and GZ, and GT is the mean of the said
magnitudes: and the proportion of the extremes AG to GZ consists of the mean
proportions (by the 5. definition of this book) namely, of the proportion of
AG to GT, and of the proportion GT to GZ: But the proportion of AG to GT is one
and the self same with the proportion of the sides BG to GI (by the first of
this book). And the proportion also of GT to GZ is one and the self same with
the proportion of the other sides, namely, DG to GE (by the same Proposition).
Wherefore the proportion of the parallelogrammes AG to GZ consists of the
proportions of the sides BG to GI, and DC to GE. Wherefore equiangle
parallelogrammes are the one to the other in that proportion which is composed
of their sides: which was required to be proved.

The 18. Theoreme. The 24. Proposition. In every parallelogramme, the
parallelogrammes about the dimecient are like unto the whole, and also like the
one to the other.
Demonstration of this proposition wherein is first proved that the
parallegramme EG is like to the whole parallelogra^me ABCD.
SVppose yt there be a parallelogramme ABCD, and let the dimecient thereof be AC:
and let the parallelogrammes about the dimecient AC, be EG and HK. Then I say
that either of these parallelogrames EG and HK is like unto the whole
parallelogramme ABCD, and also are like the one to the other. For forasmuch as
to one of the sides of the triangle ABC, namely, to BC is drawn a parallel
line OF, therefore as BE is to EA, so (by the 2. of the sixth) is CF to FA.
Again forasmuch as to one of ye sides of the triangle ADC, namely, to CD is
drawn a parallel line F^, therefore (by the same) as CF is to FA, so is DG to
GA. But as CF is to FA, so is it pro^ued that BE is to EA. Whe^fore as BE is to
EA, so (by the 11. of the fifth)^ is DG to GA. Wherefore by composition (by the
18. of the fifth) as BA is to AE^ so is DA to AG. And alternately (by the 16.
of the fifth) as BA is to AD, so is EA to AG. Wherefore in the parallelogrammes^
ABCD and EG ye sides which are about the common angle BAD are proportional.
And because ye line GF is a parallel unto the line DC^ therefore the angle AGF
(by the 29^ of the^ first) is equal unto ye angle ADC, ^ ye angle GFA equal
unto ye angle DCA and the angle DAC is common to the two triangles ADC and AFG:
Wherefore the triangle DAC is equiangle unto the triangle AGF. And by the same
reason the triangle ABC is equiangle unto the triangle AEF. Wherefore the whole
parallelogramme ABCD is equiangle unto the parallelogra^me EG. Wherefore as AD
is in proportion to DC, so (by the 4. of the sixth) is AG to GF, and as DC is
to CA, so is GF to FA. And as AC is to CB, so is AF to FE. And moreover as CB
is to BA, so is FE to EA. And forasmuch as it is proved that as D^ is to CA, so
is GF to FA: but as AC is to C^, so is AF to FE. Wherefore of equality (by the
22. of the fifth) as DC is to CB, so is GF to FE. Wherefore in the
parallelogrammes ABCD and EG, the sides which include the equal angles are
proportional. Wherefore the parallelogramme ABCD is (by the first definition
of the sixth) like unto the parallelogramme EG.

And by the same reason also the parallelogramme ABCD is like to the
parallelogramme KH: That the parallelogra^me KH is like to the whole
parallelogramme ABCD.
wherefore either of these parallelogrammes EG and KH is like unto the
parallelogramme ABCD. But rectiline figures which are like to one and the same
rectiline figure are also (by the 21. of the sixth) like the one to the other.
Wherefore the parallelogramme EG is like to the parallelogramme HK. That the
parallelogrammes EG and KH are like the one to the other.
Wherefore in every parallelogramme, the parallelogrammes about the dimecient
are like unto the whole, and also like the one to the other. Which was required
to be proved.

An other more brief demonstration after Flussates.
Suppose that there be a parallelogra^me ABCD, whose dime^ient let b^ A^, An
other Demonstration after Flussates.
about which let consist these parallelogrammes EK and TI, having the angles at
the points ^ and (...) with the whole parallelogramme ABCD. Then I say, that
those parallelogrammes EK and TI are like to the whole parallelogramme DB and
also al^ like the one to the other. For forasmuch as BD, EK, and TI are
parallelogrammes, therefore the right line AZG falling upon these parallel
lines AEB, KZT, and DI G, or upon these parallel lines AKD, EZI, and BTG,
makes these angles equal the one to the other, namely, the angle EAZ to the
angle KZA, and the angle EZA to the angle KAZ, and the angle TZG to the angle
ZGI, and the angle TGZ to the angle IZG, and the angle BAG to the angle AGD:
and finally, the angle BGA to the angle DAG. Wherefore (by the first Corollary
of the 32. of the first, and by the 34. of the first) the angles remaining are
equal the one to the other, namely, the angle B to the angle D, and the angle
E to the angle K, and the angle T to the angle I. Wherefore these triangles are
equiangle and therefore like the one to the other, namely, the triangle ABG to
the triangle GDA, and the triangle AEZ to the triangle ZKA, and the triangle
ZTG to the triangle GIZ. Wherefore as the side AB is to the side BG, so is the
side AE to the side EZ, and the side ZT to the side TG. Wherefore the
parallelogrammes contained under those right lines, namely, the
parallelogrammes ABGD, EK, and TI, are like the one to the other (by the first
definition of this book). Wherefore in every parallelogramme the
parallelogrammes. etc. as before: which was required to be demonstrated.

A Problem added by Pelitarius.
Two equiangle Parallelogrammes being given, so that they be not like, to cut
of from one of them a parallelogramme like unto the other.

An addition of Pelitarius.
Suppose that the two equiangle parallelogrammes be ABCD and CEFG, which let not
be like the one to the other. It is required from the Parallelogramme ABCD, to
cut of a parallelogramme like unto the parallelogramme CEFG. Let the angle C of
the one be equal to the angle C of the other. And let the two parallelogrammes
be so (...), that the lines BC and CG may make both one right line, namely, BG.
Wherefore also the right lines DC and CE shall both make one right line,
namely, DE. And draw a line from the point F to the point C, and produce the
line FC till it co^curre with the line AD in the point H. And draw the line HK
parallel to the line CD (by the 31. of the first). Then I say, that from the
parallelogramme AC is cut of the parallelogra^me CDHK, like unto the
parallelogra^me EG. Which thing is manifest by this 24. Proposition. For that
both the said parallelogrammes are described about one and the self same
dimetient. And to the end it might the more plainly be seen, I have made
complete the Parallelogramme ABGL.

An other Problem added by Pelitarius.
Between two rectiline Superficieces, to find out a mean superficies
proportional.

Another addition of Pelitarius.
Suppose that the two superficieces be A and B, between which it is required to
place a mean superficies proportional. Reduce the said two rectiline figures
A and B unto two like parallelogra^mes (by the 18. of this book) or if you
think good reduce either of them to a square, (by the last of the second). And
let the said two parallelogrammes like the one to the other and equal to the
superficieces A and B, be CDEF and FGHK. And let the angles F in either of them
be equal, which two angles let be placed in such sort, that the two
parallelogrammes ED and HG may be about one and the self same dimetient CK
(which is done by putting the right lines OF and FG in such sort that they both
make one right line, namely, EG). And make co^plete the parallelogra^me CLK M.
Then I say, that either of the supplements FL and FM is a mean proportional
between the superficieces CF and FK, that is, between the superficieces A and
B: namely, as the superficies HG is to the superficies FL, so is the same
superficies FL to the superficies ED. For by this 24. Proposition the line HF
is to the line FD, as the line GF is to the line FE. But (by the first of this
book) as the line HF is to the line FD, so is the superficies HG to the
superficies FL: and as the line GF is to the line FE, so also (by the same) is
the superficies FL to the superficies ED. Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as
the superficies HG is to the superficies FL, so is the same superficies FL to
the superficies ED: which was required to be done.

The 7. Problem. The 25. Proposition. Unto a rectiline figure given to
describe an other figure like, which shall also be equal unto an other
rectiline figure given.
SVppose yt the rectiline figure given, whereunto is required an other to be
made like be ABC, and let the other rectiline figure whereunto the same is
required to be made, equal be D. Now it is required to describe a rectiline
figure like unto the figure ABC, and equal unto the figure D. Construction.
Upon the line BC describe (by the 44. of the first) a parallelogramme BE
equal unto the triangle ABC, and by the same upon the line CE, describe the
parallelogramme C M equal unto the rectiline figure D, and in the said
parallelogramme let the angle FCE, be equal unto the angle CBL. And forasmuch
as the angle FCE is by construction equal to the angle CBL, Demonstration.
add the angle BCE common to them both. Wherefore the angles LBC and BCE are
equal unto the angles BCE and ECF, but the angles LBC and BCE are equal to
two right angles (by the 29. of the first) wherefore also the angles BCE and ECF
are equal to two right angles. Wherefore the lines BC and CF (by the 14. of the
first) make both one right line, namely, BF, and in like sort do the lines LE
and EM make both one right line, namely, LM. Then (by the 13. of the sixth)
take the mean proportional between the lines BC and CF, which let be GH. And
(by the 18. of the sixth) upon the line GH, let there be described a rectiline
figure KHG like unto the rectiline figure ABC, and in like sort situate. And
for that as the line BC, is to the line GH, so is the line GH to ye line CF:
Demonstration.
but if there be three right lines proportional, as the first is to the third,
so is the figure which is described of the first unto the figure which is
described of the second, the said figures being like and in like sort situate
(by the second correllary of the 20. of the sixth) wherefore as the line BC is
to the line CF, so is the triangle ABC to the triangle KGH. But as the line BC
is to the line CF, so is the parallelogramme BE to the parallelogramme OF (by
the 1. of the sixth). Wherefore as the triangle A BC, is to the triangle KGH so
is the parallelogramme BE to the parallelogramme OF. Wherefore alternately also
(by the 16. of the fifth) as the triangle ABC is to the parallelogra^me BE, so
is the triangle KGH, to the parallelogramme OF: but the triangle ABC is equal
unto the parallelogra^me BE, wherefore also the triangle KGH is equal unto the
parallelogramme OF: but the parallelogramme FE is equal unto the rectiline
figure D. Wherefore also the rectiline figure KGH is equal unto the rectiline
figure D, and the rectiline figure KGH is by supposition like unto the
rectiline figure ABC. Wherefore there is described a rectiline figure KGH like
unto the rectiline figure given ABC, and equal unto the other rectiline figure
given D: which was required to be done.

The 19. Theoreme. The 26. Proposition. If from a parallelogramme be taken away
a parallelograme like unto the whole and in like sort set, having also an
angle common with it, then is the parallelogramme about one and the self same
dimecient with the whole.
SVppose that there be a parallelogramme ABCD, and from the parallelogramme
ABCD, take away a parallelogramme AF like unto the parallelogramme ABCD, and in
like sort situate, having also the angle DAB common with it. Then I say, that
the parallelogrammes ABCD and AF are both about one and the self same By the
dimetie^t is understand here the dimetient which is ^rawen from the angle which
is common to them both to the opposite angle.

Demonstration leading to an absurdity.


dimecient AFC, that is, that the dimecient AFC of the whole parallelogramme
ABCD passes by the angle F of the parallelogramme AF, and is common to either
of the parallelogrammes. For if AC do not pass by the point F, then if it be
possible let it pass by some other point, as AHC does. Now then the dimetient
AHC shall cut either the side GF or the side OF of ye parallelogramme AF. Let
it cut ye side GF in the point H. And (by the 31. of the first) by the point H
let there be drawn to either of these lines AD and BC a parallel line HK
wherefore GK is a parallelogramme, and is about one and the self same dimetient
with ye parallelogramme ABCD. And forasmuch as ye parallelogrammes ABCD and GK
are about one and the self same dimecient, therefore (by the 24. of the sixth)
the parallelogramme ABCD is like unto the parallelogramme GK. Wherefore as the
line DA is to the line AB so is the line GA to the line AK (by the conversion
of the first definition of the sixth) And for that the parallelogrammes ABCD,
and EG are (by supposition) like, therefore as the line DA is to the line AB so
is the line GA to the line AE. Wherefore the line GA has one and the self
proportion to either of these lines AK and AE. Wherefore (by the 9. of the
fifth) the line AK is equal unto ye line AE, namely, ye less to ye greater,
which is impossible. The self same inconvenience also will follow, if you put
the dimetient AC to cut the side FE. Wherefore AC the dimetie^t of the whole
parallelogramme ABCD passes by the angle and point F. And therefore the
parallelogramme AEFG is about one and the self same dimetient with the whole
parallelogramme ABCD. Wherefore if from a parallelogramme be taken away a
parallelograme like unto the whole, and in like sort situate, having also an
angle common with it, then is that parallelogramme about one and the self same
dimetient with the whole: which was required to be proved.

An other demonstration after Flussates, which proves this proposition
affirmatively.
From the parallelogramme ABGD let there be taken away the parallelogramme AEZK
like and in like sort situate with the whole parallelogramme ABGD, and having
also the angle A common with the whole parallelogramme. An other way after
Flussates.
Then I say that both their diameters, namely, AZ and AZG do make one and the
self same right line. Divide the sides AB and B^ into two equal parts in the
points C and F (by the 10. of the first.) And draw a line from C to F.
Wherefore the line CF is a parallel to the right line AG (by the corollary
added by Campane after the 29. of the first) Wherefore the angles BAG and BCF
are equal (by the 29. of the first): but the angle EAZ is equal unto the
angle BAG (by reason the parallelogrammes are supposed to be like) wherefore
the same angle EAZ is equal to the angle BCF, namely, the outward angle to the
inward and opposite angle. Wherefore (by the 28. of the first) the lines AZ and
CF are parallel lines. Now then the lines AZ and AG being parallels to one and
the self same line, namely, to CF do concur in the point A. Wherefore they
are set directly the one to the other, so that they both make one right line
(by that which was added in the end of the 30. proposition of the first)
wherefore the parallelogrammes ABGD, and AEZK are about one and the self fame
dimetient: which was required to be proved.

The 20. Theoreme. The 27. Proposition. Of all parallelogrammes applied to a
right line wanting in figure by parallelogrammes like and in like sort situate
to that parallelograme which is described of the half line: the greatest
parallelogramme is that which is described of the half line being like unto
the want.
In this proposition are two cases, in the first the parallelogramme compared
to the parallelogra^me described of the half line is described upon a line
greater the^ the half line: In the second upon a line less.

The first case where the parellelogramme compared namely AF is described upon
the line AK which is greater then the half line AC.


LEt there be a right line AB, and (by the 10. of the first) divide it in two
equal parts in the point C. And unto the right line AB apply a
parallelogramme AD wanting in figure by the parallelogramme DB, which let be
like and in like sort described unto the parallelogramme described of half the
line AB, which is, BC. Then I say, that of all the parallelogrammes which may
be applied unto the line AB and which want in figure by parallelogra^mes like
and in like sort situate unto the parallelogramme DB the greatest is the
parallelogramme AD. For unto ye right line AB let there be applied a
parallelogramme AF wanting in figure by the parallelogramme FB, which let be
like and in like sort situate unto the parallelogramme DB. Then I say, that the
parallelogramme AD is greater then the parallelogramme AF. For forasmuch as the
parallelogramme DB is like unto the parallelogramme ^B, therefore (by the 26. of
the sixth) they are about one and the self same dimetient. Demonstration of
this case.
Let their dimetient be DB, and make complete the figure. Now forasmuch as (by
the 43. of ye first) the supplement FC is equal unto the supplement FE^ add
the figure FB common to them both. Wherefore the whole figure CR is equal unto
the whole figure KE. But the figure CR is equal unto the figure CG (by the 36.
of the first) for that the base AC is equal unto the base CB. Wherefore the
figure GC is equal unto the figure KE. Add the figure CF common unto them
both. Wherefore the whole figure AF is equal unto the whole Gnomon LMN. But the
whole parallelogramme DB is greater then the Gnomon LMN (by the 3. common
sentence). Wherefore also it is greater then the parallelogramme AF. But the
parallelogramme AD is equal unto the parallelogramme DB (by the 36. of the
first). Wherefore the parallelogramme AD is greater then the parallelogramme
AF. Wherefore of all parallelogrammes applied to a right line wanting in figure
by parallelogrammes like and in like sort situate, to that parallelogramme
which is described of ye half line, the greatest parallelogra^me is that which
is described of the half of the line, being like unto the want: which was
required to be proved.

Again, let AB be divided into two equal parts in the point C, and let the
parallelogramme applied upon the half line be AL, The second case where the
parallelogramme compared namely AE is described upon the line AD which is less
then the line AC, Demonstration of the second case.
wanting in figure by the parallelogramme LB, which let be like and in like
sort situate unto the parallelogramme AL. Again unto the line AB let there be
applied an other parallelogramme AE wanting in figure by ye parallelogra^me EB
being like and in like sort situate unto the parallelogra^me LB which is
described upon half of the line AB. The^ I say, that the parallelogramme AL
applied unto half the line is greater then the parallelogramme AE. For
forasmuch as the parallelogramme EB is like unto the parallelogramme LB, they
are (by the 26. of the sixth) about one and the same dimetient. Let their
dimetient be EB, and make complete the whole figure, and for that the figure LF
is equal unto the figure LH (by the 36. of the first) for the base FG is
equal unto the base GH, therefore the figure LF is greater then the figure KE.
But the figure LF is equal unto the figure DL (by the 43. of the first).
Wherefore the figure DL is greater then the figure KE: put the figure KD common
to them both. Wherefore the whole parallelogramme AL is greater then the whole
parallelogramme AE: which was required to be proved.

The 8. Problem. The 28. Proposition. Upon a right line given, to apply a
parallelogramme equal to a rectiline figure given, and wanting in figure by a
parallelogramme like unto a parallelogra^me given. Now it behooves that the
rectiline figure given, whereunto the parallelogra^me applied must be equal,
be not greater the^ that parallelogramme, which so is applied upon the half
line, that the defectes shall be like, namely, the defect of the
parallelogra^me applied upon the half line, and the defect of the
parallelogramme to be applied (whose defect is required to be like unto the
parallelogramme given).
SVppose the right line given to be AB, and let the rectiline figure given
whereunto is required to apply upon the right line AB an equal rectiline figure
be C, which figure C, let not be greater then that parallelogra^me which is so
applied upon the half line, that the defectes shall be like, namely, the
defect of the parallelogramme applied upon the half line, and the defect of
the parallelogramme to be applied (whose defect is required to be like unto the
parallelogramme given). And let the figure whereunto the defect or want of the
parallelogramme is required to be like D. Now it is required upon ye right line
given AB, to describe unto the rectiline figure given C, an equal
parallelogramme wanting in figure by a parallelogramme like unto D.
Construction.
Let the line AB (by the 10. of the first) be divided into two equal parts in
ye point E. And (by the 18. of the sixth) upon the line ^B describe a
rectiline figure EBFG like unto the parallelogramme D and in like sort situate,
which shall also be a parallelograme. And make complete the parallelogramme AG.
Two cases in this Proposition.
Now then the parallelogramme AG is either equal unto the rectiline figure C,
or greater then it by supposition. If the parallelogramme AG be equal unto the
rectiline figure C, then is that done which we ^ought for. The first case.
For then upon the right line AB is described unto the rectiline figure given C
an equal parallelogramme AG wanting in figure by the parallelograme GB, The
second case.
which is like unto the parallelogramme D. But if AG be not equal unto C then
is AG greater then C, but AG is equal unto GB (by the first of the sixth).
Wherefore also GB is greater then C. Take the excess of the rectiline figure BG
above the rectiline figure C (by that which Pelitarius adds after the 4^. of
the first) And unto that excess (by the 15. of the sixth) describe an equal
rectiline figure KLMN like and in like sort situate unto the rectiline figure
D. But the rectiline figure D is like unto the rectiline GB, wherefore also the
rectiline figure KLMN is like unto the rectiline figure GB (by the 25. of the
sixth) Now then let the sides KL and GE be sides of like proportion, let also ye
sides LM and GF be sides of like proportion. And forasmuch as the
parallelogra^me GB is equal unto the figures C and KM, therefore the
parallelogramme GB is greater then the parallelogramme KM. Wherefore also the
side GE is greater then the side KL, and the side GF is greater then the side
LM, unto the side KL put an equal line GO (by the 2. of the first) and
likewise unto the side LM put an equal line GP. And make perfect the
parallelogramme OGPX. Wherefore the parallelogramme GX is equal and like unto
the parallelogramme KM. But the parallelogramme KM is like unto the
parallelogramme GB. Wherefore also the parallelogramme GX is like unto the
parallelogramme GB. Wherefore the parallelogrammes GX and GB are (by the 26. of
the sixth) about one and the self same dimecient. Let their dimecient be GB, and
make complete the figure. Now forasmuch as the parallelogramme BG is equal
unto the rectiline figure C, and unto the parallelogramme KM, and the
parallelogramme GX, which is part of the parallelogramme GB, is equal unto KM.
Wherefore the Gnomon remaining YQV is equal unto the rectiline figure
remaining, namely, to C. And forasmuch as the supplement PR is equal unto the
supplement OS, put the parallelogramme XB common unto them both. Wherefore the
whole parallelogramme PB is equal unto the whole parallelograme OB. But the
parallelogramme OB is equal unto the parallelogramme TE by the 1. of the sixth,
(for the side AE is equal unto the side EB) Wherefore the parallelogramme TE is
equal unto the parallelogramme PB. Put the parallelogramme OS common to them
both. Wherefore the whole parallelogramme TS is equal unto the whole gnomon
YQV. But it is proved that the gnomon YQV is equal unto the rectiline figure C.
Wherefore also the parallelogramme TS is equal unto the rectiline figure C.
Wherefore upon the right line given AB is applied a parallelogramme TS equal
unto the rectiline figure given C, and wanting in figure by a parallelogramme
XB which is like unto the parallelogramme given D, for the parallelogramme XB
is like unto the parallelogramme GX: which was required to be done.

A Corollary added by Flussates.
Hereby it is manifest, that if upon a right line be applied a parallelogramme
wantyng in figure by a square, A Corollary added by Flussates, and is put of
Theon as an assumpt before the 17. proposition of the tenth book: which ^or
that it follows of this proposition I thought it not amiss here to place.
the parallelogramme applied shall be equal to the rectangle figure which is
contained under the segments of the line given which are made by the
application. For the rest of the line is equal to the other side of the
parallelogramme applied. For that they are sides of one and the self same
square, as the parallelogramme AG is contained under the lines AD and DB, or DG
which is equal to DB.

The 9. Problem. The 29. Proposition. Upon a right line given to apply a
parallelogramme equal unto a rectiline figure given, and exceeding in figure
by a parallelogramme like unto a parallelogramme given.
SVppose the right line given to be AB, and let the rectiline figure given
whereunto is required upon the line AB to apply an equal parallelogramme be C:
let also the parallelogramme whereunto ye excess is required to be like, be D.
Now it is required upon the right line AB to apply in parallelogramme equal
unto the rectiline figure C, and exceeding in figure by a parallelogramme like
unto the parallelogramme D. Construction.
Let the line AB be (by the 10. of the first) divided into two equal parts in
the point E. And upon the line EB (by the 18. of the sixth) describe a
parallelogramme BF like unto the figure D, and in like sort situate. And unto
both these figures BF and C, describe an equal rectiline figure GH like unto
the figure D and in like sort situate (by the 25. of the sixth). Wherefore the
parallelogramme GH is (by the 21. of the sixth) like unto the parallelogramme
BF. Let the sides KH and FL be sides of like proportion, and so also let the
sides KG and FE be. And forasmuch as the parallelogramme GH is (by
construction) greater then the parallelogramme FB, therefore the line KH is
greater then the line FL, and the line KG is greater then the line FE. Extend
the lines FL and FE to the points M and N, and unto the line KH put an equal
line FLM, and likewise unto the line KG put an equal line FEN: and make
perfect the figure MN. Wherefore the parallelogramme MN is equal and like unto
the parallelogramme GH. But the parallelogramme GH is like unto the
parallelogramme EL. Wherefore also the parallelogramme MN is like unto the
parallelogramme EL. Wherefore the parallelogrammes EL and MN are (by the 26. of
the sixth) about one and the same dimetient. Let the said dimetient be FO, and
make perfect the figure. Demonstration.
Now forasmuch as the parallelogramme GH is equal unto the figures EL and C.
But by construction the parallelogramme GH is equal unto the parallelogramme
MN. Wherefore the parallelogramme MN is equal unto the figures EL and C. Take
away the figure EL which is common to them both. Wherefore the Gnomon
remaining, namely, VYX, is equal unto the rectiline figure C. And forasmuch as
the line AE is equal unto the line EB, therefore the parallelogramme A N is
(by the 36. of the first) equal unto the parallelogramme NB, that is, unto the
parallelogramme LP, which (by the 43. of the first) is equal unto the
parallelogramme NB. Add the parallelogramme BO common to them both. Wherefore
the whole parallelogramme AO is equal unto the Gnomon VYX. But the Gnomon VYX
is equal unto the rectiline figure C. Wherefore the parallelogramme AO is
equal unto the rectiline figure C. Wherefore upon the right line given AB is
applied the parallelogramme AO equal unto the rectiline figure given C, and
exceeding in figure by the parallelogramme QP which is like unto the
parallelogramme given D. For the parallelogramme D is like unto the
parallelogramme BF: and the parallelogramme BF is like unto the parallelogramme
PQ: for they are about one and the self same dimetient: which was required to
be done.

The 10. Problem. The 30. Proposition. To divide a right line given by an
extreme and mean proportion.
SVppose the right line given to be AB. It is required to devide the line AB by
an extreme and mean proportion. Construction.
Upon the line AB describe (by the 46. of the first) a square BC. And upon the
line AC (by the 29. of the sixth) apply a parallelogramme CD equal unto the
square BC, Demo^stra^ion.
and exceeding in figure by the figure AD like unto the figure BC. Now BC is a
square. Wherefore also AD is a square. And forasmuch as BC is equal unto CD,
take away the figure CE which is common to them both. Wherefore the figure
remaining, namely, BF, is equal to the figure remaining, namely, to AD, and
the angle E of the one is equal unto the angle E of the other. Wherefore (by
the 2. definition of the sixth, and by the 14. of the sixth) the sides of the
figures BF and DA, which contain the equal angles, are reciprokall. Wherefore
as the side FE is to the side ED, so is the side AE to the side EB. But the
side FE is equal unto the line AC, that is, unto the line AB, and the side ED
is equal unto the line AE (by the 34. of the first). Wherefore as the line BA
is to the line AE, so is the line AE to the line EB. But the line AB is greater
then the line AE. Wherefore also the line AE is greater then the line EB.
Wherefore the right line AB is divided by an extreme and mean proportion in
the point E: and the greater segment thereof is AE: which was required to be
done.

An other way.
An other way.
Suppose the right line given to be AB. It is required to divide the line AB by
an extreme and mean proportion. Divide the line AB in the point C (by the 11.
of the second) in such sort that the rectangle figure comprehended under the
lines AB and BC may be equal unto the square described of the line CA. And
forasmuch as that which is comprehended under the lines AB and BC, is equal
unto the square made of the line AC, therefore as the line BA is to the line
AC, so (by the 17. of the sixth) is the line AC to the lin^ CB. Wherefore the
line AB is divided by an extreme and mean proportion in the point C. which was
required to be done.

The 21. Theoreme. The 31. Proposition. In rectangle triangles the figure made
of the side subtending the right angle, is equal unto the figures made of the
sides co^prehending the right angle, so that the said thr^e figures b^ b^ like
and in like sort described.
SVppose that there be a triangle ABC, whose angle BAC let be a right angle.
The^ I say that the figure which is described of the line BC is equal unto the
two figures which are described of the lines BA and AC, the said three figures
being like the one to the other, and in like sort described. From the point A
(by the 12. of the first) let there be drawn unto the line BC a perpendiculer
line AD. Construction.
Now forasmuch as in ye rectangle triangle ABC is drawn from the right angle A
unto the base BC a perpendicular line AD, Demonstration.
therefore the triangles ABD, and ADC set upon the perpendiculer line, are like
unto the whole triangle ABC, and also like the one to the other (by the 8. of
the sixth). And forasmuch as the triangle ABC is like unto the triangle ABD,
therefore as the line CB is to the line BA, so is the line AB to the line BD.
Now for that there are three right lines proportional, therefore (by the 2.
correllary of the 20. of the sixth) as the first is to the third, so is the
figure made of the first, to the figure made of the second, the said figures
being like and in like sort described. Wherefore as the line BC is to the line
BD, so is the figure made of the line BC to the figure made of the line BA,
they being like and in like sort described. And by ye same reason as the line
BC is to the line CD, so is the figure made of the line BC, to the figure made
of the line CA, they being like and in like sort described. Wherefore as the
line BC is to the lines BD and DC, so is the figure made of the line BC to the
figures made of the lines BA and AC, they being like and in like sort
described. But the line BC is equal unto the lines BD and DC, wherefore the
figure made of the line BC is equal unto the figures made of the lines BA and
AC, they being like and in like sort described. Wherefore in rectangle triangles
the figure made of the side subtending the right angle is equal unto the
figures made of the sides comprehending the right angle, so that the said thr^
figures be like and in like sort described: which was required to be proved.

An other way.
Forasmuch as (by the first correllary of the 20. of the sixth) like rectiline
figures are in double proportion to that that the sides of like proportion are,
therefore the rectiline figure made of the line BC is unto the rectiline figure
^ade of the line BA in double proportion to that that the line CB is to the
line BA, and (by the same) the square also made of the line BC is unto the
square made of the line BA in double proportion to that that the line CB is
unto the line BA. Wherefore also as the rectiline figure made of the line CB is
to the rectiline figure made of the line BA, so is the square made of the line
CB to the square made of the line BA. And by the same reason also, as the
rectiline figure made of the line BC is to the rectiline figure made of ye line
CA, so is the square made of the line BC to the square made of the line CA.
Wherefore also as the rectiline figure made of the line BC is to the rectiline
figures made of the lines BA and AC, so is the square made of the line BC to
the squares made of the lines BA and AC. But the square made of ye line BC is
equal unto the squares made of the lines BA and AC (by the 47. of the first)
Wherefore also the rectiline figure made of the line BC is equal unto the
rectiline figures made of the lines BA and AC, the said three figures being
like and in like sort described.

The converse of this Proposition after Campane.
The converse of the former proposition.
If the figure described of one of the sides of a triangle be equal to the
figures which are described of the two other sides, the said figures being like
and in like sort described, the triangle shall be a rectangle triangle.

Suppose that ABC be a triangle, and let the figure described of the side BC be
equal to the two figures described of the sides AB and AC, the said figures
being like, and in like sort described. Then I say that the angle A is a right
angle. Let the angle CAD be a right angle, and put the line AD equal to the
line AB, and draw a line from D to C. Now then by this 31. proposition, the
figure made of the line CD is equal to the two figures made of the lines AC
and AD, the said figures being like and in like sort described. Wherefore also
it is equal unto the figure made of the line BC, which is by supposition equal
to the two figures made of the lines AC and AD (for the line AD is put equal
to the line AB) wherefore the line DC is ^quall to the line BC. Wherefore (by the
8. of the first) the angle BAC is a right angle, which was required to be
proved.

The 22. Theoreme. The 32. Proposition. If two triangles be set together at one
angle, having two sides of the one proportional to two sides of the other, so
that their sides of like proportion be also parallels: then the other sides
remaining of those triangles shall be in one right line.
SVppose the two triangles to be ABC, and DCE, and let two of their sides AC
and DC make an angle ACD, and let the said triangles have two sides of the one,
namely, BA and AC proportional to two sides of the other, Demonstration.
namely, to DC and DE, so yt as AB is to AC, so let DC be to DE. And let AB be
a parallel unto DC, and AC a parallel unto DE. Then I say, that the lines BC
and CE are in one right line. For forasmuch as the line AB is a parallel unto
the line DC, and upon the^ lights a right line AC: therefore (by the 29. of
the first) the alternate angles BAC and ACD are equal the one to the other.
And by the same reason the angle CDE is equal unto ye same angle ACD.
Wherefore the angle BAC is equal unto the angle CDE. And forasmuch as there
are two triangles ABC and DCE, having the angle A of the one equal to the
angle D of the other, and the sides about the equal angles are (by
supposition) proportional, that is, as the line BA is to the line AC, so is
the line CD to the line DE, therefore the triangle ABC is (by the 6. of the
sixth) equiangle unto the triangl^ DCE. Wherefore the angle ABC is equal unto
the angle DCE. And it is proved, that the angle ACD is equal unto the angle
BAC. Wherefore the whole angle ACE is equal unto the two angles ABC and BAC.
Put the angle ACB common to them both. Wherefore the angles ACE and ACB are
equal unto the angles CAB, ACB, and CBA. But the angles CAB, ACB, and CBA, are
(by the 32. of the first) equal unto two right angles. Wherefore also the
angles ACE and ACB are equal to two right angles. Now then unto the right line
AC, and unto the point in it C, are drawn two right lines BC and CE, not on
one and the same side, making the side angles ACE and ACB equal to two right
angles. Wherefore the lines BC and CE (by the 14. of the first) are set
directly and do make one right line. If therefore two triangles be set together
at one angle having two sides of the one proportional to two sides of ye
other, so yt their sides of like proportion be also parallels: then ye sides
remaining of those triangles shall be in one right line: which was required to
be proved.

Although Euclide does not distinctly set forth the manner of proportion of like
rectiline figures, as he did of lines in the 10. Proposition of this Book, and
in the 3. following it, yet as Flussates notes, is that not hard to be done by
the 22. of this Book. ^or two like rectiline figures being given to find out
a third proportionall^ also between two rectiline superficieces given to find
out a mean proportional (which we before taught to do by Pelitarius after the
24. Proposition of this book): and moreover three like rectiline figures being
given to find out a fourth proportional like and in like sort described, and
such kind of proportions, are easy to be found out by the proportions of
lines. As thus. If unto two sides of like proportion we should find out a third
proportional by the 11. of this boke^ the rectiline figure described upon that
line shall be the third rectiline figure proportional with the two first
figures given by the 22. of this book. And if between two sides of like
proportion be taken a mean proportional by the 13. of this Book: the
rectiline ^igure described upon the said mean shall likewise be a mean
proportional between the two rectiline figures given by the same 22. of the
sixth. And so if unto three sides ge^en be found out the fourth side
proportional (by the 12. of this book) the rectiline ^igure described upon
the said fourth line shall be the fourth rectiline figure proportional. For if
the right lines be proportional, the rectiline figures described upon them
shall also be proportional, so that the said rectiline ^igures be like and in
like sort described by the said 22. of the sixth.

The 23. Theoreme. The 33. Proposition. In equal circles, the angles have one
and the self same proportion that the circumfere^ces have, wherein they
consist, whether the angles be set at the centres or at the circumferences. And
in like sort are the sectors which are described upon the centres.
SVppose the equal circles to be ABC, and DEF, whose centres let be G and H,
and let the angles set at their centres G and H, be BGC, and EHF: and let the
angles set at their circumferences be BAC and EDF. Then I say that as the
circumference BC is to the circumference OF so is the angle BGC to the angle
EHF: and the angle BAC to the angle EDF, and moreover the sector GBC to the
sector HEF. Unto the circumference BC (by the 38. of the third) put as many
equal circumferences in order as you will, namely, CK and KL, and unto the
circumference OF put also as many equal circumferences in number as you will,
namely, FM, and MN. And draw these right lines GK, That the angles at the
ce^ter are in proportion the one to the other, as the circumferences whereon
they are.
GL, HM, and HN. Now forasmuch as the circumferences BC, CK, and KL are equal
the one to the other, the angles also BGC, and CGK, and KGL are (by the 27. of
the third) equal the one to the other. Therefore how multiplex the
circumference BL is to the circumference BC, so multiplex is ye angle BGL to
the angle BGC. And by ye same reason also, how multiplex the circumference NE
is to the circumference OF, so multiplex is the angle NHE to the angle EHF.
Wherefore if the circumference BL be equal unto the circumference EN, the angle
BGL is equal unto the angle EHN, and if the circumference BL be greater then
the circumference EN, the angle BGL is greater then the angle NHE, and if the
circumference be less, the angle is less. Now then there are four
magnitudes, namely, the two circumferences BC and OF, and the two angles that
is, BGC, and EHF, and to the circumference BC and to the angle BGC, that is, to
the first and third are taken equemultiplices, namely, the circumference BL,
and the angle BGL, and likewise to the circumference OF, and to the angle EHF,
that is, to the second and fourth, are taken certain other equemultiplices,
namely, the circumference EN and the angle EHN. And it is proved, that if the
circumference BL exceed the circumference EN, the angle also BGL exceeds the
angle EHN. And if the circumference be equal, the angle is equal, and if the
circumfere^ce be less, the angle also is less. Wherefore (by the 6. definition
of the fifth) as the circumference BC is to the circumference OF, so is the
angle BGC to the angle EHF^

But as the angle BGC is to the angle EHF, That the angles at the
circumferences are so also.
so is the angle BAC to the angle EDF, for the angle BGC is double to the angle
BAC, and the angle EHF is also double to the angle EDF (by the 20. of the
third) Wherefore as the circumference BC is to the circumference OF, so is the
angle BGC to the angle EHF, and the angle BAC to the angle EDF. Wherefore in
equal circles the angles are in one and the self same proportion that their
circumferences are, whether the angles be set at the centres, or at the
circumferences: which was required to be proved.

I say moreover that as the circumference BC is to the circumference OF, That
the sectors are so also.
so is the sector GBC to the sector HEF. Draw these lines BC and CK. And in the
circumferences BC and CK take points at all adventures, namely, P and O. And
draw lines from B to P, and from P to C, from C to O, and from O to K. And
forasmuch as (by the 15. definition of the first) the two lines BG and GC are
equal unto the two lines CG and GK, and they also comprehend equal angles,
therefore (by the 4. of the first) the base BC is equal unto the base CK, and
the triangle GBC is equal unto the triangle GCK. And seeing that the
circumference BC is equal unto the circumference CK, therefore the
circumference remaining of the whole circle ABC, namely, the circumference
BLAKOC, is equal unto the circum^erence remaining of the self same circle
ABC, namely, to the circumference CPBLAK. Wherefore the angle BPC is equal unto
the angle COK (by the 27. of the third) Wherefore (by the 10. definition of the
third) the segment BPC is like unto the segment COK, and they are set upon
equal right lines BC and KC. But like segmentes of circles which consist upon
equal right lines are also equal the one to the other (by the 24. of the
third). Wherefore the segment BPC is equal unto the segment COK. And the
triangle GBC is equal unto the triangle GCK. Wherefore the sector GBC is equal
unto the sector GCK. And by the same reason also, the sector GKL is equal unto
either of the sectors GBC and GCK. Wherefore ye three sectors GBC and GCK, and
GKL, are equal ye one to ye other. And by the same reason also the sectors HEF
and HFM, and HMN are equal the one to the other. Wherefore how multiplex the
circumference BL is to the circumference BC so multiplex is the sector GLB to
the sector GBC. And by the same reason how multiplex the circumference NE is to
the circumference OF, so multiplex is ye sector HEN to the sector HEF. If
therefore the circumference BL be equal unto ye circumference EN, ye sector
also BGL is equal unto ye sector EHN. And if the circumfere^ce BL excede ye
circumference EN, ye sector also BGL excedeth the sector EHN. And if the
circumference be less, the sector also is less. Now the^ there are four
magnitudes, namely, the two circumferences BC and OF, and the two sectors GBC
and HEF, and to the circumference BC, and to the sector GBC, namely, to the
first and the third, are taken equemultiplices, that is, the circumference BL,
and the sector GBL, and likewise to the circumference OF, and to the sector
HEF, namely, to the second and fourth, are taken certain other
equimultiplices, namely, the circumference EN and the sector HEN. And it is
proved that if the circumference BL excede the circumference EN, the sector
also BGL excedeth the sector EHN. And if the circumference be equal, the
segment also is equal, and if the circumference be less, the segment also is
less. Wherefore (by the conversion of the sixth definition of the fifth) as the
circumference BC is to the circumference OF, so is ye sector GBC unto the
sector HEF: which is all that was required to be proved.

Corollary. And hereby it is manifest, that as the sector is to the sector, so
is angle to angle by the 11. of the fifth.
Flussates here adds five Propositions whereof one is a Problem having three
Corollaryes following of it, and the rest are Theoremes: which for that they
are both witty, and also serve to great use, as we shall afterward see, I
thought not good to omit, but have here placed them: but only that I have
not put them to follow in order with the Propositions of Euclide as he has
done.

The first Proposition added by Flussates.
To describe two rectiline figures equal and like unto a rectiline figure
given and in like sort situate, which shall have also a proportion given.

Suppose that the rectiline figure given be ABH. Construction of the Problem.
And let the proportion given be the proportion of the lines GC and CD. And (by
the 10. of this book) divide the line AB like unto the line GD in the point E
(so that as the line GC is to the line CD, so let the line AE be to the line
EB). And upon the line AB describe a semicircle AFB. And from the point E erect
(by the 11. of the first) unto the line AB a perpendicular line OF cutting the
circumference in the point F. And draw these lines AF and FB. And upon either
of these lines describe rectiline figures like unto the rectiline figure AHB
and in like sort situate (by the 18. of the sixth): which let be AKF, and FIB.
Then I say, that the rectiline figures AKF, and FIB, have the proportion given
(namely, the proportion of the line GC to the line CD) and are equal to the
rectiline figure given ABH unto which they are described like and in like sort
situate. For forasmuch as AFB is a semicircle, therefore the angle AFB is a
right angle (by the 31. of the third) and FE is a perpendicular line.
Demonstartion of the same.
Wherefore (by the 8. of this book) the triangles AFE and FBE are like both to
the whole triangle AFB and also the one to the other. Wherefore (by the 4. of
this book) as the line AF is to the line FB, so is the line AE to the line OF,
and the line OF to the line EB, which are sides co^tayning equal angles.
Wherefore (by the 22. of this book) as the rectiline figure described of the
line AF is to the rectiline figure described of the line FB, so is the
rectiline figure described of the line AE to the rectiline figure described of
the line OF, the said rectiline figures being like and in like sort ^ituate.
But as the rectiline figure described of the line AE being the first, is to the
rectiline ^igure described of the line OF being the second, so is the line AE
the first, 10. the line ^B the third (by the 2. Corollary of the 20. of this
book). Wherefore the rectiline figure described of the line AF is to the
rectiline figure described of the line FB, as the line A^ is to the line EB.
But the line AE is to, the line EB (by construction) as the line GC is to the
line CD. Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as the line GC is to the line CD,
so is the r^^tiline ^igure described of the line AF to the rectiline ^igure
described (...) the line ^B, the said rectiline figures being like and in like
sort described. But the (...) described o^ the lines AF and FB, are equal to
the rectiline ^igure d^^^^^bed o^ the line AB, unto which they are (by
construction) described like and in like sort situate. Wherefore there are
described two rectiline figures AKF and FIB equ^ll and like unto the rectiline
figure given ABH and in like sort situate, and they have also the one to the
other the proportion given, namely, the proportion of the line GC to the line
CD: which was required to be done.

The first Corollary.
To resolve a rectiline figure give into two like rectiline ^igures which shall
hau^ also a proporti^ ge^e^. For i^ there be put three right lines in the
proportion given, and if the line AB be cu^ in the same proportion that the
first line is to the third, The first Corollary.
the rectiline ^igures described of the line^ A^ and FB (which figures have the
same proportion that the lines AE and EB have) shall be in double proportion to
that which the lines AF and FB are (by the ^irs^ ^orollary o^ the 20. o^ this
book). Wherefore the right lines AF and FB are the o^e to the other in the
same proportion that the first of the three lines put is to the (...). ^or the
(...) line to the third, namely, the line AE to the line EB is in double
propo^tion that it is to the second, by the 10. de^inition of the fi^t.

The second Corollary.
Hereby may we learn, how from a rectiline ^igure given to take away a part
appointed, lea^ing, the rest of the rectiline ^igure like unto the whole. The
second Corollary.
For if from the right line AB be cut of a part appointed, namely, EB (by the
9. of this book) as the line AE is to the line EB, so is the rectiline ^igure
described of the line AF to the rectiline figure described of the line FB (the
said ^igures being supposed to be like both the one to the other and also to
the rectiline ^igure described of the line AB, and being also in like sort
situate). Wherefore taking away from the rectiline ^igure described of the line
AB, the rectiline figure described of the line FB, the residue, namely, the
rectiline figure described of the line AF shall be both like unto the whole
rectiline ^igure given described of the line AB, and in like sort situate.

The third Corollary.
To compose two like rectiline ^igures into one rectiline figure like and
equal to the same figures. Let their sides of like proportion be set so that
they make a right angle, The third Corollary.
as the lines AF and FB are. And upon the line subtending the said angle,
namely, the line AB, describe a rectiline ^igure like unto the rectiline
figures given and in like sort situate (by the 18. of this book) and the same
shall be equal to the two rectiline figures given (by the 31. of this book).

The second Proposition.
If two right lines cut the one the other obtuseangled wise, and from the ends
of the lines which ^ut the one the other be drawn perpendicular lines to
either line: the lines which are between the ends and the perpendicular lines
are cut reciprokally.

Suppose that there be two right lines AB and GD cutting the one the other in
the point E, and making an obtuse angle in the section E. And from the ends of
the lines, namely, A and G, let there be drawn to either line perpendicular
lines, namely, from the point A to the line GD, which let be AD, and from the
point G to the right line AB: which let be GB. Then I say, that the right lines
AB and GD do, between the end A and the perpendicular B, and the end G and the
perpendicular D, cut the one the other reciprokally in the point E: so that as
the line AE is to the line ED, so is the line GE to the line EB. Demonstration
of this proposition.
For forasmuch as the angles ADE and GBE, are right angles, therefore they are
equal. But the angles AED and GEB are also equal (by the 15. of the first).
Wherefore the angles remaining, namely, EAD, and EGB, are equal (by the
Corollary of the 32. of the first). Wherefore the triangles AED and GEH, are
equiangle. Wherefore the sides about the equal angles shall be proportional
(by the 4. of the sixth). Wherefore as the line AE is to the line ED, so is the
line GE to the line EB. If therefore two right lines cut the one the other
obtuseangled wife. etc: which was required to be proved.

The third Proposition.
If two right lines make an acute angle, and from their ends be drawn to each
line perpendicular lines cutting them: the two right lines given shall be
reciprokally proportional as the segmentes which are about the angle.

Suppose that there be two right lines AB and GB, making an acute angle ABG.
And from the points A and G let there be drawn unto the lines AB and GB
perpendicular lines AC and GE, cutting the lines AB and GB in the points E and
^. Then I say, that the lines, namely AB to GB, are reciprokally proportional,
as the segmentes, namely, CB to EB which are about the acute angle B.
Demonstration of this propositions
For forasmuch as the right angles ACB and GER are equal, and the angle^ ABG
is common to the triangles ABC, and GBE^ therefore the angles remaining BAC and
EGB are equal (by the Corollary of the 32. of the first). Wherefore the
triangles ABC and GBE are equiangle. Wherefore the side^ about the equal
angles are proportional (by the 4. of the six)^ so that, as the line AB is to
the line FC, so is the line GB to the line BE. Wherefore alternately as the
line AB is to the line GB so is the line CB to the line BE. If therefore two
right lines mak^ a^ ^c^te angle^ etc^ which was required to be proved.

^ The fourth Proposition^
If in a circle be drawn two right lines cutting the one the other, the
sections of the one to the sections of the other shall be reciprokally
proportional.

In the circle, AGB let these two right lines (...) one the other in the point
E. Demonstration of this proposition.
Th^^ I say, that reciprokally (...) ^h^ line AE is to the line ED, so is the
line GE to the line EB. For forasmuch as (by the 35. of the third) the
rectangle figure contained under the lines AE and EB is equal to the rectangle
figure contained under the lines GE and ED, but in equal rectangle
parallelogrammes the sides about the equal angles are reciprokall (by the 14.
of the sixth). Therefore the line AE is to the line ED reciprokally as the line
GE is to the line EB (by the second definition of the sixth). If therefore in a
circle be drawn two right lines. etc: which was required to be proved.

The fifth Proposition.
If from a point given be drawn in a plain super^icies two right lines to the
concaue circumference of a circle: they shall be reciprokally proportional
with their parts taken without the circle. And moreover a right line drawn
from the said point and touching the circle, shall be a mean proportional
between the whole line and the utter segment.

Suppose that there be a circle ABD, and without it take a certain point,
namely, G. And from the point G draw unto the concaue circumference two right
lines GB and GD, cutting the circle in the points C and E. And let the line GA
touch the circle in the point A. The^ I say, that the lines, namely, GB to GD
are reciprokally as their parts taken without the circle, namely, as GC to GE.
Demonstration of the first part of this proposition.
For forasmuch as (by the Corollary of the 36. of the third) the rectangle
figure contained under the lines GB and GE is equal to the rectangle figure
contained under the lines GD and GC, therefore (by the 14. of the sixth)
reciprokally as the line GB is to the line GD, so is the line GC to the line
GE, for they are sides containing equal angles. I say moreover, that between
the lines GB and GE, or between the lines GD and GC the touch line GA is a
mean proportional. Demonstration of the second part.
For forasmuch as the rectangle figure comprehended under the lines GB and GE
is equal to the square made of the line AG (by the 36. of the third) it
follows that the touch line GA is a mean proportional between the extremes
GB and GE (by the second part of the 17. of the sixth) for that by that
Proposition the lines GB, GA, and GE are proportional. And by the same reason
may it be proved that the line GA is a mean proportional between the lines GD
and GC, and so of all others. If therefore from a point geuen^ etc^ which was
required to be demonstrated.

The end of the sixth book of Euclides Elements.
The seventh book of Euclides Elements.
HITHERTO IN THE SIX books before has Euclide passed through, and entreated
of the Elements of Geometry without the aid and succor of number. But the
matters which remain to be taught and to be spoken of in these his
Geometrical books which follow as in the tenth, eleventh, and so forth, he
could by no means fully and clearly make plain and demonstrate, without the
help and aid of nombers. In the tenth is entreated of lines irrational and
uncertain, and that of many and sundry kinds: and in the eleventh and the
other following he teaches the natures of bodies, and compares their sides
and lines together. All which for the most part are also irrational. And as
rational quantites, and the comparisons and proportions of them, cannot be
known, nor exactly tried, but by the mean of number, in which they are first
seen and perceived: even so likewise cannot irrational quantities be known
and found out without number. As straightnes is the trial of crokednes, and
inequality is tried by equality: so are quantities irrational perceived and
known by quantities rational: which are first and chiefly found among
nombers. Wherefore in these three books following, being as it were in the
midst of his Elements, he is compelled of necessity to entreat of nombers,
Why Euclide in the midst of his works was compelled to add these three
books of numbers.
although not so fully, as the nature of nombers requires, yet so much as
shall seem to be fit, and sufficiently to serve for his purpose. Whereby is seen
the necessity, that the one Art, namely, Geometry, has of the other,
namely, of Arithmeticke. And also of what excellency and worthiness Arithmeticke
is above Geometry: Arithmetike of more excellency then Geometry.
in that, Geometry boroweth of it principles, aid, and succor, and is as it
were maimed with out it. Whereas Arithmeticke is of it self, sufficient and
neadeth not at all any aid of Geometry, but is absolute and perfect in it
self, and may well be taught and attained unto without it. Again the matter
or subject where about Geometry is occupied, which are lines, figures, and
bodies, are such as offer them selves to the senses, as triangles, squares,
circles, cubes, and other are seen and judged to be such as they are, by the
sight: but number, which is the subject and matter of Arithmeticke, falls
under no sense, nor is represented by any shape, form, or figure: and
therefore cannot be judged by any sense, but only by consideration of the
mind, and understanding. Now things sensible are far under in degree then
are things intellectual: Things intellectual of more worthiness the^ things
sensible.
and are of nature much more gross then they. Wherefore number, as being only
intellectual, is more pure, more immateriall, and more subtle, far then is
magnitude: and exte^deth it self farther. For Arithmeticke, not only aydeth
Geometry: but ministers principles, and grounds to many other, nay rather to
all other sciences and arts. Arithmetike ministers prin^ciples and grounds
in a manner to all sciences.
As to music, Astronomy, natural philosophy, perspectiue, with others. What
other thing is in music entreated of, then number contracted to sound and
voice? In Astronomy, who without the knowledge of number can do any thing,
either in searching out of the motions of the heavens, and their courses,
either in judging and foreshewing the effects of them? In natural philosophy,
it is of no small force. The wisest and best learned philosophers that have
been, as Pithagoras, Timeus, Plato, and their followers, found out and taught
most pithely and purely, the secret and hidden knowledge of the nature and
condition of all things, by nombers, and by the proprieties and passions of
them. Of what force number is in perspectiue, let him declare and judge, who
has any thing traueled therein. Yea to be short, what can be worthily and with
praise practiced in common life of any man of any condition, without the
knowledge of number. Yea it has been taught of the chiefest amongst
philosophers, that all natural things are framed, and have their constitucion
of number. Boethius says Hoc fuit principal^ in anim^ c^^ditoris exemplar:
Boethius: Cap. 2. Lib. prim. Arithmeti.
Number (says he) was the principal example and patron in the mind of the
creator of the world. Does not that great philopher Timaus in his book, Timaus.
and also Plato in his Tim^^, following him, show how the soul is composed of
harmonicall nombers, and consonantes of music. Number compaseth all things,
and is (after these men) the being and very essence of all things. And
ministers aid and help, as to all other knowledges, so also no small to
Geometry. Which thing causes Euclid^ in the midest of his book of Geometry,
to inserte and place these three books of Arithmeticke: as without the aid of
which he could not well pass any father.

In this seventh book, he first places the general principles, and first
grounds of Arithmetick^, and sets the diffinitions of number or multitude
and the kinds thereof: as in the first book, he did of magnitude and the kinds
and parts thereof. The argument of the seventh book.
After that he entreats of nombers generally, and of their parts: and
searches and demonstrateth in general the most common passions and
proprieties of the same, and chie^ely of nombers prime or incommensurable, and
of nombers composed or commensurable and of their proprieties and partly also
of the comparison o^ proportion of one number to an other.

Definitions.
The first definition.
1 Unity is that, whereby every thing that is, is said to be on.
As a point in magnitude, is the least thing in magnitude, and no magnitude at
all, and yet the ground and beginning of all magnitudes: even so is unity in
multitude or number, the least thing in number, and no number at all, and yet
the ground and beginning of all nombers. And therefore it is here in this
place, of Euclide first defined: as in the first book, for the like reason and
cause was a point first defined. Unity, says Euclide, is that whereby every
thing is said to be one: that is, unity is that, whereby every thing is
divided and separated from an other, and remains on in it self pure and
distinct from all others. Otherwise, were not this unity, Without unity should
be confusion of things.
whereby all things are seioyned the on from the other, all things should
suffer mixtion and be in confusion. And where confusion is, there is no order,
nor any thing can be exactly known, either what it is, or what is the nature,
and what are the properties thereof. Unity therefore is that which makes
every thing to be that which it is. Boethius says very aptly: ^oetius in his
book d^ vnitate and vno.
Vnum quodque, idea est, quia vnum numero est, that is every thing therefore is
(that is, therefore has his being in nature, and is that it is) for that it is
on in number. According whereunto Iordane (in that most excellent and absolute
work of A^ithmeticke which he wrote) defines unity after this manner.

Vnitas, est res per se discretio: that is, unity is properly, and of it self
the difference of any thing. That is, An other desinition of unity.
unity is that whereby every thing does properly and essentially differ, and
is an other thing from all others. Certainly a very apt de^inition and it
makes plain the definition here set of Euclide.

The second definition.
2 Number is a multitude composed of unities.
As the number of three, is a multitude composed and made of three unities.
Likewise the number of five is nothing else, but the composition and putting
together of five unities. Although as was before said, between a point in
magnitude, and unity in multitude, there is great agreement and many thi^^^^
are com^on to them both, (for as a point is the beginning of magnitude, so is
unity the beginning of number. And as a point in magnitude is indivisible, so
is also unity in number indivisible) yet in this they differ and disagree.
Differen^e between a point and unity.
There is no line or magnitude made of points, as of his parts. So that
although a point be the beginning of a line, yet is it no part thereof. But
unity, as it is the beginning of number, so is it also a part thereof, which is
somewhat more manifestly set of Boethius in an other d^ffinition of number which
he gives in his Arithmetike, Boethius.
which is thus.

Numerus, est quantitat^ acernus ex vnitatibus profusus, that is. Number is a
mass or heap of quantities produced of unities: which diffinition in
substance is all one with the first, wherein is said most plainly, that the
heap or mass, An other desinition of number.
that is, the whole substance of the quantity of number is produced and made
of unities. So that unity is as it were the very matter of number. As four
unities added together are the matter whereof the number 4. is made, and each of
these unities is a part of the number four, namely, a fourth part, or a
quarter. Unto this diffinition agrees also the definition given of Iordane,
Iordane.
which is thus. Number is a quantity which gathers together things severed
a sonder. An other definition of numbers.
As five men being in themselves severed and distinct, are by the number five
brought together, as it were into one mass, and so of others. And although
unity be no number, yet it contains in it the virtue and power of all
numbers, and is set and taken for them. Unity has in it the virtue and power
of all numbers.


In this place (for the Farther elucidation of things, partly before set, and
chiefly hereafter to be set, because Euclide here does make mention of diverse
kinds of numbers, and also defines the same) is to be noted, that number may
be considered three manner of ways. First, number may be considered absolutely,
without comparyng it to any other number, Number considered three manner of way^.
or without applieng it to any other thing, only vewing and paysing what it is
in it self, and in his own nature only, and what parts it has, and what
proprieties and passions. As this number six, may be considered absolutely in
his own nature, that it is an even number, and that it is a perfect number,
and has many mo conditions and proprieties. And so conceive ye of all other
numbers, whatsoever, of 9. 12. and so forth.

An other way, number may be considered by way of comparison, and in respect of
some other number either as equal to it self, or as greater the^ it self, or
as less the^ it self. As 12. may be considered, as compared to 12. which is
equal unto it, or as to 24. which is greater then it, for 12 is the half
thereof, of as to 6. which is less then it, as being the double thereof. And of
this consideration of numbers arises and springs all kinds and varieties of
proportion: as has before been declared in the explanation of the principles
of the fifth book, so that of that matter it is needelesse any more to be said
in this place.

The third way may numbers be considered as they are applied to forms and
figures of Geometry^ And numbers so considered are not represented by figures
or charactes of number commonly used in Arithmetique, but are signified by
certain points or pricks, which represent the unities which they contain:
which, according to the diversity of the disposition and placing of them, may
represent diverse forms and figures of Geometry^ and according to the nature of
the figure which it represen^eth, ^t takes his name, and is called a
trianguler number, a square number, a cube number or after any other figure. As
if the figure of 10. be described by his unities that they be orderly set in a
straight course, so that they represent the form of a line, then is the number
10 called a lineall number. And if the same number to be so described by his
unities, that it show forth the form of a triangle, then it is called a
trianguler nu^ber^ as ye here see. Likewise if 12 be in such sort described by
his unities, that it represe^teth that form^ or figure which in Geometry is
called a figure on the one side longer^ then shall the number 12 be called a
number having the one side longer, and so may you conceive of all others.

Thus much of this for the declaration of the things following.

3 A part is a less number in comparison to the greater when the less
measures the greater. The third definition.

As the number 3 compared to the number 12. is a part. For 3 is a less number
then is 12. and moreover it measures 12 the greater number. For 3 taken (or
added to it self) certain times (namely, 4 times) makes 12. For 3 four
times is 12. Likewise is ^ a part of 8: 2 is less then 8, and taken 4 times it
makes 8. For the better understanding of this diffinition, and how this word
Part, is diversely taken in Arithmetique and in Geometry, read the declaration
of the first diffinition of the 5. book.

4 Parts are a less number in respect of the greater, when the less
measures not the greater. The fourth definition.

As the number 3 compared to 5, is parts of 5 and not a part. For the number 3
is less then the number 5, and does not measure 5. For taken once it makes
but 3. once 3 is 3, which is less then 5. and 3 taken twice makes 6, which is
more then 5. Wherefore it is no part of 5 but parts, namely, three fifth parts
of 5. For in the number 3 there are 3 unities, and every unity is the fifth
part of 5. Wherefore 3 is three fifth parts of 5, and so of others.

5 Multiplex is a greater number in comparison of the less, when the less
measures the greater. The fifth definition.

As 9 compared to 3 is multiplex, the number 9 is greater then the number 3.
And moreover 3 the less number measures 9 the greater number. For 3 taken
certain times, namely, 3 times makes 9. three times three is 9. For the more
ample and full knowledge of this definition, read what is said in the
explanation of the second definition of the 5 book, where multiplex is
sufficiently entreated of with all his kinds.

6 An even number is that, which may be divided into two equal parts. The
sixth definition.

As the number 6 may be divided into 3 and 3 which are his parts, and they are
equal, the one not exceeding the other. This definition of Euclide is to be
understand of two such equal parts, which joined together, make the whole
number: as 3 and 3 (the equal parts of 6) joined together, make 6, for
otherwise many numbers both even and odd may be divided into many equal
parts, as into 4. 5. 6^ or mo, and therefore into 2. As 9 may be divided into 3
and 3 which are his parts, and are also equal, for the one of them excedeth
not the other: yet is not therefore this number ^ an even number, for that 3 and
3 (these equal parts of 9) added together make not 9 but only 6. Likewise
taking the definition so generally, every number whatsoever should be an even
number^ for in that sort of understanding there is no number, but that it may
be divided into two equal parts: as this number 7 may be divided into 3
parts namely, 3. 1. and 3. of which two, namely, 3 and 3 are equal, yet i^ not
7 an even number, because 3 and 3 added together, make not 7. Boethius therefore
in the first book of his Arithmetike, Boethius.
for the more playnes, after this manner defines an even number: Num^ru^ pa^
est, qui potest in ^qu^lia due diuidi, vna medi^ ^^n intercedenta, that is:

An even number is that which may be divided into two equal parts, without an
unity coming between them. An other definition of an eue^ number.
As 8 is divided into 4 and 4 two equal parts without an^ unity coming
between them, which added together, make 8, so that the sense of this
definition is, that an even number is that which is divided into two such
equal parts, which are his two half parts.

Here is also to be noted, Note.
that a part is taken in this de^inition, and in certain definitions
following, not in the signification as it was before de^ined, namely, for such
a part as^ measures the whole number, but for any part which helps to the
making of the whole, and into which the whole may be r^solued, so are 3 and 5
parts of 8 in this sense but not in the other sense. For neither 3 not 5
measures ^. Pithagoras and his scholars gave an other definition of an even
number (which definition (...) also has) after this manner. Pithagora^.


An even number is that which in one and the same division is divided into the
greatest, and into the least: into the greatest, as touching space, and into
the least as touching quantity. An other definition.
As 10. is divided into 5 and 5. which (...) his greatest parts (which
greatness of parts he calls space) and in the same division the number 10 is
divided but into two parts: but into less the^ two parts nothing can be
divided, which thing he calls quantity, so that 10 divided into 5 and 5. in
that one division, is divided into the greatest, namely, into his halues^ and
into the least, namely, into two parts, and no mo.

There is also another de^inition more ancient, which is thus.

An other definition.
An even number is that which may be divided into two equal parts, and into
two unequal parts, but in neither division (to the constitucion of the whole)
to the even part is added the odd, neither to the odd is added the even. As 8
may be divided diversely, partly into even parts, as into 4 and 4. likewise
into 6 and 2. and partly into odd parts, as into 5 and 3. also into 7 and 1.
In all which deuisions, ye see no odd part joined to an even, nor an even
part joined to an odd: but if the one be even, the other is even, and if the
one be odd, the other is odd. In the two first deuisions, both parts were
even, and in the two last, both parts were odd. It is to be considered that
the two parts added together must make the whole.

This diffinition is general and common to all even numbers, except to the
number 2. which can not be divided into two unequal parts, but only into two
unities, which are equal.

An other definition.
There is yet given an other diffinition of an even number, namely, thus. An
even number is that which only by an unity either above it or under it,
differs from an odd. As 8 being an even number differs from 9 an odd
number, being above it but by one. And also from 7. under it, it differs
likewise by one, and so o^ others.

The seventh definition.
7 An odd number is that which cannot be divided into two equal parts: or that
which only by an unity differs from an even number.
As the number 5 can be by no means divided into two equal parts, namely,
such two which add^d together, shall make 5. Or by the second definition, 5 an
odd number, differs from 6 an even number above ^t, by 1. And the same 5
differs from 4 an even number under it likewise by 1.

(...) number after this manner.

An odd number is that which cannot be divided into two equal parts, but
that an unity shall be between them As if ye divide 5 into 2 and ^. which are
two equal parts, An other definition of an od number.
there remains one or an unity between them to make the whole number 5.

There is yet an other definition of an odd number. An odd number is that,
which being divided into two unequal parts howsoever, the one is ever even,
and the other odd. As if 9 be divided into two parts, which added together,
makes the whole, namely, into 4 and 5. which are unequal: An other definition.
ye see the one is even, namely, 4 and the other is odd, namely, 5. so if ye
divide 9 into 6 and 3. or into 8 and 1. the one part is ever even, and the
other odd.

The eight definition.
8 A number euenly even (called in latin pariter par) is that number, which an
even number measures by an even number.
As 8 is a number euenly even. For 4 an even number measures 8 by 2, which is
also an even number. This definition has much troubled many, and seems not a
true definition, for that there are many numbers which even numbers do measure,
and that by even numbers, which yet are not euenly eue^ numbers, after most
men's minds: as 24. which 6 an eue^ number does measure by four, which is also
an even number, and yet as they think is not 24 an euenly even number, for
that 8 an even number does measure also ^4 by 3. an odd number. Campane.
Wherefore Campane to make his sentence plain, after this manner sets forth
this definition. Pariter par est quem cuncti pares ^um numerantes, paribus
vicibu^ numerane, that is:

An other de^inition of an eue^ly even number.
An euenly even number is, when all the even numbers which measure it, do
measure it by even times, that is, by even numbers, as 16. All the even numbers
whith measure 16, as are 8. 4. and 2. do measure it by even numbers. As 8 by 2,
twice 8 is 16:4 by 4, four times 4 is 16: and 2 by 8, 8 times 2 is 16. Which
particle (all even number) added by Campane makes 24 to be no euenly even
number. For that some one even number measures it by an odd number as 8 by 3.
Flussates also is plainly of this mind, Flussates.
that Euclide gave not this definition in such manner as it is by Theon written,
for the largenes and generality thereof, ^or that it extends it to in^inite
numbers which are not euenly even as he thinks, for which cause in place
thereof, he gives this definition.

An other definition.
A number euenly even, is that which only even numbers do measure. As 16 is
measured of none but of even numbers, and therefore is euenly even. There is
also of Boethius given an other definition of more facility, Boethius.
including in it no doubt at all, which is most commonly used of all writers,
and is thus.

An other definition.
A number euenly even is that which may be divided into two even parts, and
that part again into two even parts, and so continually dividing without stay
(...) come to unity. As by example^ 64. may be divided into 31 and. 32. And
either of these parts may be divided into two even parts, for 32 may be
divided into 16 and 16. Again, 16 may be divided into 8 and 8 which are even
parts, and 8 into 4 and 4. Again 4 into ^ and ^, and last of all may ^ be
divided into one and one.

9 A number euenly odd (called in latin pariter impar) is that which an even
number measures by an odd number. The ninth definition.

As the number 6 which 2 an even number measures by 3 an odd number, three
times 2 is 6. Likewise 10. which 2. an even number measures by 5 an odd
number. In this diffinition also is found by all the expositors of Euclide, the
same want that was found in the diffinition next before. And for that it
extends it self to large, for there are infinite numbers which even numbers
do measure by odd numbers, which yet after their minds are not eue^ly odd
numbers, as for example 12. For 4 an eue^ number, measures 12 by ^ an odd
number^ three times 4 is 12. yet is not 12 as they think an euenly odd
number. Wherefore Campane amendeth it after his thinking, Campane.
by adding of this word all, as he did in the first, and defines it after
this manner.

A number euenly odd is, when all the even numbers which measure it, do
measure it by uneven times, that is, by an odd number.

As 10. is a number euenly odd, An other definition.
for no even number but only 2 measures 10. and that is by 5 an odd number.
But not all the even numbers which measure 12. do measure it by odd numbers.
For 6 an even number measures 12 by 2 which is also even. Wherefore 12 is not
by this definition a number euenly odd. Flussates also offended with the over
large generality of this definition to make the definition agree with the
thing defined puts it after this manner. Flussates.


A number euenly odd, is that which an odd number does measure only by an
even number.

As 14. which 7. an odd number does measure only by 2. which is an even
number. An other definition.
There is also an other definition of this kind of number commonly given of
more plains, which is this.

A number euenly odd in that which may be divided into two equal parts, but
that part cannot again be divided into two equal parts: as 6. may be divided
into two equal parts into 3. and 3. but neither of them can be divided into
two equal parts: for that 3. is an odd number and suffers no such
division. An other definition.


10 A number oddly even (called im lattin in pariter par) is that which an odd
number measures by an even number. The tenth definition.

As the number 12: for 3. an odd number measures 12. by 4. which is an even
number: three times 4. is 12.

This definition is not found in the greek neither was it doubtless ever in
this manner written by Euclide: This definition not found in the Greeks.
which thing the slendernes and the imperfection thereof and the absurdities
following also of the same declare most manifestly. The definition next before
given is in substance all one with this, For what number soever an euen^ number
does measure by an odd, the self same number does an odd number measure by
an even. As 2. an eue^ number measures 6. by 3. an odd number. Wherefore 3. an
odd number does also measure the same number 6. by 2. an eue^ number. Now if
these two definitions be definitions of two distinct kinds of numbers, then is
this number 6. both euenly even, and also euenly odd and so is contained under
two diverse kinds of numbers. Which is directly against the authority of
Euclide who plainly. p^ouo^h here after in the 9. book, that every number
whose half is an odd number, is a number euenly odd only. Flussates has
here very well noted, that these two euenly odd, and oddely even, were taken
of Euclide for on and the self same kind of number. But the number which here
ought to have been placed is called of the best interpreters of Euclide,
numerus pariter par and nupar, that is a number eue^ly eue^, and eue^ly odd.
Ye^ and it is so called of Euclide him self in the 34. proposition of his 9.
book: which kind of number Campanus and Flussates in stead of the
insufficient and v^apt definition before given, assign this definition.

A number euenly even, and euenly ^dde, is that which an even number does
measure sometime by an even number, and sometime by an odd. An other
definition.


As the number 12: for 2. an even number, measures 12. by 6. an even number:
two times 6. i^ 12. Also 4. an even number measures the same number 12. by 3.
an odd number. Add therefore is 12. a number euenly even, and euenly odd, and
so of such others.

The cause why that Campanus and Flussates were so scrupelous in amending (as
they supposed) the two definitions before, Campane and Flussates with other
(...)
namely, of a number eue^ly even and of a number euenly odd, the one by adding
this word all, and the other by adding this word only, was for that they were
offended with the la^^eue^ and generality of them For ^ha^ by them, on and
the self same number might be comprehended under either definition. And so,
the self number should be both euenly even, and also euenly odd: which they
took for an absurdity. For that they are two distinct and diverse kinds of
numbers. But all things well and justly conceived, it shall not be hard nor
amiss to think, that these definitio^s were set and written by Euclide in
such form and ma^er; as they are delivered unto us by Theon: and that they
need not these corrections and amendementes by adding these words all and
only, for admit that they be distinct kinds of numbers, may not contraries be
attributed in diverse respects to one thing? May not one line be said to be
great and little, compared to diverse? Great in comparison of a less, and less
in comparison of a greater? Even so one number in diverse respects may be of
diverse and contrary kinds of numbers. One number in di^ers respects may be of
di^e^^ kinds of numbers.
What are more diverse them a square number and a cube number. And yet ^^ 64. in
diverse respects a number both square and cube. In respect of 8. to be his
root, it is a square number: for 8. times 8. is 64. and in respect of 4. to be
his root, it is a cube number for 4. times 4. four times is 64: so in diverse
respects it is both, without any absurdity at all. Likewise this number 6. in
diverse respects, is a number on the on side longer, and also a triangular
number: which yet are diverse and distinct kinds of numbers. For 6. described
by his unities resembling a figure of leng^he and breadthe having two sides,
namely 2. and 3. is a plain or superficial number of one side longer. And if
the same 6. be so described by his unities, that it represents the figure of
a triangle, then is it and bears it the name of a triangler ^igure: as here
ye may see the form of either. And if ye extend in description thereof all his
unities in length only, so is 6 also a lineall number. So you see 6 in diverse
respects is a lineall number, a number on the one side longer, and also a
trigonall or trianguler number, and yet thereby no inconvenience at all. And why
may not likewise one and the self number in diverse respects be accounted a
number both euenly even, and euenly odd? Yea Euclide him self does most
manifes^ly prove the same, and in the ^ame words, if it be diligently wayed,
in his ninth book. For he says, that all numbers being double in continual
course from the number 2. be euenly even numbers only: and again all numbers
whose halues are odd, are euenly odd numbers only: and that number which
neither is duple from the number two nor has to his half an odd number is a
number euenly even and a number euenly odd. What in this can be spoken more
plainly? So that by Euclide it is no inconvenience that on number, as 12, f^r
example, in diverse respects should be both a number euenly even, and also a
number euenly odd. In respect that 6. an even number measures 12. by 2. an
even number, 12 is a number euenly even: and in respect that 4. an even number
measures 12. by 3. an odd number, 12. is a number euenly odd. And thus judge
ye of all others like.

There is also an other definition given of this kind of number by Boethius and
others commonly which is thus.

Boe^ius def^nition of a number euenly eue^, and euenly ^d
A number eue^ly even and euenly odd is that, which may be divided into two
equal parts, and each of them may a^ayne be divided into two equal parts:
and so forth. But this division is at lenghth stayed, and continues not till it
come to unity. As for example 48: which may be divided into two equal parts,
namely, into 24. and 24. Again 24. which is on of the parts may be divided
into two equal parts 12. and 12. Again 12. into 6. and 6. And again 6 may
be divided into two equal parts, into 3. and 3: but 3. cannot be divided into
two equal parts. Wherefore the division there stays: and continues not
till it come to unity as it did in these numbers which are euenly even only.

The eleventh definition.
11 A number odly odd is that, which an odd number does measure by an odd
number.
As 25, which 5. an odd number, measures by an odd number, namely, by 5.
Five times five is 25: Likewise 21. whom 7. an odd number does measure by 3,
which is likewise an odd number. Three times 7. is 21.

Flus^ates.
Flussatus gives this definition following of this kind of number, which is
all one in substance with the former definition.

A number odly odd, it that, which only an odd number does measure.

An other definition.
As 15. for no number measures 15. but only 5. and 3: also 25: none measures
it but only 5. which is an odd number, and so of others.

The twelfth definition.
12 A prime (or first) number is that, which only unity does measure.
As 5.7.11.13. For no number measures 5, but only unity. For v. unities make
the number 5. So no number measures 7, but only unity.2. taken 3. times
makes 6. which is less then 7: and 2. taken 4. times is 8, which is more then
7. And so of 11.13. and such others. So that all prime numbers, Prime numbers
called incomposed numbers.
which also are called first numbers, and numbers vncomposed, have no part to
measure the^, but only unity.

The thirtenth definition.
13 Numbers prime the one to the other are they, which only unity does
measure, being a common measure to them.
As 15. and 22. be numbers prime the one to the other.15. of it self is no
prime number, for not only unity does measure it, but also the numbe^^ 5. and
3, for ^. times 5. is lx. Likewise 22. is of it self no prime number: for it
is measured by 2. and 11, besides unity. For 11. twice, or 2. eleven times,
make 22. So that although neither of these two numbers 15. and 22. be a prime
or incomposed number, but either have parts of his own, whereby it may be
measured beside unity: yet compared together, they are prime the one to the
other: for no one number does as a common measure, measure both of them but
only unity, which is a common measure to all numbers. The numbers 5. and 3.
which measure 15. will not measure 22: again, the numbers 2. and 11. which
measure 22, do not measure 15.

14 A number composed, is that which some one number measures. The fourtenth
defini^ion.

A number composed is not measured only by unity, as was a prime number, but
has some number which measures it. As 15: the number 3. measures 15, namely,
taken 5. times. Also the number 5. measures 15, namely, taken 3. times. 5.
times ^, and 3. times 5, is 15. Likewise 18. is a composed number, it is
measured by these numbers 6.3.9.2. and so of others. These numbers are also
called commonly second numbers, as contrary to prime or first numbers.

15 Numbers composed the one to the other, are they, which some one number,
being a common measure to them both, does measure. The fiftenth definition.

As 12. and 8. are two composed numbers the one to the other. For the number 4,
is a common measure to them both: 4. taken three times makes 12: and the same
4. taken two times makes 8. So are 9. and 15: 3. measures them both. Also 10.
and 25: for 5. measures both of them: and so infinitely of others. In this do
numbers composed the one to the other or second numbers, differ from numbers
prime the one to the other: for that two numbers being composed the one to the
other, each of them severally is of necessity a composed number. As in the
examples before 8. and 12. are composed numbers: likewise 9. and 15: also 10,
and 25: but if they be two numbers prime the one to the other, ^it is not of
necessity, that each of them severally be a prime number. As 9. and 22. are two
numbers prime the one to the other: no one number measures both of them: and
yet neither of them in it self and in his own nature is a prime number, but
each of them is a composed number. For 3. measures 9, and 11. and 2. measure 22.

16 A number is said to multiply a number, when the number multiplied, The
sixtenth definition.
is so oftentimes added to it self, as there are in the number multiplying
unities: and an other number is produced.
In multiplication are ever required two numbers, the one is whereby ye
multiply, commonly called the multiplier or multiplicant, the other is that
which is multiplied. Two numbers required in multiplication.
The number by which an other is multiplied, namely, the multiplyer, is said to
multiply. As if ye will multiply 4. by 3, then is three said to multiply 4:
therefore according to this definition, because in 3. there are three unities:
add 4,3. times to it self, saying 3. times 4: so shall ye bring forth an
other number, namely, 12, which is the sum produced of that multiplication:
and so of all other multiplications.

17 When two numbers multiplying them selves the one the other, produce an
other: The seuententh definition.
the number produced is called a plain or superficial number. And the numbers
which muliply them selves the one by the other, are the sides of that number.
As let these two numbers 3. and 6, multiply the one the other, saying, 3.
times 6, or six times 3, they shall produce 18. This number 18. thus produced,
is called a plain number, or a superficial number. And the two multiplying
numbers which produced 12, namely, 3. and 6, are the sides of the same
superficial or plain number, that is, the length and breadth thereof.
Likewise if 9. multiply 11, or eleven nine, there shall be produced 99. a plain
number, whose sides are the two numbers 9. and 11 ^ as the length and breadth
of the same. They are called plain and superficial numbers, Why they are
called superficial numbers.
because being described by their unities on a plain superficies, they
represent some superficial form or figure Geometrical, having length and
breadth. As ye see of this example: and so of others. And all such plain or
superficial numbers do ever represent right angled figures as appears in the
example.

The eightenth definition.
18 When three numbers multiplied together ye one into the other, produce any
number, the number produced, is called a solid number: and the numbers
multiplying them selves the one into ye other, are the sides thereof.
As taking these three numbers 3.4. 5. multiply the one into the other. First
4. into 5. saying, four times 5. is 20: then multiply that number produced,
name^y, 20. into 3: which is the third number, so shall ye produce 60. which is
a solid number: and the three numbers which produced the number, namely, 3.4.
and 5. are the sides of the same. And they are called solid numbers, Why they
are called solid numbers.
because being described by their unities, they represent solid and bodylicke
figures of Geometry, which have length, breadth, and thicknes. As ye see this
number 60. expressed here by his unities. Whose length is his side 5, his
breadth is 3, and thicknes 4. And thus may ye do of all other three numbers
multiplying the one the other.

The ninetenth definition.
19 A square number is that which is equally equal: or that which is contained
under two equal numbers.
As multiply two equal numbers the one into the other. As 9. by 9. ye shall
produce 81, which is a square number. Euclide calls it a number equally
equal, because it is produced of the multiplication of two equal numbers the
one into the other. Which numbers are also said in the second definition to
contain a square number. As in the definitions of the second book two lines
are said to contain a square or a parallelogramme figure. It is called a
square number, Why it is called a square number.
because being described by his unities it represents the figure of a square
in Geometry. As ye here see does the number 81. whose sides, that is to say,
whose length and breadth, are 9. and 9, equal numbers: which also are said to
contain the square number 81: and so of others.

The twenteth definition.
20 A cube number is that which is equally equal equally: or that which is
contained under three equal numbers.
As multiply three equal numbers the one into the other, as 9, 9, and 9: first
9. by 9, so shall ye have 81: which again multiply by 9, so shall ye produce
729. which is a cube number. And Euclide calls it a number equally equal
equally, because it is produced of the multiplication of three equal numbers
the one into the other: which three numbers are said in the second definition
(wherein he speaks more applying to Geometry) to contain the cube number. It
is therefore called a cube number, Why it is called a cube number.
because being described by his unities, it represents the form of a cube in
Geometry, whose sides, that is to say, whose length, breadth, and thicknes, are
the three equal numbers 9, 9, and 9, of which he was produced: which three
sides also are said to contain the cube number 729: behold here the
description thereof.

The twenty one definition.
21 Numbers proportional are, when the first is to the second equemultiplex, as
the third is to the fourth, or the self same part, or the self same parts.
Here he defines which numbers are called proportional, that is, what numbers
have one and the self same proportion. For example 6. to 3: and 4. to 2, are
numbers proportional, and have one and the self same proportion: for 6. the
first is to 3. the second equemultiplex, as 4. the third is to 2. the fourth:
^. is double to 3: and so is 4. double to 2. Likewise these four numbers are
in like proportion 3.9.4.1^. for what part 3. is of 9, such part is 4. of 12
^3. of 9. is a third part, so is also 4. of 12. a third part. So are these
four numbers also in proportion ^.5: 4. 10: what parts 2. are of 5, such
parts are 4. of 10: 2, of 5, are two ^ift parts, likewise 4. of 10 are two
fifth parts. Moreover, these numbers 8.6: 1^.9: be in proportion, for what and
how many parts 8. are of 6, such and so many parts are 12. of 9: 8. of 6, is
four third parts, for one third part of 6. is 2, which taken four times
makes 8: so 12. of 9, is also four third parts: for one third part of 9. is
3, which taken four times make 1^. And so conceive ye of all other
proporti^^^ll numbers.

In the (...) definition of the v. book, Euclide gave a ^arre other definition
of magnitudes proportional, and much unlike to this which he here gives of
numbers proportional: Why the definition of proportional magnitudes is unlike
to the definitio of proportional numbers.
the reason is as there also was partly noted, for that there he gave a
definition common to all quantities discrete and continual, rational, and
irrational: and therefore was constrained to give the definition by the
excess, equality or want of their equemultiplices, and that generally only:
for that irrational quantities have no certain part or common measure to be
measured by or known, neither can they be expressed by any certain numbers.
But here in this place because in numbers there are no irrational quantities,
but all are certainly known, so that both they and the proportions between
them may be expressed by numbers certain and known, by reason of their parts
certain, and for that they have some common measure to measure them (at the
lest unity which is a common measure to all numbers) he gives here this
definition of proportional numbers, by that the one is like equemultiplex to
the other, or the same part, or the same parts: which definition is much
easier then was the other: and is not so large, as is the other, neither
extends it self generally to all kind of quantities rational and
irrational, but contains it self within the limits and bonds of rational
quantity and numbers.

22 Like plain numbers, and like solid numbers, are such, The twenty two
definition.
which have their sides proportional.
Before he showed that a plain number has two sides, and a solid number
three sides. Now he shows by this definition which plain numbers, and which
solid numbers are like the one to the other. The likeness of which numbers
depends altogether of the proportions of the sides of these numbers. So that
if the two sides of one plain number, have the same proportion the one to the
other, that the two sides of the other plain number have the one to the other,
then are such two plain numbers like. For an example 6 and 24 be two plain
numbers, the sides of 6 be 2 and 3, two times 3 make 6: the sides of 24 be 4
and 6, four times 6 makes 24. Again the same proportion that is between 3 and
2 the sides of 6. is also between 6 and 4 the sides of 24. Wherefore 24 and 6 be
two like plain and superficial numbers. And so of other plain numbers. After
the same manner is it in solid numbers. If three sides of the one be in like
proportion together, as are the three sides of the other, then is the one
solid number like to the other. As 24 and 192 be solid numbers, the sides of
24. are 2. 3. and 4, two times there taken 4 times are 24. the sides of 192 are
4.6. and 8: for four times 6. 8 times make 192. Again the proportion of 4 to
3 is sesquitercia, the proportion of 3 to 2 is sesquialtera, which are the
proportions of the sides of the one solid number, namely, of 24: the
proportion between 8 and 6 is sesqu^^ercia, the proportion between 6 and 4 is
sesquialtera, which are the proportions of the sides of the other solid
number, namely, of 191. And they are one and the same with the proportione of
the (...) of the other wherefore th^se two solid numbers 24 and 192 be like,
and so of other solid numbers.

23 A perfect number is that, which is equal to all his parts. The twenty
three definition.

As the parts of 6 are 1. 2. 3. three is the half of 6, two the third part,
and 1. the sixth part, and mo p^rtes 6 has not: which thr^^ pa^tes 1.^.3.
added together, make 6 the whole number, whose parts they are. Wherefore 6 is a
perfect number. So likewise is 28 a perfect number, the parts whereof are
these numbers 14. 7. 2. and 1: 14 is the half thereof, 7 is the quarter, 4 is
the seventh part, 2 is a fourtenth part, and 1 an 28 part, and these are all
the parts of 28. all which, namely, 1, 2, 3, 4, 7 and 14 added together, make
justly without more or l^sse 28. Wherefore (...) a perfect number, and so of
others the like. This kind of numbers is very rare and seldom found. Perfect
numbers rare and of great use in magike and in secret philosophy.
From 1 to 10, there is but one perfect number, namely, 6. From 10 to an 100,
there is also but one, that is, 28. Also from 100 to 1000 there is but one
which is 496. From 1000 to 10000 likewise but one. So that between every s^ay
in numbering, which is ever in the tenth place, there is found but one perfect
number And for their rarenes and great perfection, they are of marvelous use in
magike, and in the secret part of philosophy.

This kind of number is called perfect, In what respect a number is perfect.
in respect (...) numbers which are i^perfect. For as the nature of a perfect
number stands in this, that all parts added together are equal to the
whole: and make the whole: so in an imperfect number all the parts added
together are not equal to the whole, nor make the whole, but make either more
or less. Wherefore of imperfect numbers there are two kinds, Two kinds of
imperfect numbers.
the one is called abundan^ or a building, the other (...), or wanting.

A number abunding is that whose parts being all added together make more then
the w^^ds number whose parts they are, as 12. is an abundant number. For all
the parte^ of 12. namely, 6.4.3.2. and 1. added together make 16: which are
more then 12. Likewise 18. is a number abunding, all his part^ n^mely, 9.6.3.2.
and 1. added together make 20. which are more then 18: and so of others.

A ^^mber wan^^ng^
A number diminute, or wanting is that whose parts being all added together,
make less then the whole, or number whose parts they are.

As 9. is a diminute, or wanting number, for all his parts, namely^ 3. and 1.
(more parts he has not) added together make only 4: which are less then 9.
Also 26. is a diminute number, all his parts, namely. 13.2.1. added togeth^r
make only 16: which is a number much less then 26. And so of such like.

Common sentences.
CAmpane and Flussates here add certain common sentences, some of which for
that they are in these three books following sometimes alleged, I thought good
here to annexe.

first common sentence.
1 The less part is that which has the greater denomination: and the greater
part is that, which has the less denomination.
As the numbers 6. and 8. are either of them a part of the number 24:6. is a
fourth part, 4. times 6. is 24: and 8. is a third part, 3. times 8. is 24. Now
forasmuch as 4 (which denominateth what part 6. is of 24) is greater then 3.
(which denominateth what part 8. is of 24.) therefore is 6. a less part of 24^
then is 8. and so is 8. a greater part of 24. the^ 6. is. And so in others.

^^cond ^ommon sentence.
2 Whatsoever numbers are equemultiplices to one and the self same number, or
to equal numbers, are also equal the one to the other.
As if unto the number 3 be taken two numbers containing the same number four
times, that is being equemultiplices to the same number three: the said two
numbers shall be equal. For 4. times 3. will ever be 12. So also will it be if
unto the two equal numbers 3. and 3. be taken two numbers, the one co^taining
the one number 3. four times, the other containing the other number 3. also
four times, that is, being equemultiplices to the equal numbers 3. and 3.

Third common sentence.
3 Those numbers to whom one and the self same number is equmultiplex, or
whose equemultiplices are equal: are also equal the on to the other.
As if the number 18. be equemultiplex to any two numbers, that is, contain
any two numbers twice, thrice, four times etc? As for example 3. times: then
are the said two numbers equal. For 18. divided by 3. will ever bring forth 6.
So that that division made twice will bring forth 6. and 6. two equal numbers.
So also would it follow if the two numbers had equal equemultiplices, namely,
if 18. and 18. which are equal numbers contained any two numbers 3. times.

4 If a number measure the whole, and a part taken away: it shall also measure
the residue. F^urth common sentence.

As if from 24. be taken away 9. there remains 15. And for as much as the
number 3 measures the whole number 24, and also the number taken away, namely,
9. it shall also measure the residue, which is 15^ For 3. measures 15 by five,
five times 3. is 15. And so of others.

^i^th common sentence.
5 If a number measure any number: it also measures every number that the said
number measures.
As the number 6. measuring the number 12. shall also measure all the numbers
that 1^. measureth^ as the numbers 24.36.48.60. and so forth: which the number
12. does measure by the number^ 2.3.4. and 5. And for as much as the number 12.
does measure the numbers 24.36.48. and 60. And the number 6, does measure the
number 12. (namely by 2.) It follows by this common sentence, that the number
6. measures each of th^se numbers 24. 36.48. and 60. And so of others.

6 If a number measure two numbers, Sixth common sentence.
it shall also measure ye number composed of them.
As the number 3 measures these two numbers 6. and 9^ it measures 6. by 2^
and 9. by 3. And therefore by this common sentence it measures the number 15.
which is composed of the numbers 6. and 9: namely it measures it by 5.

7 If in numbers there be proportions how manysoeuer equal or the self same
to one proportion: Seventh com^mon sentence.
they shall al^o be equal or the self same the one to the other.
As if the proportion of the number 6. to the number 3. be as the proportion of
the number 8. to the number 4, if also the proportion of the number 10. to the
number 5. be as the proportion of the number 8. to the number 4: then shall the
proportion of the number 6. to the number 3. be as the proportion of the number
10. is to the number 5: namely, each proportion is duple. And so of others.
Euclide in his ^. book the 11. proposition demonstrated this also in
continual quantity: which although as touching that kind of quantity it
might have been put also as a principle (as in numbers he takes it) yet for
that in all magnitudes their proportion can not be expressed, (as has before
been noted and shall be afterward in the tenth book more at large made
manifest:) therefore he demonstrateth it there in that place, and proves that
it is true as touching all proportions generally whither they be rational or
irrational.

The first Proposition. The first Theoreme. If there be given two unequal
numbers, and if in taking the less continually from the greater, the number
remaining do not measure the number going before, until it shall come to
unity: then are those numbers which were at the beginning given, prime the one
to the other.
SVppose that there be two unequal numbers AB the greater, and CD the less,
and from AB the greater, take away CD the less as often as you can leaving FA,
Constr^ctio^.
and from CD take away FA as often as you can, leaving the number GC. And from
FA take away GC as often as you can, and so do continually till there remain
only unity, which let be HA. Demonstrati^^ leading to an absurdity.
Then I say that no number measures the numbers AB and CD. For if it be
possible let some number measure them, and let the same be E. Now CD measuring
AB leaves a less number then it self, which let be FA^ And FA measuring DC
leaves also a less then it self, namely, GC. And GC meas^ring FA leaves
unity HA. And forasmuch as the number E measures DC, and the number CD
measures the number BF, therefore the number E also measures BF, and it
measures the whole number BA, wherefore it also measures that which remains,
namely, the number FA (by the 4. common sentence of the seventh). But the
number AF measures the number DG, wherefore E also measures DG. And it
measures also the whole DC, wherefore it also measures that which remains,
namely, the number GC (by the same common sentence): but GC measures the
number FH, wherefore also E measures FH, and it meas^reth the whole number FA,
wherefore (by the former common sentence) it also measures that which remains
HA, which is unity, it self being a number, which is impossible. Wherefore no
number does measure the numbers AB and CD, wherefore the numbers AB and CD are
prime numbers the one to the other: which was required to be proved.

The converse of this proposition after Campane.
And if the two numbers, namely AB and CD be prime the one to the other. Then
the less being continually taken from the greater there shall be no stay of that
sustraction, till that you come to unity. For if in the continual
substraction ther^ be a stay before you come to unity. The converse of ^his
proposition.
Suppose that HA be the number whereat the stay is made, which also being
subtrahed out of GC leaves nothing. Wherefore HA measures GC wherefore also it
measures FH by the 5. common sentence of the seventh. And for as much as it
also measures i^ self, therefore it also measures the whole AF by the sixth
common sentence of the seventh, wherefore also it measures DG by the 5. common
sentence. But it is before proved that it measures GC, wherefore it measures
the whole CD, by the sixth common sentence of the seventh: wherefore also it
measures BF by the 5. common sentence of the seventh. And it is also proved
that it measu^eth FA, wherefore also it measures the whole number AB by the
sixth common sentence of the seventh. Now for as much as the number HA
measures the numbers AB and CD, therefore the numbers AB and CD are numbers
composed: wherefore they are not prime the one to the other: which is contra^y
to the supposition.

And by this proposition if there be two numbers given. It is easy to find
out, whether they be prime the one to the other or no. How to ^now whether two
numbers given be prime the one to the other.
For if by such continual substraction of the less from the greater, you come
at the length to unity. Then are those numbers given prime the one to the
other. But if there be a stay before you come to unity, then are the numbers
given, numbers composed the one to the other.

The 1. Problem. The 2. Proposition. Two numbers being given not prime the one
to the other, to find out their greatest common measure.
SVppose the two numbers given not prime the one to the other to be AB and CD.
It is required to find out the greatest common measure of the said numbers AB
and CD. Two cases in this problem.
Now the numbe^ CD either measures the number AB or not. If CD measure AB it
also measures it self. The first case.
Wherefore CD is a common measure to the numbers CD and AB. And it is manifest
also that it is the greatest common measure^ for there is no number greater
then CD that will measure CD.

The second case.
But if CD do not measure AB, then if of the numbers AB and CD, the less be
continually taken away from the greater, there will before you come to unity,
be left a number, which will measure the number going before (by the 1. of the
seventh). For if there should not, then should the numbers AB and CD be prime
the one to the other, which is contrary to the supposition. Let the said number
left by the continual substraction of the less number out of the greater be
FC. So that le^ the number CD measuring AB, and subtrahed out of it as often as
you can le^e a less number then it self, namely AE. And let AE measuring CD,
and subtrahed out of it as often as you can leave a lesse-then it self namely,
CF. And suppos^ that CF do so measure AE that there remain nothing. Then I say
that CF is a common measure to the numbers AB and CD. For forasmuch as CF
measures AE, and AE measures DF, Demonstration of the second case.
therefore CF also measures DF (by the fifth common sentence of the seventh)
and it likewise measures it self, wherefore it also measures the whole CD (by
the sixth common sentence of the seuenth^)^ but CD measures BE, wherefore CF
also measures BE (by the ^ifte common sentence of the seventh). And it
measures also EA: That CF is a common measure to the numbers AB and CD.
wherefore it also measures the whole BA (by the sixth common sentence of the
seventh): and it also measures CD as we have before proved: wherefor^ the
number CF measures the numbers AB and CD wherefore the number CF is a common
measure to the numbers AB and CD.

I say also that it is the greatest common measure. For if CF be not the
greatest common measure to AB and CD, That CF is the greatest common measure to
AB and CD.
let there be a number greater then CF, which measures AB and CD: which let be
G. And forasmuch as G measures CD, and CD measures BE, therefore G also
measures BE (by the ^^ft common sentence of the seventh). And it measures the
whole AB, wherefore also it measures the residue, namely, AE (by the 4. common
sentence of the se^enth). But AE measures DF, wherefore G also measures DF
(by the foresaid 5. common sentence of the seventh). And it measures the whole
CD. Wherefore it also measures the residue FC: namely, the greater number the
less: which is impossible. No number therefore greater then CF shall measure
those numbers AB and CD: wherefore CF is the greatest common measure to AB and
CD: which was required to be done.

Corrolary.
Hereby it is manifest, that if a number measure two numbers it shall also
measure their greatest common measure. For if it measure the whole and the part
taken away, it shall always measure the residue also, which residue is at the
length, the greatest common measure of the two numbers given.

The 2. Problem. Th 3. Proposition. Three numbers being given, not prime the
one to the other: to find out their greatest common measure.
SVppose the three numbers given not prime the one to the other to be A, B, C.
Now it is required unto the said numbers A, B, C to find out the greatest
common measure. Take the greatest common measure of the two numbers A and B (by
the 2 of the seventh) which let be D: which number D either measures the
number C or not.

First let D measure C. And it also measures the numbers A and B, Two cases in
this Proposition.
wherefore D measures the numbers A, B, C. Wherefore D is a common measure unto
the numbers A, B, C. Then I say also, that it is the greatest common measure
unto them. For if D be not the greatest common measure unto the numbers A, B,
C, The first case.
let some number greater then D measure the numbers A, B, C. And let the same
number be E. Now forasmuch as E measures the numbers A, B, C, it measures
also the numbers A, B. Wherefore it measures also the greatest common measure
of the numbers A, B (by the Corollary of the second of the seventh). B^t the
greatest common measure of the numbers A, B, is the number D (by construction).
Wherefore the number E measures the number D, namely, the greater the less:
which is impossible. Where^ore no number greater the^ D measures the numbers
A, B, C. Wherefore D is the greatest common measure to the numbers A, B, C.

The second case.
But now suppose that D do not measure C. First I say that D and C are not prime
numbers the one to the other. For forasmuch as the numbers A, B, C, are not
prime the one to the other (by supposition) some one number will measure them:
but that number that measures the numbers A, B, C, shall also measure the
numbers A, B, and shall likewise measure the greatest common measure of AB,
namely, D (by the Corollary of the second of the seventh). And the said number
measures also C. Wherefore some one number measures the numbers D and C.
Wherefore D and C are not prime the one to the other.

Now then let there be taken (by the 2. of the seventh) the greatest common
measure unto the numbers D and C, which let be the number E. And forasmuch as E
measures D, and D measures the numbers A, B, therefore E also measures the
numbers A, B (by the sixth common sentence): and it measures also C. Wherefore E
measures the numbers A, B, C. Wherefore E is a common measure unto the numbers
A, B, C. I say also that it is the greatest. For if E be not the greatest
common measure unto the numbers A, B, C, let there be some number greater then
E, which measures the numbers A, B, C. And let the same number be ^. And
forasmuch as F measures the numbers A, B, C: it measures also the numbers A,
B. Wherefore also it measures the greatest common measure of the numbers A, B
(by the Corollary of the 2. of the seventh). But the greatest common measure of
the numbers A, B, is D. Wherefore E measures D. And it measures also the
number C. Wherefore F measures the numbers D, C. Wherefore also (by the same
Corollary) it measures the greatest common measure of the numbers D, C. But
the greatest common measure of the numbers D, C, is E. Wherefore F measures E,
namely, the greater number the less: which is impossible. Wherefore no number
greater then E shall measure the numbers A, B, C. Wherefore E is the greatest
common measure to the numbers A, B, C: which was required to be done.

Corollary.
Wherefore it is manifest, that if a number measure three numbers, it shall
also measure their greatest common measure. And in like sort more numbers being
given not prime the one to the other may be found out their greatest common
measure, and the Corollary will follow.

The 2. Theoreme. The 4. Proposition. Every less number is of every greater
number, either a part, or parts.
Two cases in this Proposition.
SVppose there be two numbers A and BC. Of which let BC be the less. Then I
say, that BC is either a part or parts of A. For the numbers A and BC are
either prime the one to the other, or not. First let A and BC be prime the one
to the other. The first case.
And divide the number BC into those unities which are in it. Now every one of
the unities which (...) in BC i^ some certain part of A^ Wherefore BC are
parts of A.

But now suppose that the number^ A and BC (...) not prime the one to the
other. Then BC either measures A or not measures it. The second case.
If BC measure: A, then is BC a part of A. But if not^ take (by the 2. of the
seventh) the greatest common ^eas^r^ of A and BC, and let the same be D. And
let BC be divided into as man^ pa^te^ as it has equal unto D, that is into
BE, EF^ and FC. And forasmuch as D measures A, therefore D i^ a part of A. But
D is equal unto every one of these parts BE, OF, and FC. Wherefore also every
one of these parts BE, OF, and FC, is a part of A. Wherefore the number BC is
parts of A. Wherefore every less number is of every greater number, either a
part or parts: which was required to (...) proved.

The 3. Theoreme. The 5. Proposition. If a number be a part of a number, and an
other number the self same part of an other number, then both the numbers
added together shall be the self same part of both the numbers added together,
which one number was of one number.
SVppose the number A to be a part of the number BC, and let an other number,
namely, D, be the self same part of an other number, namely, of OF. The^ I
say, This proposition, and the 6. proposition in discrete quantity, answer to
the first of the fifth in continual quantity.
that the numbers A and D added together, are the self same part of the
numbers BC and OF added together, that A is of BC. For forasmuch as what part
the number A is of the number BC, the self same part is the number D of the
number ^ F, therefore h^w many numbers there are in BC equal unto A, so many
numbers are there in OF equal unto D. Divide I^ say, BC into the numbers that
are equal unto A, that is, into BG, and GC, and likewise divide OF into the
numbers that are equal unto D, that is, into EH and HF^ Now then the multitude
of these BG and GC is equal unto the multitude of these EH and HF.
Demonstration.
And forasmuch as BG is equal unto A, and EH, unto D, therefore BG and EH are
equal unto A and D. And by the same reason forasmuch as GC is equal unto A,
and HF unto D: therefore GC and HF are also equal unto A and D. Wherefore how
many numbers there are in BC equal unto A^ so many are there in BC and OF
equal unto A and D. Wherefore how multiplex BC is to A, so multiplex are both
the numbers BC and OF, to both the numbers A and D. Wherefore what part A is of
BC, the self part also are A and D added together, of BC and OF added
together: which was required to be proved.

The 4. Theoreme. The 6. Proposition. If a number be parts of a number, and an
other number the self same parts of an other number^ then both numbers added
together shall be of both numbers added together the self same parts, that
one number was of one number.
SVppose that the number AB be parts of the number C, and let an other number,
namely, DE be the self same parts of an other number, namely, of F. Then I
say, that the numbers AB and DE added together, are of the numbers C and F
added together the self same parts, that AB is of C. Construction.
For forasmuch as what parts AB is of C, the self same parts is DE of F:
therefore how many parts of C there are in AB, so many parts of F are there
in DE. Divide AB into the parts of C, that is, into AG and GB, and likewise DE
into the parts of F, that is, into DH and HE. Demonstration.
Now then the multitude of these AG and GB is equal to the multitude of these
DH and HE. And forasmuch as what part AG is of C, the self same part is DH of
F^ therefore what part AG is of C, the self same part is AG and DH added
together of C and F added together. And by the same reason also what part GB is
of C, the self same part is GB and HE added together of C and F added
together. Wherefore what parts AB is of C, the self same parts are AB and DE
added together of C and F added together: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 5. Theoreme. The 7. Proposition. If a number be the self same part of a
number, that a part taken away is of a part taken away: then shall the residue
be the self same part of the residue, that the whole was of the whole.
Thi^ proposition and the next following in discret quantity answers to the
fifth proposition of the fifth book in continual quantity.
SVppose that the number AB be of the number CD the self same part, that the
part taken away AE is of the part taken away CF. Then I say, that the residue
EB is of the residue FD the self same part that the whole AB is of the whole
CD. What part AE is of CF, the self same part let EB be of GC. And for that
what part AE is of CF, the same part is EB of CG, therefore what part AE is of
CF, the same part (by the 5. of the seventh) is AB of FG. But what part AE is
of CF, the same part (by supposition) is AB of CD. Wherefore what part AB is of
FG, the self same part is AB of CD. Construction.
Wherefore AB is one and the self same part of both these numbers GF and CD.
Wherefore GF is equal unto CD (by the second common sentence of the seventh).
Take away CF which is common to them both. Wherefore the residue GC is equal
unto the residue FD. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as what part AE is of CF, the same part is EB of GC: but GC is
equal unto FD: therefore what part AE is of FC, the self same part is EB of
FD. But what part AE is of CF, the same part is AB of CD. Wherefore what part
EB is of FD, the same part is AB of CD. Wherefore the residue EB is of the
residue FD the self same part that the whole AB is of the whole CD: which was
required to be demonstrated.

The 6. Theoreme. The 8. Proposition. If a number be of a number the self same
parts, that a part taken away is of a part taken away, the residue also shall
be of the residue the self same parts that the whole is of the whole.
SVppose that the number AB be of the number CD the self same parts that the
part taken away AE is of the part taken CF. Then I say, that the residue EB is
of the residue FD the self same parts that the whole AB is of the whole CD.
Unto AB put an equal number GH. Constu^ction.
Wherefore what parts GH is of CD, the self same parts is AE of CF. Divide
GH into the parts of CD, that is, GK, and KH, and likewise AE into the parts
of CF, that is, into AL and LE. Now then the multitude of these GK and KH, is
equal unto the multitude of these AL and LE. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as what part GK is of CD, the self same part is AL of CF: but
CD is greater then CF. Wherefore GK is greater then AL. Put unto AL an equal
number MG. Wherefore what part GK is of CD, the same part is GM of CF.
Wherefore the residue MK is (by the 7. of the seventh) of the residue FD, the
self same part that the whole GK is of the whole CD. Again, forasmuch as what
part KH is of CD, the self same part is EL of CF: but CD is greater then CF.
Wherefore HK is greater then EL. Put unto EL an equal number KN. Wherefore
what part KH is of CD, the self same part is KN of CF. Wherefore the residue
also NH is (by the 7. of the seventh) of the residue FD, the self same part
that the whole KH is of the whole DC. Wherefore both these MK and NH added
together are (by the 5. of the seventh) of DF the self same parts that the
whole HG is of the whole CD. But both these MK and NH added together, are
equal unto EB. And HG is equal unto BA. Wherefore the residue EB is of the
residue FD the self same parts that the whole AB is of the whole CD: which
was required to be proved.

An other demonstration after Flussates.
Suppose that the number AB be of the number CD the self same parts that the
part taken away AE is of the part taken away CF. An other demonstration after
Flussates.
Then I say, that the residue EB is of the residue FD the self same parts
that the whole AB is of the whole CD. Let EB be of CI the self same parts that
AB is of CD, or AE of C^. Now forasmuch as EB is of CI the self same parts
that AE is of CF: therefore both these AE and EB added together are of both
these CF and CI added together (that is, the whole AB is of the whole FI) the
self same parts that AE is of CF (by the sixth of this book). But what parts
AE is of CF, the self same parts is the number AB of the number CD (by
supposition). Wherefore what parts the number AB is of the number FI, tho
self same parts is the same number AB of the number CD. Wherefore the numbers
FI and CD are equal. Take away the number CF which is common to them both.
Wherefore the numbers remaining CI and ^D are equal. Wherefore what parts the
number EB is of the number CI, the self same parts is the same number EB of
the number FD. But what parts EB is of CI, the self same parts (by
construction) is AB of CD. Wherefore what parts the residue EB is of the
residue FD, the self same parts is the whole AB of the whole CD: which was
required to be proved.

The 7. Theoreme. The 9. Proposition. If a number be a part of a number, and if
an other number be the self same part of an other number: then alternately what
part or parts the first is of the third, the self same part or parts shall
the second be of the fourth.
SVppose that the number A be of the number BC the self same part, that an
other number D is of an other number OF. And let A be less then D. Then I say,
that alternately what part or parts A is of D, the self same part or parts
is BC of OF. Construction.
For forasmuch as what part A is of BC, the self same part is D of OF,
therefore how many numbers there are in BC equal unto A, so many are there in
OF equal unto D. Divide BC into the numbers equal unto A, that is, into BG
and GC: and likewise OF into the numbers equal unto D, that is, into EH and
HF. Now then the multitude of these BG and GC, is equal unto the multitude of
these EH and HF. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the numbers BG and GC are equal the one to the other, the
numbers also EH and HF are equal the one to the other: and the multitude of
these BG and GC is equal unto the multitude of these EH and HF. Wherefore what
part or parts BG is of EH, the self same part or parts is GC of HF. Wherefore
what part or parts BG is of EH, the self same part or parts (by the fifth and
sixth of the seventh) are BG and GC added together, of EH and HF added together.
But BG is equal unto A, and EH unto D. Wherefore what part or parts A is of
D, the self same part or parts is BG of OF: which was required to be
demonstrated.

The 8. Theoreme. The 10. Proposition. If a number be parts of a number, and
an other number the self same parts of an other number, then alternately what
parts or part the first is of the third, the self same parts or part is the
second of the fourth.
SVppose that the number AB be of the number C the self same parts, that an
other number DE is of an other number F, and let AB be less then DE. Then I
say, that alternately also what part or parts AB is of DE, the self same
parts or part is C of F. Forasmuch as what parts AB is of C, the self same
parts is DE of F: Construction.
therefore how many parts of C there are in AB, so many parts of F also are
there in DE. Divide AB into the parts of C, that is, into AG and GB. And
likewise DE into the parts of F, that is, DH and HE. Now then the multitude of
these AG and GB, is equal unto the multitude of these DH and HE. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as what part AG is of C, the self same part is DH of F,
therefore alternately also (by the former) what part or parts AG is of DH, the
self same part or parts is C of F. And by the same reason also what part or
parts GB is of HE, the same part or parts is C of F. Wherefore what part or
parts AG is of DH, the self same part or parts is AB of DE (by the 6. of the
seventh). But what part or parts AG is of DH, the self same part or parts is
it proved that C is of F. Wherefore what parts or part AB is of D E, the self
same parts or part is C of F: which was required to be proved.

The 9. Theoreme. The 11. Proposition. If the whole be to the whole, as a part
taken away is to a part taken away: then shall the residue be unto the residue,
as the whole is to the whole.
This proposition i^ discret quantity answers to the ninth prop^sitio^ of
the fifth book in continual quantity.
SVppose that the whole number AB be unto the whole number CD, as the part taken
away AE, is to the part taken away CF. The^ I say that the residue EB, is to
the residue FD, as the whole AB is to the whole CD. For forasmuch as, AB is to
CD, as AE is to CF: therefore what part or parts AB is of CD, the self same
part or parts is AE of CF. Wherefore also the residue EB is of the residue
FD(by the 8. of the seventh) the self same part o^ parts that AB is of CD.
Demonstration.
Wherefore also (by the 21. definition of this book) as EB is to FD, so is AB
to CD: which was required to be proved.

The 10. Theoreme. The 12. Proposition. If there be a multitude of numbers how
many soever proportional: as one of the antecedentes is to one of the
consequentes, so are all the antecedentes to all the consequentes.
SVppose that there be a multitude of numbers how many soever proportional,
namely, A, B, C, D, so that as A is to B, so let C be to D. This in discret
quantity answers to the twelfe proposition of the fifth in continual quantity.
Then I say that as one of the antecedentes, namely, A is to one of the
consequentes, namely, to B, or as C is to D, so are all the antecedentes:
namely, A and C to all the consequentes, namely, to B and D. For forasmuch as
(by supposition) as A is to B, so is C to D, therefore what part or parts A is
of B, the self same part or parts is C of D (by the 21. definition of this
book) wherefore alternately what part or parts A is of C the self same part
or parts is B of D (by the ninth and tenth of the seventh) wherefore both
these numbers added together, Demonstration.
A and C, are of both these numbers B and D added together the self same part
or parts that A is of B (by the 5. and 6. of the seventh) wherefore (by the 21.
definition of the seventh) as one of the antecedents, namely, A, is to one of
the consequentes, namely, to B, so are all the antecedentes A and C to all the
consequentes B and D. Which was required to be proved.

The 11. Theoreme. The 13. Proposition. If there be four numbers
proportional: then alternately also they shall be proportional.
SVppose that there be four numbers proportional, This in discrete quanti^y
answers to the sixtenth proposition of the fifth book in continual
quantity.
A, B, C, D, so that as A is to B, so let C be to D. Then I say that
alternately also they shall be proportional, that is. as A is to C, so is B to D.
For forasmuch as (by supposition) as A is to B, so is C to D, therefore (by the
21. definition of this book) what part or parts A is of B the self same part
or parts is C of D. Therefore alternately what part or parts A is of C the
self same part or parts is B of D (by the 9. of the seventh) and also (by the
10. of the same): wherefore as A is to C, so is B to D (by the 21. definition of
this book): which was required to be proved.

Here is to be noted, that although in the foresaid example and demonstration
the number A be supposed to be less then the number B, and so the number C is
less then the number D: Note.
yet will the same serve also though A be supposed to be greater then B, whereby
also C shall be greater then D, as in th^s example here put. For for that (by
supposition) as A is to B, so is C to D, and A is supposed to be greater then
B, and C greater then D: therefore (by the 21. definition of this Book) how
multiplex A is to B, so multiplex is C to D, and therefore what part or parts
B is of A, the self same part or parts is D of C. Wherefore alternately what
part or parts B is of D, the self same part or parts is A of C, and
therefore by the same definition, B is to D, as A is to C. And so must you
understand of the former Proposition next going before.

The 12. Theoreme. The 14. Proposition. If there be a multitude of numbers how
many soever, and also other numbers equal unto them in multitude, which being
compared two and two are in one and the same proportion: they shall also of
equality be in one and the same proportion.
This in discrete quantity an^wereth to t^^ twenty one proposition o^ the fifth
book in continual quantity.
SVppose that there be a multitude of numbers how many soever: namely, A, B, C,
and let the other numbers equal unto them in multitude be D, E, F: which being
compared two and two, let be in one and the same proportion: that is, as A to
B, so let D be to E: and as B is to C, so let E be to F. Then I say, that of
equality, as A is to C, so is D to F. For forasmuch as by supposition as A is
to B, so is D to E: therefore alternately also (by the 13 of the seventh) as A
is to D, so is B to E. Again, for that as B is to C, so is E to F:
Demonstration.
therefore alternately also (by the self same) as B is to E, so is C to F. But
as B is to E, so is A to D. Wherefore (by the seventh common sentence of the
seventh) as A is to D, so is C to F. Wher^ore alternately (by the 13. of the
seventh) as A is to C, so is D to F: which was required to be demonstrated.

After this Proposition, Campane demonstrateth in numbers these four kinds of
proportionalitie, Certain additions of ^a^pane.
namely, proportion converse, composed, divided, and euerse: which were in
continual quantity, demonstrated in the 4. 17. 18. and 19. propositions of the
fifth book. And first he demonstrateth converse proportion in this manner.

Suppose that the number A be to the number B, as the number C is to the number
D. Two cases in this p^^positio^.
Then I say, that conuersedly B is to A, as D is to C. For if A be less then,
B, C also shall be less then D, and what part or parts A is of B, the self
same part or parts is C of D. The fi^s^ case.
Wherefore B is equemultiplex to A, as D is to C. Wherefore (by the 21.
definition of this book) as B is to A, so is D to C.

The second case.
But if A be greater then B, C also is greater then D: and what part or parts
B is of A, the self same part or parts is D of C. Wherefore (by the same
definition) as B is to A, so i^ D to C: which was required to be proved.

Proportionalitie divided, is thus demonstrated.
Suppose that the number AB be to the number B, as the number CD is to the
number D. Then I say, Prop^rtionality divided.
that divided also, as A is to B, so is C to D. For for that as AB is to B, so
is CD to D: therefore alternately (by the 14. of this book) as AB is to CD, so
is B to D. Wherefore (by the 11. of this book) as AB is to CD, so is A to C.
Wherefore as B is to D, so is A to C: and for that as A is to C, so is B to D,
therefore alternately as A is to B, so is C to D.

Proportionalitie composed, is thus demonstrated.
Pr^portionali^y composed.
If A be unto B, as C is to D: then shall AB be to B, as CD is to D. For
alternately A is to C, as B is to D. Wherefore (by the 13. of this book) as
AB, namely, all the antecedentes are to CD, namely, to all the consequentes, so
is B to D, namely, one of the antecedentes to one of the consequentes. Wherefore
alte^nately as AB is to B, so is CD to D.

Euerse proportionalitie, is thus proved.
Euerse proportionality.
Suppos^ that AB be to B, as CD is to D: then shall AB be to A, as CD is to C.
For alternately AB is to CD, a^ B is to D. Wheref^r^ (by the 13. of this boo^^)
A^ is ^ CD, as A is to C. Wherefore alternately AB i^ to A, a^ CD i^ to C:
which was required to be proved.

A proportion here added by Campane.
If the proportion of the first to the second, be as the proportion of the
third to the fo^rth, and if the proporti^n of ^he fifth to the second be as the
prop^rtion of the sixth to the fourth: then the proportion of the first and the
fifth taken together, shall be to the second, as the proportion ^f the third
and the sixth taken together to the fourth.

As if A be unto B, as C is to D: and if also E be to B, as F is to D. This
propos^tion in discret quantity answers to the 24. proposition of the fif^h
book in con^inual quantity.
Then shall A and E taken together, be unto B, as C and F taken together, are
unto D. For by converse proportionalitie, B is to E, as D is to F. Wherefore by
proportion of equality, as A is to E, so is C to F. Wherefore (by composition)
as A and E are to E, so are C and F to F. But (by supposition) as E is to B, so
is F to D. Wherefore again by proportion of equality, as A and E are to ^, so
are C and F to D: which was req^ired to be proved.

And after the same manner may you prove the converse of this Proposition. If B
be to A, as D is to C^ and if also B be unto E, as D is to F: Then shall B be
to AE, as D is to CF. For by converse proportionalitie, The conuers^ of the
same pr^position.
A is to B, as C is to D. Wherefore of equality, A is to E, as C is to F.
Wherefore by composition A and E are to E, as C and F are to F. Wherefore
conuersedly, E is to A and E, as F is to C and F. But by supposition, B is to
E, as D is to F. Wherefore again by Proportion of equality, B is to A and E,
as D is to C and F: Demonstration.
which was required to be proved.

A Corollary.
By this also it is manifest that if the proportion of numbers how many soever
unto the first, be as the proportion of as many other numbers unto the second,
A Corollary followi^g th^se propositions ad^ed by Campa^e.
then shall the proportion of the numbers composed of all the numbers that were
antecedentes to the first, be to the first, as the number composed of all the
numbers that were antecedentes to the second is to the second. And also
conuersedly if the proportion of the first to numbers how many soever, be as
the proportion of the second to as many other numbers: then shall the
proportion of the first to the number composed of all the numbers that were
consequentes to it self, be as the proportion of the second to the number
composed of all the numbers that were consequen^es to it self.

The 13. Theoreme. The 15. Proposition. If unity measure any number, and an
other number do so many times measure an other number: unity also shall
alternately so many times measure the third number, as the second does the
fourth.
SVppose that unity A do measure the number BC: and let an other number D so
many times measure some other number, namely, OF. Then I say, that alternately,
unity A shall so many times measure the number D, as the number BC does
measure the number OF. Co^str^ctio^.
For forasmuch as unity A does so many times measure BC, as D does OF:
therefore how many unities there are in BC, so many numbers are there in OF
equal unto D. Divide (I say) BC into the unities which are in it, that is,
into BG, GH, and HC. And divide likewise OF into the numbers equal unto D,
that is, into EK, KL, and LF. Now then the multitude of these BG, GH, and HC,
is equal unto the multitude of these EK, KL, LF. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as these unities BG, GH, and HC, are equal the one to the
other, and these numbers EK, KL, and LF, are also equal the one to the other,
and the multitude of the unities BG, GH, and HC, are equal unto the multitude
of the numbers EK, KL, and LF: therefore as unity BG is to the number EK, so
is unity GH to the number KL, and also unity HC to the number LF. Wherefore
(by the 12^ of the seventh) as one of the antecede^t^^ ^s to one of the
consequentes, so are all the anteceden^es to all the consequentes: Wherefore as
unity BG is to the number EK, so is the number BC to the number OF. But unity
BG is equal unto unity A, and the number EK to the number D. Wherefore (by
the 7. common sentence) as unity A is to the number D, so is the number BC to
the number OF. Wherefore unity A measures the number D, so many times, as BC
measures OF (by the 21 definition of this book): which was required to be
proved.

The 14. Theoreme. The 16. Proposition. If two numbers multiplying them selves
the one into the other, produce any numbers: the numbers produced shall be
equal the one into the other.
SVppose that there be two numbers A and B: and let A multiplying B produce C,
and let B multiplying A produce D. Th^n I say, that the number C^ equal unto
the n^mber D. Demons^ra^ion.
Take any unity, namely^ E. And forasmuch as A multiplying B produced C,
therefore B measures C by the unities which are in A. And unity E measures
the number A by those unities which are in the number A. VVhere^ore unity E so
many times measures A, as B measures C. Wherefore alternately (by the 15. of
the seventh) unity E measures the number B so many times as A measures C.
Again, for that B multiplying A produced D, therefore A measures D by the
unities which are in B. And unity E measures B by the unities which are in B.
Wherefore unity E so many times measures the number B, as A measures D. But
unity E so many times measures the number B, as A measures C. Wherefore A
measures either of these numbers C and D a like. Wherefore (by the 3. common
s^ntence of this book) C is equal unto D: which was required to be
demonstrated.

The 15. Theoreme. The 17. Proposition. If one number multiply two numbers, and
produce other numbers, the numbers produced of them, shall be in the self same
proportion, that the numbers multiplied are.
SVppose that the number A multiplieng two numb^rs B and C, do produce the
numbers D and E. Then I say that as B is to C, so is D to E. Take unity,
namely, F. And ^orasmuch as A multiplieng B produced D, therefore B measures D
by those unities that are in A. And unity F measures A by th^s^ v^iti^^ whih
are in A. ^emonstra^ion.
Wherefore unity F so many times measures the number A, as B measures D.
Wherefore as unity I is to the number A. so is the number B to the number D
(by the 21 definition of this book) And by the same reason, as unity F is to
the number A, so is the number C to the number E: wherefore also (by the 7.
common sentence of this book) as B is to D, so is C to E. Wherefore
alternately (by the 15. of the seventh) as B is to C, so is D to E. If therefore
one number multiply two numbers^ and produce other numbers: the numbers
produced of them, shall be in the self same proportion, that the numbers
multiplied are: which was required to be proved.

Here Flu^^tes adde^h thi^ Co^ollary.
If two number^ having one and the sam^ proporti^^ with two other numbers do
multiply the o^e the other alternately, A Corollary added by Fluss^tes.
and produce any numbers, the numbers produced of them shall be equal the one
to the other.

Suppose that there be two number^ ^ and B, and also two other numbers C and D,
having the same proportion that the numbers A and B have: and let the numbers A
and B multiply the number^ C and D alternately, that is, let A multiplieng D
produce F, and let B multiplieng C produce E. Then I say that the numbers
produced namely, E and F are equal. Let A and B multiply the one the other in
such sort, that let A multiplieng B produce G, and let B, multiplieng A produce
H, Now then the numbers G and H are equal by the 16. of this booke^ And
forasmuch as A multipli^ng the two numbers B and D, produced the numbers G and
F, therefore G is to ^, as B is to D by this proposition. So likewise B
multiplieng the two numbers A and C produced the two numbers H and E. Wherefore
by the same H is to E as A is to C. But alternately (by the 13. of this book)
A is to C as B is to D, but as A is to C so is H to E, and as ^ is to D, so is
G to ^. Wherefore by the seventh common sentence, as H is to E^ so is G to F.
Wherefore a^ternately (by the 13. of this book) H is to G as E is to F. But it
is proved that G and H are equal: Wherefore E and F (which have the same
proportion that A and B have) are equal. If therefore there be two numbers,
etc. Which was required to be proved.

The 16. Theoreme. The 18. Proposition. If two numbers multiply any number, and
produce other numbers: the numbers of them produced, shall be in the same
proportion that the numbers multiplying are.
SVppose that two numbers A and B multiplieng the number C, do produce the
numbers D and E. Demonstration.
Then I say that as A is to B, so is D to E. For forasmuch as A multiplieng C
produced D, therefore C multiplieng A produces also D (by the 16. of this
book.) And by the same reason C multiplieng B produces E. Now then one number
C multiplieng two numbers A and B, produces the numbers D and E. Wherefore by
the 17. of the seventh, as A is to B, so is D to E: which was required to be
demonstrated.

This Proposition, and the former touching two numbers, may be extended to
numbers how many soever. This proposition and the former may be extended to
numbers how many soever.
So that if one number multiply numbers how many soever, and produce any
numbers, the proportion of the numbers produced, and of the numbers multiplied,
shall be one and the self same. Likewise if numbers how many soever multiply
one number, and produce any numbers, the proportion of the numbers produced^
and of the numbers multiplieng shall be one and the self same: which thing by
this and the former proposition repeted as often as is needful, is not hard
to prove.

The 17. Theoreme. The 19. Proposition. If there be four numbers in
proportion: the number produced of the first and the fourth, is equal to that
number which is produced of the second and the third. And if the number which
is produced of the first and the fourth be equal to that which is produced of
the second and the third: those four numbers shall be in proportion.
This proposition in numbers demonstrateth that which the 16. of the sixth
book demonstrateth in lines.
SVppose that there be four numbers in proportion A, B, C, D, as A is to B, so
let C be to D. And let A multiplieng D produce E: and let B multiplieng C
produce F. Then I say that the number E is equal unto the number F. Let A
multiplieng C produce G. Now forasmuch as A multiplieng C, produces G, and
multiplieng D it produces E: it follows that the number A multiplieng two
numbers C and D, produces G and E. Wherefore by the 17 of the seventh, as C is
to D, so is G to E. But as C is to D, so is A to B, wherefore as A is to B, so
is G to E. Construction.
Again, forasmuch as A multiplieng C produced G, and B multiplieng C produced
F: Demonstration.
therefore two numbers A and B, multiplieng one number C, do produce G and F.
Wherefore by the 18. of the seventh, as A is to B, so is G to F. But as A is to
B, so is G to E: wherefore as G is to E, so is G to F. Wherefore G has to
either of these E and F one and the same proportion (But if one number have to
two numbers one and the same proportion, the said^ two numbers shall be
equal). Wherefore E is equal unto F.

But now again, suppose that E be equal unto F. Then I say that as A is to B,
so is C to D. The second part of this proposition which is the converse of the
first.
For the same order of construction remaining still, forasmuch as A multiplieng
C and D produced G and E, therefore by the 17. of the seventh, as C is to D so
is G to E, but E is equal unto F (But if two numbers be equal, one number
shall have unto them on^ and the same proportion) wherefore as G is to E, so is
G to F. But as G is to E, so is C to D. Wherefore as C is to D, so is G to F,
but as G is to F, so is A to B by the 18. of the seventh, wherefore as A is to B
so is C to D: Demonstration.
which was required to be proved.

An assumpt added by Campane.
Here Campane adds, that it is needeles to demonstrate, that if one number
have to two numbers one and the same proportion, the said two numbers shall be
equal: or that if they be equal, one number has to them one and the same
proportion. For (says he) if G have unto E and F one and the same proportion,
the^ either, what part or parts G is to E, the same part or parts is G also of
F: or how multiplex G is to E, so multiplex is G to F (by the 21. definition)
And therefore by the 2 and 3 common sentence, the said numbers shall be equal.
And so conuersedly, if the two numbers E and F be equal, then shall the numbers
E and F be either the self same part or parts of the number G, or they shall
be equemultiplices unto it. And therefore by the same definition the number G
shall have to the numbers E and F one and the same proportion.

The 18. Theoreme. The 20. Proposition. If there be three numbers in
proportion, the number produced of the extremes, is equal to the square made
of the middle number. And if that number which is produced of the extremes, be
equal to the square made of the middle number, those three numbers shall be in
proportion.
SVppose there be three numbers in proportion, A, B, C, as A is to B, so let B
be to C. This proposition in numbers demonstrateth that which the 17. of the
sixth demonstrateth in lines.
Then I say that the number produced of A and C is equal to the square number
which is made of B. Put unto B an equal number D. Wherefore as A is to B, so is
D to C. Wherefore that which is produced of A into C, is equal unto that which
is produced of B into D. But that which is produced of B into D is equal to
that which is made of B (for B is equal unto D) wherefore that which is produced
of A into C is equal to that which is made of B.

Demonstration.
But now suppose that that which is produced of A into C, be equal to that
which is made of B. The second part which is the converse of the first.
Then I say that as A is to B, so is B to C. For (the same order of
construction remaining) forasmuch as that which is produced of A into C, is
equal to that which is made of B, but that which is made of B, is equal to
that which is produced of B into D. (For B and D are by supposition equal):
therefore that which is produced of A into C is equal to that which is produced
of ^ into D: Demonstration
wherefore (by the second part of the former proposition) as A is to B, so is D
to C: but D is equal to E. Wherefore as A is to B, so is the same B to C: which
was required to be proved.

The 19. Theoreme. The 21. Proposition. The left numbers in any proportion,
measure any other numbers having the same proportion equally, the greater the
greater, and the less the less.
SVppose that CD and OF be the least numbers that have one and the same
proportion with the numbers A and B. Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
Then I say, that the number CD so many times measures the number A, as the
number OF measures the number B. For forasmuch as by supposition CD is to OF,
as A is to B, and CD and OF are also supposed to be less then A and B:
therefore CD and OF are either part or parts of A and B (by the 4. of this
book, and by the 21. definition of the same). But they are not parts. For if
it be possible, let CD be parts of A. Wherefore OF is the self same parts of
B, that CD is of A. Wherefore how many parts of A there are in CD, so many
parts are there of B in OF. Divide CD into the parts of A, that is, into CG
and GD. And likewise divide OF into the parts of B, that is, into EH and HF.
Now then the multitude of these CG and GD, is equal unto the multitude of
these EH and HF. And forasmuch as CG and GD are numbers equal the one to the
other, and these numbers EH and HF are also equal the one to the other, and
the multitude of these CG and GD, is equal to the multitude of these EH and
HF: therefore as CG is to EH, so is GD to HF. Wherefore (by the 12. of the
seventh) as one of the antecedentes is to one of the consequentes, so are all
the antecedentes to all the consequentes. Wherefore as CG is to EH, so is CD to
OF. Wherefore CG and DH ^re in the self same proportion that CD and OF are,
being also less then CD and OF: which is impossible. For CD and OF are
supposed to be the least that have (...) and the same proportion with them.
Wherefore CD is not parts of A: wherefore it is a part. Wherefore OF is of B
^he self same part, that CD is of A. Wherefore CD so many (...) measures A as
OF does B^ which was req^ired to be demonstrated.

The 20. Theoreme. The 22. Proposition. If there be three numbers, and other
numbers equal unto the^ in multitude, which being compared two and two are in
the self same proportion, and if also the proportion of them be perturbate,
then of equality they shall be in one and the same proportion.
SVppose that there be three numbers A, B, and C and let the other numbers
equal unto them in multitude be D, E, and F. This proposition in discret
quantity answers to the 23. proposition of the fifth book in continual
quantity.
And le^ two and two compared together be in one and the same prop^^tion^ and
let the proportion of them be p^rturbate; so that (...) as B is to C, so let D
be to E. (...) is to C, so is D to F. ^or, for (...) therefore that which is
produced of A into F, is (by the 19. of the seventh) equal to that which is
produced of B into E. Again for that as B is to C, so is D to E, therefore
that which is produced of D into C, is equal to that which is produced of B
into E. And it is proved, that that which is produced of A into F, is equal to
that which is produced of B into E. Wherefore that which is produced of A into
F, is equal to that which is produced of D into C. Wherefore (by the second
part of the 19. of the seventh) as A is to C, so is D to F: which was required
to be proved.

The same may also be proved if in either order be more then three numbers: as
it was proved in the 23. of the fifth touching more magnitudes then three.

The 21. Theoreme. The 23. Proposition. Numbers prime the one to the other: are
ye least of any numbers, that have one and the same proportion with them.
This and the eleven propositions following, declare the p^ssions and
properties of^ prime numbers.
SVppose that A and B be numbers prime the one to the other. Then I say that A
and B are the least of any numbers that have one and the same proportion with
them. For if A and B be not the least of any numbers that have one and the same
proportion with them, then are there some numbers less then A and B, being in
the self same proportion that A and B are. Let the same be C and D. Now
forasmuch as the least numbers in any proportion measure any other numbers
having the same proportion equally, the greater the greater, and the less the
less (by the 21. of the seventh) that is, the antecedent the antecedent, and
the consequent the consequent: therefore C so many times measures A, as D
measures B. How many times C measures A, so many unities let there be in E.
Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
Wherefore D measures B by those unities which are in E. And forasmuch as C
measures A by those unities which are in E, therefore E also measures A by
those unities which are in C. And by the same reason E measures B, by those
unities which are in D. Wherefore E measures A and B being prime numbers the
one to the other which (by the 13. definition of the seventh) is impossible.
Wherefore there are no other numbers less then A and B, which are in the self
same proportion that A and B are. Wherefore A and B are the least numbers that
have one and the same proportion with them: which was required to be
demonstrated.

The 22. Theoreme. The 24. Proposition. The least numbers that have one and the
same proportion with them: are prin^e the one to the other.
SVppose that A and B be the least numbers that have one and the same
properti^^ with them. This is the co^uerse of the former proposition.
Then I say that A and B be prime the one to the other. For if A and B be not
prime the one to the other, then shall some one number measure A and B. Let the
same be C. And how oftentimes C measures A, so many unities let there be in D:
and how oftentimes C measures B, so many unities let there be in E. And
forasmuch as C measures A by those unities that are in D, therefore C
multiplying D produces A^ And by the same reason C multiplying E produces B.
Demonstr^tion leading to an absurdity.
Wherefore the number C multiplying two numbers D and E, produces A and B.
Wherefore (by the 17. of the seventh) as D is to E, so is A to B. But the
numbers D and E are less then A and ^, and are also in the self same
proportion with the^, which is impossible. Wherefore no number measures these
numbers A and B. Wherefore A and B are prime the on to the other: which was
required to be demonstrated.

The 23. Theoreme. The 25. Proposition. If two numbers be prime the on to the
other: any number measuring one of them shall be prime to the other number.
SVppose that A and B be two prime numbers the on to the other. And let some
number, namely, C, measure A. Then I say that C and B are prime numbers the on
to the other. For if C and B be not prime the one to the other, let some number
measure C and B, and let the same be D. Demonstration leading to an absurdity.
And forasmuch as D measures C, and C measures A, therefore D also measures A
(by the fifth common sentence) and D measures B. Wherefore D measures A and B
being numbers prime the on to the other, which is impossible (by the 13.
definition of the seventh) wherefore no number measures these numbers B and C.
Wherefore B and C are numbers prime the on to the other. Which was required to
be proved.

The 24. Theoreme. The 26. Proposition. If two numbers be prime to any one
number, the number also produced of them shall be prime to the self same.
SVppose that the two numbers A and B be prime to any one number, namely, to C,
and let A multiplieng B produce D. Then I say that C and D are prime numbers
the one to the other. For if C and D be not prime the one to the other then
some number shall measure them. Let there be a number that measures them, and
let the same be E. Demonstration leading to an absurdity.
And forasmuch as A and C are prime numbers the one to the other, and the
number E measures C. Therefore E and A are (by the 25. of the seventh) prime
the one to the other. And forasmuch as E measures D. How many times E
measures D, so many unities let there be in F. Wherefore F also measures D by
those unities which are in E. Wherefore E multiplieng F produces D. But A also
multiplieng B produced D. Wherefore that which is produced of E into F is equal
to that which is produced of A into B. But if that which is produced of the
extremes be equal to that which is produced of the means, then are those
four numbers in proportion (by the 19. of the seventh) wherefore ^^ E is to A,
so is B to F. But A and E are prime the one to the other. Yea they are prime
and the least in the same proportion (by the 23 of the seventh.) But the least
numbers in any proportion measure any other numbers having the same proportion
equally, the greater the greater, and the less the less, that is, the
antecedent the antecedent, and the consequent the consequent by the 21. of the
seventh wherefore E measures B, and it also measures C: wherefore E measures C
and B, which are by supposition numbers prime the one to the other, which is
impossible by the 13. definition of the seventh. Wherefore no number measures
those numbers C and D. Wherefore C and D are prime the one to the other: which
was required to be proved.

The 25. Theoreme. The 27. Proposition. If two numbers be prime the one to the
other, that which is produced of the one into him self, is prime to the other.
SVppose that there be two numbers prime the one to the other, A and B, and let
A multiplieng himself produce C. Then I say that B and C are prime the one to
the other. For put unto A an equal number, Demonstration.
namely, D. And forasmuch as A and B are prime the one to the other, and A is
equal unto D: therefore D and B also are prime the one to the other. Wherefore
either of these numbers D and A is prime to B. Wherefore that which is produced
of D into A is prime unto B by the former proposition. But that number which is
produced of D into A is the number C. Wherefore C and B are prime numbers the
one to the other: which was required to be proved.

The 26. Theoreme. The 28. Proposition. If two numbers be prime to two numbers,
each to either of both: the numbers produced of them shall be prime the one to
the other.
SVppose that there be two numbers A and B prime to two numbers C and D, either
of both, to either of both: namely, let either of these A and B be prime to C,
and also to D. Demonstration.
And let A multiplieng B produce E, and let C multiplieng D produce F. Then I
say that E and F are prime numbers the one to the other. For forasmuch as
either of these A and B are prime unto C, therefore that which is produced of A
into B is prime unto C by the 26. of the seventh. But that which is produced of
A into B is the number E, therefore E and C are prime the one to the other. And
by the same reason also E and D are prime the one to the other^ Wherefore either
of these numbers C and D are prime unto E: wherefore that also which is
produced of C into D is prime unto E by the same. But that which is produced of
C into D, is the number F. Wherefore E and F are numbers prime the one to the
other: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 27. Theoreme. The 29. Proposition If two numbers be prime the one to the
other, and each multiplying himself bring forth certain numbers: the numbers
of them produced shall be prime the one to the other. And if those numbers
given at the beginning multiplying the said numbers produced, produce any
numbers: they also shall be prime the one to the other: and so shall it be
continuing infinitely.
SVppose that there be two numbers A and B prime the one to the other. And let
A multiplying him self produce C: and multiplying C let it produce E. Likewise
let B multiplying him self produce D, and multiplying D let it produce F. The^
I say what C and D are numbers prime the one to the other. And likewise that E
and F are numbers prime the one to the other. For forasmuch as A and B,
De^onstration.
are prime the one to the other, and A multiplying him self produced C,
therefore C and B are prime the one to the other (by the 27. of the seventh).
And by the same reason forasmuch as C and B are prime the one to the other, and
B multiplying him self produced D, therefore C and D are prime the one to the
other. Again forasmuch as A and B are prime the one to the other, and B
multiplying him self produced D. Therefore (by the 27 of the seventh) A and D
are prime the one to the other. Now then forasmuch as two numbers A and C are
prime to two numbers B and D, either of both to either of both: therefore (by
the 28. of the seventh) that which is produced of A into C is prime to that
which is produced of B into D. But that which is produced of A into C is the
number E, and that which is produced of B into D is the number F. Wherefore E
and F are numb^rs prime the one to the other. And so always if A and B
multiplying the numbers E and F do produce any numbers, the numbers produced,
may by the former Proposition, be proved to be prime the one to the other:
which was required to be proved.

The 28. Theoreme. The 30. Proposition. If two numbers be prime the one to the
other: then both of them added together, shall be prime to either of them. And
if both of them added together be prime to any one of them, then also those
numbers given at the beginning, are prime the one to the other.
SVppose that these two numbers AB and BC being prime numbers be added
together. Then I say, that both these added together, namely, the number ABC,
is prime to either of these AB, and BC. For if CA and AB be not prime the one
to the other, some number then shall measure them. Demonstration of the first
part leading to an absurdity.
Let some number measure them, and let the same be D. Now then forasmuch as D
measures the whole CA and the part taken away AB, it measures also the
residue CB (by the 4. common sentence). And it measures BA. Wherefore D
measures these numbers AB and BC, being prime the one to the other: which is
impossible (by the 13. definition of the seventh). Wherefore no number
measures these numbers CA and AB. Wherefore CA and AB are prime the one to the
other. And by the same reason also may it be proved, that CA and BC are prime
the one to the other. Wherefore the number AC is to either of these numbers AB
and BC, prime.

But now suppose that the numbers CA and AB be prime the one to the other. Then
I say, that the numbers AB and BC are also prime the one to the other, For if,
AB and BC be not prime the one to the other: some one number measures these
numbers AB and BC^ Let some one number measure them, and let the same be D. And
forasmuch as D measures either of these numbers AB and BC, it shall also
measure the whole CA (by the 6. common sentence). Demonstration of the second
part which is the con^c^se of the first, lean^ng also to an absurditi^.
And it also measures AB. Wherefore D measures these numbers CA and AB being
prime the one to the other: which is impossible (by the 13. definition of the
seventh). Wherefore no number measures these numbers AB and BC. Wherefore AB
and BC are prime the one to the other, which was required to be proved.

The 29. Theoreme. The 31. Proposition. Every prime number is to every number
which it measures not, prime.
SVppose that there be given a prime number, namely, A, and let B be an other
number, which it measures not. Demonstrasion leading to an absurdity.
Then I say, that the numbers B and A are prime the one to the other. For if A
and B be not prime the one to the other, then some number measures them. Let
there be a number that measures them, and let the same be C. Now C is no
unity. And forasmuch as C measures B, but A measures not B, therefore C is
not one and the same number with A. And forasmuch as C measures A and B, it
also measures A being a prime number, and being not one and the same with it:
which is impossible (by the 13. definition of the seventh). Wherefore no number
measures these numbers A and B. And therefore A and B are prime the one to the
other: which was required to be proved.

The 30. Theoreme. The 32. Proposition. If two numbers multiplying the one the
other produce any number, and if also some prime number measure that which is
produced of them: then shall it also measure one of those numbers which were
put at the beginning.
SVppose that two numbers A and B multiplying the one to the other do produce
the number C: and let some prime number, namely, D measure C. The^ I say that D
measures one of these numbers either A or B. Suppose that it measure not A:
now D is a prime number. Wherefore A and D are prime the one to the other (by
the proposition next going before). And how often D measures C, so many
unities let there be in E. Demonstrasion.
And forasmuch as D measures C by those unities which are in E, therefore D
multiplying E produces C: but A also multiplying B produced C wherefore that
which is produced of D into E is equal to that which is produced of A into B.
Wherefore (by the 19. o^ the seventh) as A is to D, so is E to B: but D and A
are prime numbers: and therefore the least numbers in that proportion: but the
least in any proportion measure the numbers having the self same proportion
with them equally, the greater, the greater, and the less, the less, that is
the antecedent, the antecedent, and the consequent, the consequent (by the 21.
of the seventh). wherefore the consequent D measures the consequent B. In like
sort may we prove that if D measure not B it measures A. Wherefore D measures
one of these numbers A or B: which was required to to be proved.

A Corollary.
A Corollary ^^ded by Campaue.
Hereby it is manifest that if a number measure a number produced of two numbers
multiplied the one into the other, or be commensurable to the same, it shall
also either measure one of the two number^ multiplied, or be comme^surable with
one of them.

The 31. Theoreme. The 3^. Proposition. Every composed number, is measured by
some prime number.
SVppose that A be a composed number. Then I say that A is measured by some
prime number. For forasmuch as A is a composed number, some number must needs
measure it (by the 14. definition of the seventh). Let there be a number that
measures it, and let the same be B. Now if B be a prime number then is that
manifest which we seek for: Demonstration l^ading to an impossibility.
but if it be composed number some number must needs measure it (by the self
same definition) Let there be a number that measures it, and let the same be
C. And forasmuch as C measures B, and B measures A: therefore C also
measures A (by the 5. common sentence): and if C be a prime number then is
that manifest which we sought for. But if it be a composed number some number
shall measure it: and the like consideration being had there shall at the
length be found some prime number which measures the number going before,
which shall also measure A. For if there be not found any such prime number
then shall infinite numbers decresing measure the said number A of which the
one is less the^ the other, which is impossible in numbers. Wherefore some
prime number shall at the length be found which shall measure the number going
before and which shall also measure the number A (by the 5. common sentence).
Every composed number therefore is measured by some prime number: which was
required to be proved.

An other way.
Suppose that A be a composed number. An other demonstration.
Then I say that some prime number measures it. For forasmuch as A is a
composed number, some number shall measure it (by the 14. definition of the
seventh) Let the least number that measures it be B. Then I say that B is a
prime number. For if B be not a prime number some number shall measure it. Let
C measure it. Wherefore C is less then B. And forasmuch as C measures B, and
B measures A, therefore C also measures A being less then B, which by
supposition is the least number that measures A, which is absurd. Wherefore B
is not a composed number, but a prime number, which was required to be proved.

The 32. Theoreme. The 34. Proposition. Every number is either a prime number,
or else some prime number measures it.
SVppose that there be a number A. Demonstration.
Then I say that A is either a prime number, or else some prime number measures
it. For if A be a prime number then is that had which is required. But if it be
a composed number, some prime number shall measure it (by the 33. of the
seventh). Every number therefore is either a prime number, or else some prime
number measures it: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 3. Problem. The 35. Proposition. How many numbers soever being given, to
find out the least numbers that have one and the same proportion with them.
SVppose that there be a multitude of numbers given, namely, A, B, and C. It is
required to find out the least numbers that have one and the same proportion
with these numbers A, B, C. Two cases in this Proposition.
These numbers A, B, C, are either prime the one to the other, or not prime. If
A, B, C, be prime the one to the other, then are they the least that have one
and the same proportion with them (by the 23. of the seventh). The first case.


The second case.
But if they be not prime, take by the 3. of the seventh, unto A, B, C, the
greatest common measure, which let be the number D. And how often D measures
every one of these A, B, C, Demonstration.
so many unities let there be in every one of these numbers EFG. Wher^ore these
numbers E, F, G, do measure these numbers A, B, C, by those unities which are
in D. Wherefore these numbers E, F, G, measure these numbers A, B, C, equally.
Wherefore E, F, G, are by the 18. of the seventh, in the self same proportion
that A, B, C, are. Now then I say that they also are the least. For if E, F, G,
Demonstration leading to an absurdity.
be not the l^ast that have one and the same proportion, with A, B, C, there
shall the^ be some numbers less then E, F, G, being in the self same
proportion that A, B, C, are. Suppose that the same numbers be H, K, L, which
shall measure the numbers A, B, C, equally. How many times H measures A, so
many unities let there be in M. Wherefore either of these K and L measures
either of these B and C by those unities which are in M (by the 21. of the
seventh). And forasmuch as H measures A by those unities which are in M,
therefore M also measures A by those unities which are in H. And by the same
reason M measures either of these B and C by those unities which are in either
of these K and L. Wherefore M measures these numbers A, B, C. And forasmuch as
H measures A by those unities which are in M, therefore H multiplieng M,
produces A. And by the same reason E multiplieng D, produces A. Wherefore that
which is produced of E into D is equal to that which is produced of H into M.
Wherefore (by the 19. of the seventh) as E is to H, so is M to D. But E is
greater then H, wherefore M also is greater then D, and it measures these
numbers A, B, C, which is impossible. For D is supposed to be the greatest
common measure unto A, B, C. Wherefore there shall be no other numbers less
then E, F, G, and in the self same proportion with A, B, C. Wherefore E, F, G,
are the lest numbers which have one and the same proportion with A, B, C: which
was required to be done.

A Corollary.
Hereby it is manifest that the greatest common measure to numbers how many
soever: A Corollary added by Campa^e.
measures the said numbers by the numbers in the least proportion that the
numbers given are.

The 4. Problem. The 36. Proposition. Two numbers being given, to find out
the lest number which they measure.
SVppose that the ^^o numbers ge^e^ be A and B. It is required to find (...)
the lest number which they measure^ No^ A and B are ei^h^r prime ^he one to the
other, or not. Two cases in this proposition.
Suppose first that A and ^ be prime the one to the other: and let A
multiplying B produce C: wherefore B, multiplying A produ^^^ also C (by the 16.
of the seventh.) The first case.
Wherefore A and B measure C. Now also I say, that C is the lest number which
they measure^ Demonstration leading to an absurdity.
For if it be not, those numbers A and ^ measure some number less the^ C: let
them measur^ some number less then C, and let the same be D: and how often A
measures D, so many unities let there be in E^ and how often ^ measures D, so
many vnitie^ let there be in ^^ Wherefore A multiplying E produce^^ D, and B
multiplying F pro^^^^^^ also D. Wherefore that which is produced of A into ^,
is equal to that which is produced of B into ^: wherefore (by the 19. of the
seventh) as A is to B, so is F to E. But A and B are prime: yea they are prime
and also the lest in that proportion (by the 23. of the seventh): but the lest
numbers in any proportion measure those numbers that have one and the same
proportion with them equally: the greater the greater: and the less the less
(by the 21 of the seventh). Wherefore B measures E, namely, the consequent, the
consequent. And forasmuch as A multiplying B and E produced C and D: therefore
(by the 17. of the seventh) as ^ is to E, so is C to D. But B measures E.
Wherefore C also measures D, the greater, the less which is impossible.
Wherefore if those numbers A and B be prime, they shall measure no number less
then C. Wherefore C is the lest number which A and B measure.

But now suppose that A and B be not prime the one to the other, The second
case^
and take (by the 35. of the seventh) the lest numbers that have one and the
same proportion with A and B, and let the same be F and E. Wherefore that which
is produced of A into E, is equal to that which is produced of B into F (by
the 19. of the seventh). Let A multiplying E produce C^ wherefore B multiplying
F produces also C. Wherefore A and B measure C. Then I say, that C is the lest
number that they measure. For if it be not, those numbers A and B shall measure
some number less then C: let them measure a number less then C, and let the
same be D^ And how often A measures D, so many unities let there be in G, And
how often ^ measures D^ so many unities let there be in H. Demonstration
leading to an absurdity.
Now then A multiplying G produces D. And B multiplying H produces also D.
Wherefore that which is produced of A into G is equal to that which is
produced of B into H. Wherefore (by the 19. of the seventh) as A is to B, so is
H to G^ But as A is to B, so is F to E. Wherefore as F is to E, so is H to G:
but the lest numbers in any proportion measure the numbers that have the same
proportion with them equally, the greater the greater, and the less the less
(by the 21. of the seventh). Wherefore E measures G. And forasmuch as A
multiplying G and E produced C and D^ therefore (by the 17. of the fifth) as E
is to G, so is C to D. But E measures G. Wherefore C also measures D, the
greater the less: which is impossible. Wherefore those numbers. A and B do not
measure any number less then ^. Wherefore ^ is the lest number that is
measured by A and B^ which was required to be done.

The 33. Theoreme. The 37. Proposition. If two numbers measure any number, the
least number also which they measure, measures the self same number.
SVppose that there be two numbers given A and B^ and let them measure the
number CD: Demonstration leading to an impossib^^^^^.
and let the least number that they measure be E. The^ I say that E also
measures the number CD. For if E do not measure CD, let E measuring CD, that
is subtrahed out of CD as often as you can, as for example, once, leave a less
then it self, namely, CF. And let the number subtrahed which E measures be
FD, and forasmuch as A and B measure E, and E measures DF, therefore A and B
also measure DF. And they measure the whole CD, wherefore by the 4. common
sentence of the seventh they measure also that which remains CF being less
then E: which is impossible. Wherefore E of necessity measures CD, which was
required to be proved.

The 5. Problem. The 38. Proposition. Three numbers being given, to find out
the least number which they measure.
SVppose that there be three numbers given A, B, C. It is required to find out
the least number which they measure. Take (by the 36. of the seventh) the least
number which A and B measure, and let the same be D. Two cases in this
proposition.
Now then C either measures D or else measures it not. The first case.
First let it measure it. And the numbers also A and B measure D: wherefore A,
B, C, measure D. Now then I say that D is the least number which they measure.
For if not, let the numbers A, B, C, measure some number less then D, and let
the same be E. Demonstration lea^i^g ^o an absur^^^^e.
And forasmuch as A, B, C, measure E therefore also A and B measure E,
wherefore (by the 37. of the seventh) the least number which those numbers A
and B measure shall also measure E. But the least number which A and B measure
is D. Wherefore D measures E, the greater the less: which is impossible.
Wherefore these numbers A, B, C, shall not measure any number less then D.
Wherefore D is the least number that A, B, C, do measure.

But now suppose that C measure not D. And take (by the 36. of the seventh) the
least number which those two numbers C and D do measure, and let the same be E.
The second case.
And forasmuch as A and B measure D, and D measures E, therefore A and B also
measure E, and C also measures E, wherefore A, B, C, also measure E. I say
moreover that E is the least number which A, B, C measure. For if it be not,
let there be some less number then E which they measure, Demonstration leading
to an absurdity.
and let the same be F. And forasmuch as A, B, C, measure F. Therefore A and B
also measure F: wherefore the least number which these numbers A and B do
measure does also measure F (by the 37. of the seventh). But the least number
which A and B do measure is D. Wherefore D measures F. And C also measures
F. Wherefore D and C measure F. Wherefore the least number which C and D do
measure, shall also (by the self same) measure F. But the least ^^mbe^ which C
and D measure is E. Wherefore E measures F, namely, the greater, the less,
which is impossible. Wherefore these numbers A, B, C, do not measure any number
less then E. Wherefore E is the least number which A, B, C, do measure: which
was required to be demonstrated.

In like manner also how many numbers soever being given, may be found out the
least number which they ^easure. For if unto the three n^mbe^s A, B, C, be
added a forth, then if the said forth number measure the number E, then is E
the least number which the four numbers given measure. But if it do not
measure E, the^ by the 37. of this book must you find but the least number
which E and the forth number measure. Which shall be the number sought for. And
so likewise if there be five, six, or how manysoeuer given.

Corollary.
Hereby it is manifest that the least common measure to numbers howmanysoeuer,
A Corollary.
measures every number which the said numbers how many soever measure.

The 34. Theoreme. The 39. Proposition. If a number measure any number: the
number measured shall have a part after the denomination of the number
measuring.
SVppose that there be a number B, which let measure the number A. Then I say,
that A has a part taking his denomination of the number B. For how often B
measures A, so many unities let there be in C. And let D be unity. And
forasmuch as B measures A, by those unities which are in C, and unity D
measures C by those unities which are in C, therefore unity D, so many times
measures the number C, as B does measure A. Demonstration.
Wherefore alternately (by the 15. of the seventh) unity D, so many times
measures B, as C does measure A. Wherefore what part unity D is of the number
B, the same part is C of A. But unity D is a part of B having his denomination
of B. Wherefore C also is a part of A having his denomination of B. Wherefore A
has C as a part taking his denomination of B: which was required to be proved.

The meaning of this Proposition is, that if three measure any number, that
number has a third part, and if four measure any number the said number has
a fourth part. And so forth.

The 35. Theoreme. The 40. Proposition. If a number have any part: the number
whereof the part takes his denomination shall measure it.
SVppose that the number A have a part, namely, B: and let the part B have his
denomination of the number C. Then I say, that C measures A. Let D be unity.
And forasmuch as B is a part of A, having his denomination of C: The co^^erse
of the former proposition.
and D being unity is also a part of the number C, having his denominatio^ of
C: therefore what part unity D is of the number C, the same part is also B of
A: wherefore unity D so many ^^^es measures the number C, Demonstration.
as B measur^^^ A. Wh^ref^re ^^^ern^^ely (by ^^e 15. ^f the s^^^nth) unity D
so many ^^mes m^^^^reth the nu^^be^ B, (...) C meas^^eth A. Wheref^^^ C
measures A: which was requi^^d to b^ proved.

This Proposition is the converse of the former: and the meaning thereof is,
that every number having a third part is measured of three, and having a fourth
part is measured of four. And so forth.

The 6. Problem. Th 41. Proposition. To find out the least number, that
contains the parts given.
SVppose that the parts given be A, B, C, namely, let A be an half part, B a
third part, and C a fourth part. Construction.
Now it is required to find out the least number which contains the parts
A, B, C. Let the said parts A, B, C, have their denominations of the numbers
D, E, F. And take (by the 38. of the seventh) ^he least number which the
numbers D, E, F, measure, and let the same be G. And forasmuch as the numbers
D, E, F measure the number G, therefore the number G has pa^tes denominated of
the numbers D, E, F (by the 39. of the seventh). But the parts A, B, C, have
their denominatio^ of the numbers D, E, F. Wherefore G has those parts A, B,
C. I say also that it is the least number which has these parts.
Demonstration le^ding to an ^bsu^di^ie.
For if G be not the least number which contains those parts A, B, C, then
let there be some number less then G which contains the said parts A, B,
C. And suppose the same to be the number H. And forasmuch as H has the said
parts A, B, C, therefore the numbers that the parts A, B, C, take their
denominations of, shall measure H (by the 40. of the seventh) But the numbers
whero^ the parts A, B, C, take their denominations of, are D, E, F. Wherefore
the numbers D, E, F, m^asu^e the number H which is less then G, which is
impossible. For G is supposed to be t^^ l^^s^ number that the numbers D, E, F,
do measure. Wherefore there is no number less then G, which contains these
parts A, B, C: which was required to be done.

Corrolary.
A Corollary ad^ed by Campane.
Hereby it is manifest that if there be taken the least number, that numbers how
many soever do measure, the said number shall be the least which has the
parts denominated of the said numbers how many soever.

Campane after he has taught to find out the first least number that
con^ayneth the parts given, teaches also to find out the second least
number, How to ^inde out the second least number and the third, and so ^orth
^n^^nitly.
that is, which except the least of all is less then all other, and also the
third least, and the fourth etc. The second is found out by doubling the number
G. For the numbers which measure the number G shall also measure the double
thereof (by the 5. common sentence of the seventh). But there cannot be given a
number greater then the number G, and less then the double thereof, whom the
parts given shall ^^asure^ For forasmuch as the parts given do ^easur^ the
whole, namely, which is less then the double, and they also measure the part
taken away, namely, the number G, they should also measure the residue, namely,
a number less then G, which is proved to be the lest number that they do
measure, which is impossible^ wherefore the second number which the said parts
given do measure^ must, exceeding G, needs reach to the double of G, and the
third to the treble, and the fourth to the quadruple, and so in^initely, for
those parts can never measure any number less then the number G.

By this Proposition also it is easy to find out the least number containing
the parts given of parts. As if we would find out the least number which
contains one third (...) ^^ an hal^e part, How to si^^ out the least ^^m^ a
con^ay^^g ^^e pa^^s of parts.
and one fourth part of a third part, reduce the said d^^ers fracti^^ into
simple fraction (by the common (...) of reducing of fr^^^ions) namely, the
(...) of an hal^e into a (...) part of an whole^ and ^he fourth of thi^d into a
twelfth part of an^ whole. And then by this Problem search out the least
number which contains a six^ part and a twelfth part, and so have you done.

The end of the seventh book of Euclides Elements.
The eighthe book of Euclides Elements.
AFter that Euclide has in the seventh book entreated of the proprieties of
numbers in general, and of certain kinds thereof more specially, and of
prime and composed numbers with others: now in this eight book he prosecuteth
farther, and finds out and demonstrateth the properties and passions of
certain other kinds of numbers: The Argu^^^^ of the eight books.
as of the least numbers in proportion, and how such may be found out
infinitely in whatsoever proportion: which thing is both delectable, and to
great use. Also here is entreated of plain numbers, and solid: and of their
sides, and proportion of them. Likewise of the passions of numbers square and
cube, and of the natures and conditions of their sides, and of the mean
proportional numbers of plain, solid, square, and cube numbers, with many
other things very requisite and necessary to be known.

The first Theoreme. The first Proposition. If there be numbers in continual
proportion howmanysoeuer, and if their extremes be prime the one to the other:
they are the least of all numbers that have one and the same proportion with
them.
SVppose that the numbers in continual proportion be A, B, C, D. And let their
extremes namely, A and D be prime the one to the other. Then I say that the
numbers A, B, C, D, are the least of all numbers that have one and the same
proportion with the^. For if they be not, let E, F; G, H being less numbers
then A, B, C, D, be in the self same proportion that ABCD are. Demonstration
leading to an absurd^^ie.
And forasmuch as the numbers A, B, C, D, are in the self same proportion that
the numbers E, F, G, H, are, and the mul^itude of these numbers E, F, G, H, is
equal to the ^ult^^ude of these ^^mbers A, B, C, D, therefore of equality (by
the 14. of the seventh) as A is to D, so is E to H. But A and D are prime the
one to the other, yea they are prime and the least that have the same
proportion with them: But the least numbers in any proportion measure the
numbers that have the same proportion with them equally, the antecedent the
antecedent, and the conseque^t the cons^^uen^ (by the 21. of the seventh)
wherefore A measures E, the greater the less: which is impossible. Wherefore
the numbers E, F, G, H, being less then A, B, C, D, are not in the same
proportion that A, B, C, D, are, wherefore A, B, C, D, are the least of all
numbers which have one and the same proportion with them which was required to
be demonstrated.

The 1. Problem. The 2. Proposition. To find out the least numbers in
continual proportion, as many as shall be required, in any proportion given.
SVppose that the proportion given in the lest numbers be A to B. It is
required to find out the lest numbers in continual proportion, as many as
shall be required, in the same proportion that A is to B. Construction.
Let there be required four. And let A multiplying him self produce C: and
multiplying B let it produce D: and likewise let B multiplying him self
produce E. And moreover let A multiplying those numbers C, D, E, Demonstration.
produce F, G, H: and let B multiplying E produce K. And forasmuch as A
multiplying him self produced C, and multiplying B produced D, now then the
number A multiplying two numbers A and B produced C and D. Wherefore (by the
17. of the seventh) as A is to B, so is C to D. Again, forasmuch as A
multiplying B produced D, and B multiplying him self produced E, therefore each
of those numbers A and B multiplying B, brings forth these numbers D and E.
Wherefore (by the 18. of the seventh) as A is to B, so D to E. But as A is to
B, so is C to D. Wherefore as C is to D, so is D to E. And forasmuch as A
multiplying C and D produced F and G, therefore (by the 17. of the seventh) as
C is to D, so is F to G. But as C is to D, so is A to B. Wherefore as A is to
B, so is F to G. Again forasmuch as A multiplying D and E produced G and H,
therefore (by the 17. of the seventh) as D is to E, so is G to H. But as D is
to E, so is A to B. Wherefore as A is to B, so is G to H. And forasmuch as
those numbers A and B multiplying E produced H and K, therefore (by the 18. of
the seventh) as A is to B, so is H to K. And it is proved, that as A is to B,
so is ^ to ^, and G to H: wherefore as F is to G, so is G to H, and H to K.
Wherefore these numbers C, D, E, and F, G, H, K, are proportional in the same
proportion, that A is to B. Now I say, that they are also the lest. For
forasmuch as A and B are the lest of all numbers that have the same proportion
with them: but the lest numbers that have one and the same proportion with them
are prime the one to the other (by the 24. of the seventh): therefore A and B
are prime the one to the other: and each of these numbers A and B multiplying
him self produced these numbers C and E, and likewise multiplying each of these
numbers C and E they produced F and K. Wherefore (by the 29. of the seventh) C,
E, and F, K, are prime the one to the other. But if there be n^mbers in
continual proportion how many soever, and if their extremes be prime the one
to the other, they are the lest of all numbers that have the same proportion
with them (by the first of the eight). Wherefore these numbers C, D, E, and F,
G, H, K, are the lest of ^ll n^mber that ^a^e ^he same proportion with A and B^
And forasmuch (...) (by the ^9. of the seventh) that always happens touching
the extre^^^^ namely, that A and B ^^ltiplying the numbers pr^duced (...) shall
produce ^ther prime numbers, namely, the extremes of five numbers in continual
proportion, therefore (by the first of this book) all five are the lest of
that proportion. And so infinitely: which was required to be done.

Corollary.
Hereby it is manifest, that if three numbers being in continual proportion,
be the lest of all numbers that have the same proportion with them, their
extremes are squares: and if there be four their extremes are cubes. For the
extremes of three are produced of the multiplying of the numbers A and B into
them selves. And the extremes of four are produced of the multiplying of the
roots A and B into the squares C and E, whereby are made the cubes F and K.

The 2. Theoreme. The 3. Proposition. If there be numbers in continual
proportion how many soever, and if they be the lest of all numbers that have
one and the same proportion with the^: their extremes shall be prime the one to
the other.
SVppose that the numbers in continual proportion being the least of all
numbers that have the same proportion with them be A, B, C, D. This proposition
is the ^^uerse of the first.
Then I say that their extremes A and D are prime the one to the other. Take
(by the 2. of the eight, or by the 35. of the seuen^h) the two least numbers
that are in the same proportion that A, B, C, D, are, and let the same be the
numbers E, F. And after that take three numbers G, H, K, and so always forward
on more (by the former proposition) until the multitude taken be equal to the
multitude of the numbers given A, B, C, D. And let those numbers be L, M, N, O.
Wherefore (by the 29. of the seventh) their extremes L, O, Demonstration^
are prime the one to the other. For forasmuch as E and F are prime the one to
the other, and each of them multiplieng himself produced G and K, and likewise
each of these, G and K multiplieng himself produced L and O, therefore (by the 29
of the seventh) G and K are prime the (...) to the other, and so likewise are L
and O prime the one to the other. And forasmuch as A, B, C, D, are the least of
all numbers that have the same proportion with them, and likewise L, M, N, O,
are the least of all numbers that are in the same proportion that A, B, C, D,
are, and the multitude of these numbers A, B, C, D, is equal to the multitude
of these L, M, N, O: therefore every one of these A, B, C, D, is equal unto
every one of these L, M, N, O. Wherefore A is equal unto L, and D is equal
unto O. And forasmuch as L and O are prime the one to the other, and L is
equal unto A, and O is equal unto D: therefore A and D are prime the one to
the other: which was required to be proved.

The 2. Problem. The 4. Proposition. Proportions in the least numbers how many
soever being given, to find out the least numbers in continual proportion in
the said proportions given.
SVppose that the proportions in the least numbers given, be A to B, C to D,
and E to F. It is required to find out the least numbers in continual
proportion, in the same proportion that A is to B, and that C is to D, and that
E is to F. Take the least number whom B and C do measure, and let the same be
G. And how often B measures G, so many times let A measure H. And how often C
measures G, so many times let D measure K. Now E either measures K or
measures it not. Two cases in this proposition. The first case.
First let it measure it. And how often E measures K, so many times let F
measure L. And forasmuch as how often A measures H, so many times does B
measure G: therefore by the 17. of the seventh, as A is to B, so is H to G. And
by the same reason as C is to D^ so is ^ to K, and moreover as E is to F, so is
K to L. Wherefore these numbers H, G, K, L, are in continual proportion, and in
the same proportion that A is to B, and that C is to D, and moreover that E is
to F. I say also that they are the least in those proportions^ Demonstration
leading to an absurdity.
For if H, G, K, L, be not the least numbers in continual proportion, and in
the same proportions that A is to B, and C to D, and E to F, then are there
some numbers less^ then H, G, K, L, in the same proportions that A is to B and
C to D, and E to F, let those numbers be N, X, M, O. And forasmuch as A is to
B, so is N to X^ and A and B are the lest, but the least measure those numbers
that have one and the same proportion with them equally, the greater, the
greater, and the less the less, that is, the antecedent, the antecedent, and
the consequent the consequent (by the 21. of the seventh) therefore B measures
X. And by the same reason C also measures X, wherefore B and C measure X.
Wherefore the least number whom B and C measure, shall also by the 37 of the
seventh measure X. But the least number whom B and C measure is G. Wherefore G
measures X, the greater, the less, which is impossible. Wherefore there shall
not be any less numbers then H, G, K, L, in continual proportion, and in the
same proportions that A is to B, and C to D, and E to F.

But now suppose that E measure not K. The second case.
And by the 36. of the seventh, take the least number whom E and K measure,
and let the same be M. And how often K measures M, so often let either of
these G and H measure either of these N and X. Demonstration.
And how often E measures M, so often let F measure O. And forasmuch as how
often G measures N, so often does H measure X, therefore as ^ is to G, so is X
to N. But as H is to G, so is A to B Wherefore as A is to B, so is X to N. And
by the same reason as C is to D, so is N to M. Again, forasmuch as how often E
measures M, so often F measures O, therefore as E is to F so is M to O.
Wherefore X, N, M, O, are in continual proportion, and in the same proportions
that A is to B, and C to D, and E to F. I say also that they are the least in
that proportion. For if X, N, M, O, be not the least in continual proportion,
and in the same proportions that A is to B, and C to D, and E to F, then shall
there be some numbers less then X, N, M, O, in continual proportion, and in
the same proportions that A is to B, and C to D, and E to F. Let the same be
the numbers P, R, S, T. And for that as P is to R, so is A to B, and A and B
are the least, but the least numbers measure those numbers that have one and
the same proportion with them equally, the greater the greater, and the less
the less, that is, the antecedent the antecedent, and the consequent the
consequent by the 21. of the seventh, therefore B measures R. And by the same
reason also C measures R. Wherefore B and C measure R. Wherefore the least
number wh^m B and C measure shall also measure R (by the 37. of the seventh).
But the lest number whom B and C measure is G, wherefore G measures R. And as G
is to R, so is K to S. Wherefore K measures S. And E also measures S.
Wherefore E and K measure S. Wherefore the least number whom E and K measure,
shall (by the self same) measure S. But the least number whom E and K measures
M. Wherefore M measures S the greater the less, which is impossible. Wherefore
there are no numbers less then X, N, M, O, in continual proportion, and in
the same proportions that A is to B, and C to D, and E to F. Wherefore X, N, M,
O are the least numbers in continual proportion, and in the same proportions
that A is to B, and C to D, and E to F: which was required to be done.

The 3. Theoreme. The 5. Proposition. Plain or superficial numbers are in
that proportion the one to the other which is composed of the sides.
This proposition in numbers answers to the of the sixth touching
parellelogrammes.
SVppose that A and B be plain or superficial numbers, and let the sides of A
be the numbers C and D, and let the sides of B, be the numbers E and F. Then I
say that A is to B in that proportion that is composed of the sides. Take (by
the fourth of the eight) the least numbers in continual proportion, and in the
same proportions that C is to E, and D to F. Construction.
And let the same be the numbers G, H, K: Demonstration.
so that as C is to E, so let G be to H, and as D is to F, so let H be to K.
Wherefore those numbers G, H, K, have the proportions of the sides: but the
proportion of G to K is con posed of that which G has to H and of that which H
has to K: wherefore G is unto K in that proportion which is composed of the
sides. Now I say that as A is to B, so is G to K. For let D multiplying E
produce L. And forasmuch as D multiplying C produced A, and multiplying E
produced L: therefore (by the 17. of the seventh) as C is to E, so is A to L.
But as C is to E, so is G to H, wherefore as G is to H, so is A to L. Again
forasmuch as E multiplying D produced L, and multiplying F produced B:
therefore (by the 17. of the seventh) as D is to F, so is L to B. But as D is
to F, so is H to K, wherefore as H is to K, so is L to B. And it is proved that
as G is H, so is A to L. Wherefore of equality (by the 14. of the seventh) as
G is to K, so is A to B. But G is unto K in that proportion which is composed
of the sides, wherefore A is unto B in that proportion which is composed of the
sides: which was required to be demonstrated.

An other demonstration of the same after Campane.
Suppose that A and B be plain numbers: and let the sides of A be the numbers
C and D: and let the numbers E and F be the sides of the number B. And let D
multiplying E produce the number G. The^ I say that the proportion of A to B is
composed of the proportio^s of C to E and D to F that is, An other
demonstration after Campane.
of the sides of the superficial number A to the sides of the superficial
number B. For forasmuch as D multiplying E produced G, and multiplying C it
produced A, therefore by (the 17. of the seventh) A is to G as C is to E:
again forasmuch as E multiplying D produced G and multiplying F it produces
B, therefore by the same G is to B as D is to F. Wherefore the proportions of
the sides namely, of C to E and of D to F are one and the same with the
proportions of A to G and G to B. But (by the fifth definition of the sixth)
the proportion of the extremes A to B is composed of the proportions of the
means, namely, of A to G and G to B, which are proved to be one and the same
with the proportions of the sides C to E, and D to F. Wherefore the proportion
of the superficial numbers A to B is composed of the proportions of the sides
C to E, and D to F. Wherefore pla^ne. etc. which was required to be proved.

The 4. Theoreme. The 6. Proposition. If there be numbers in continual
proportion how many soever, and if the first measure not the second, neither
shall any one of the other measure any one of the other.
SVppose that there be numbers how many soever in continual proportion,
namely, f^ue, A, B, C, D, E. And suppose that A measure not B. Then I say, that
neither shall any other of the numbers A, B, C, D, E, measure any one of the
other. That A, B, C, D, E, do not in continual order measure one the other, it
is manifest: for A measures not B. Now I say, that neither shall any other of
them measure any other of them. I say that A shall not measure C. For how many
in multitude A, B, C, are, take so many of the lest numbers that have one and
the same proportion with A, B, C, (by the 35. of the seventh) and let the same
be F, G, H. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as F, G, H are in the self same proportion that A, B, C, are:
and the multitude of these numbers A, B, C, is equal to the multitude of those
numbers F, G, H, therefore of equality (by the 14. of the seventh) as A is to
C, so is F to H. And for that as A is to B, so is F to G, but A measures not
B, therefore neither does F measure G. Wherefore F is not unity. For if F were
unity, it should measure any number. But F and H are prime the one to the
other (by the 3. of the eight). Wherefore F measures not H: and as F is to H,
so is A to C, wherefore neither does A measure C. In like sort may we prove
that neither shall any other of the numbers A, B, C, D, E, measure any other of
the numbers A, B, C, D, E: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 5. Theoreme. The 7. Proposition. If there be numbers in continual
proportion how many soever, and if the first measure the last, it shall also
measure the second.
SVppose that there be a multitude of numbers in continual proportion, namely,
A, B, C, D. And let A the first measure D the last. Demonstration leading to an
impossibility.
Then I say, that A the first measures B the second. For if A do not measure
B, neither shall any other measure any other (by the 7. of the eight): which
(by supposition) is not true. For A is supposed to measure D. Now then A
measuring D, shall also measure B: which was required to be proved.

The 6. Theoreme. The 8. Proposition. If between two numbers there fall numbers
in continual proportion: how many numbers fall between them, so many also
shall fall in continual proportion between other numbers which have the self
same proportion.
SVppose that between the two numbers A and B, do fall in continual proportion
the numbers C and D. And as A is to B, so let E be to F. Then I say, that how
many numbers in continual proportion do fall between A and B, so many numbers
also in continual proportion shall there fall between E and F. How many A, B,
C, D, are in multitude, take (by the 35. of the seventh) so many of the least
numbers that have one and the same proportion with A, B, C, D, and let the same
be G, H, K, L. Wherefore their extremes G and I. are prime the one to the other
(by the 3. of the eight). And forasmuch as A and C, and D and B, are in the
self same proportion that G and H, and K and L are, Demonstration.
and the multitude of these numbers A, C, D, B, is equal to the multitude of
these numbers G, H, K, L: therefore of equality (by the 14. of the seventh) as
A is to B, so is G to L. But as A is to B, so is E to F. Wherefore as G is to
L, so is E to F. But G and L are prime the one to the other: yea they are prime
and the least. But the least numbers measure those numbers that have the same
proportion with them equally, the greater the greater, and the less the less
(by the 21. of the seventh) that is, the antecedent, the antecedent, and the
consequent, the consequent. Wherefore how many times G measures E, so many
times L measures F^ How often G measures E, so often let H measure M, and K
measure N Wherefore these numbers G, H, K, L, equally measure these numbers E,
M, N, F. Wherefore (by the 18. of the seventh) these numbers G, H, K, L, are in
the self same proportion that E, M, N, F, are. But G, H, K, L, are in the
self same proportion that A, C, D, B, are: wherefore those numbers A, C, D, B,
are in the self same proportion that E, M, N, F, are^ But A, C, D, B, are in
continual proportion: wherefore also E, M, N, F, are in continual proportion.
Wherefore how many numbers in continual proportion fall between A and B, so
many also in continual proportion fall there between E and F: which was
required to be demonstrated.

A Corollary added by Flussates.
A Corollary added by Flussates.
Between two numbers whose proportion is superparticular, or superbipartient,
there falls no mean^ proportional. For the least numbers of that proportion
differ the one from the other only by unity or by two. But if between the
greater numbers of that proportion there should fall a mean proportional then
should there fall also a mean proportional between the least numbers which
have the same proportion by this Proposition. But between numbers differing
only by unity or by two, there falls no mean proportional.

The 7. Theoreme. The 9. Proposition. If two numbers be prime the one to the
other, and if between them shall fall numbers in continual proportion: how
many numbers in continual proportion fall between them, so many also shall
fall in continual proportion between either of those numbers and unity.
SVppose that there be two numbers prime the one to the other A and B: and let
there fall between them in continual proportion these numbers C and D: and let
E be unity. Then I say, that how many numbers in continual proportion fall
between A and B, so many also shall fall in continual proportion between A and
unity E: Construction.
and likewise between B and unity E. Take (by the 35. of the seventh) the two
least numbers that are in the same proportion that A, C, D, B, are: and let the
same be F and G: and then take three of the least numbers that are in the same
proportion that A, C, D, B, are: and let the same be H, K, L: and so always in
order one more, until the multitude of them be equal to the multitude of
these numbers A, C, D, B: and those being so taken let them be M, N, X, O. Now
it is manifest, that F multiplying him self produced H, and multiplying N
produced M. Demonstration.
And G multiplying him self produced L, and multiplying L produced O. And
forasmuch as M, N, X, O, are (by supposition) the least of all numbers that
have the same proportion with G, F: and A, C, D, B, are (by the first of the
eight) the least of all numbers that have the same proportion with G, F: and
the multitude of these numbers M, N, X, O, is equal to the multitude of these
numbers A, ^, D, B: therefore every one of these numbers M, N, X, O, is equal
to every one of these numbers A, C, D, B. Wherefore M is equal unto A, and O
is eq^all unto B. And forasmuch as F multiplying him self produced H: therefore
^ measures H by those unities which are in F: and unity E measures F by
those unities which are i^ F: wherefore (by the 15. of the seventh) unity E, so
many times measures the number F, as F measures H^ wherefore as unity E is
to the number F, so is F to H. Again forasmuch as F multiplying N produced M,
therefore H measures M by those unities which are in F. And unity E measures
F by th^se unities which are in F: wherefore (by the self same) unity E so
many times measures F, as H measures M. Wherefore as unity E is to the
numbers F, so is H to M. But it is proved, that as unity E is to the number F,
so is F to H: wherefore as unity E is to the number F, so is F to H, and H to
M. But M is equal unto A^ wherefore as unity E is to the number F, so is F to
H, and H to A. And by the same reason as unity E is to the number G, so is G
to L and L to B. Wherefore how many numbers fall in continual proportion
between A and B: so many numbers also in continual proportion fall there
between unity E and the number A, and likewise between unity E and the number
^: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 8. Theoreme. The 10. Proposition. If between two numbers and unity fall
numbers in continual proportion: how many numbers in continual proportion fall
between either of them and unity so many also shall there fall in continual
proportion between them.
SVppose that between the two numbers A, B, and unity C^ do fall these numbers
in continual proportion D, E, and F, G. This proposition is the converse of
the former.
Then I say that how many numbers in continual proportion there are between
either of these A, B, and unity C, so many numbers also in continual
proportion shall there fall between A and B. Let D multiplying F produce H, and
let D multiplying H produce K, and like wise let F multiplying H produce L.
Construction.
And for that by supposition as unity C is to the number D, so is D to E,
therefore how many times unity C measures the number D, Demonstration.
so many times does D measure E. But unity C measures D by those unities
which are in D^ wherefore D measures E by those unities which are in D.
Wherefore D multiplying himself produces E. Again for that as unity C is to
the number D, so is E to A, therefore how many times unity C measures the
number D, so many times E measures A. But unity C measures D, by those
vnitie^ which are in D, therefore E measures A by those unities which are in
D. Wherefore D multilying E produced A. And by the same reason F multiplying
himself produced G, and multiplying G produced B. And forasmuch as D
multiplying himself produced E, and multiplying F produced H, therefore (by
the 17. of the seventh) as D is to F, so is E to H. And by the same reason as D
is to F, so is H to G. Wherefore as E is to H, so is H to G. Again forasmuch
as D multiplying E produced A, and multiplying H produced K, therefore (by the
17. of the seventh) as E is to H, so is A to K. But as E is to H, so is D to F,
therefore as D is to F, so is A to K. Again forasmuch as D multiplying H
produced K, and F multiplying H produced L, therefore (by the 17. of the
seventh) as D is to F, so is K to L. But as D is to F, so is A to K, wherefore
as A is to K, so is K to L. Again forasmuch as F multiplying H produced L and
multiplying G produced B, therefore (by the 17. of the seventh) as H is to G,
so is L to B. But as H is to G so is D to F, wherefore as D is to F so i^ L to
B. And it is proved that as D is to F, so is A to K, and K to L, and L to B.
Wherefore the numbers A, K, L, B, are continual proportion. Wherefore how many
numbers in continual proportion fall between either of these numbers A, B, and
unity C, so many also in continual proportion fall there between the numbers
A and B: which was required to be proved.

The 9. Theoreme. The 11. Proposition. Between two square numbers there is one
mean proportional number. And a square number to a square, is in double
proportion of that which the side of the one is to the side of the other.
SVppose that there be two square numbers A and B, and let the side of A be C,
and let the side of B be D. Then I say that between these square numbers A and
B, there is one mean proportional number, and also that A is unto B in double
proportion of that which C is to D. Let C multiplieng D produce E. The first
part of this proposition demonstrated.
And forasmuch as A is a square number, and the side thereof is C, therefore C
multiplieng himself produced A. And by the same reason D multiplieng himself
produced B. Now forasmuch as C multiplieng C produced A, and multiplieng D
produced E, therefore (by the 17. of the seventh) as C is to D, so is A to E.
Again forasmuch as C multiplieng D produced E, and D multiplieng himself
produced B, therefore these two numbers C and D multiplieng one number, namely,
D, produce E and B. Wherefore (by the 18. of the seventh) as C is to D, so is E
to B. But as C is to D, so is A to E. Wherefore as A is to E, so is E to B.
Wherefore between these square numbers A and B, there is one mean
proportional number, namely, E. The second part demonstrated.
Now also I say that A is unto B in double proportion of that which C is to D.
For forasmuch as there are three numbers in continual proportion, A, E, B,
therefore (by the 10. definition of the fifth) A is unto B in double proportion
of that which A is to E. But as A is to E, so is C to D. Wherefore A is unto B
in double proportion of that which the side C is unto the side D: which was
required to be proved.

The 10. Theoreme. The 12. Proposition. Between two cube numbers there are two
mean proportional numbers. And the one cube is to the other cube in treble
proportion of that which the side of the one is to the side of the other.
^Vppose that there be two cube numbers A and B, and let the side of A be C,
and let the side of B be D. Then I say that between those cube numbers A and B,
there are two mean proportional numbers, and that A is unto B in treble
proportion of that which C is to D. Let C multiplieng himself produce E, and
multiplieng D let it produce F, Construction.
and let D multiplieng himself produce G. And let C multiplieng F produce H,
and let D multiplieng F produce K. The first part of this pr^position
de^^^strated.
And forasmuch as A is a cube number, and the side thereof is C, and C
multiplieng himself produces E, therefore C multiplieng E produces A. And by
the same reason for that D multiplieng himself, produced G, therefore D
multiplieng G produces B. And forasmuch as C multiplieng C and D produced E
and F: therefore by the 17. of the fifth, as C is to D, so is E to F. And by the
same reason also, as C is to D, so is F to G. Again forasmuch as C multiplieng
E and F produced A and H, therefore as E is to F, so is A to H. But as E is to
F, so is C to D. Wherefore as C is to D: so is A to H. Again forasmuch as each
of these numbers C and D multiplieng F produced H and K, therefore (by the 18.
of the seventh) as C is to D, so is H to K. Again forasmuch as D multiplieng F
and G produced K and B: therefore (by the 17. of the seventh) as F is to G, so
is K to B. But as F is to G, so is C to D, wherefore as C is to D, so is K to
B. And it is proved that as C is to D, so is A to H, and H to K, and K to B:
wherefore between these cube numbers A and B, there are two mean proportional
numbers, that is, H and K.

Now also I say, that A is unto B in treble proportion of that which C is to D.
The second part demonstrated.
For forasmuch as there are four numbers proportional A, H, K, B, therefore
(by the 10. definition of the fifth) A is unto B in treble proportion of that
which A is unto H. But as A is unto H, so is C to D, wherefore A is unto B in
treble proportion of that which C is to D: which was required to be proved.

The 11. Theoreme. The 13. Proposition. If there be numbers in continual
proportion how many so ever, and each multiplying himself produce certain
numbers, the numbers of them produced shall be proportinall. And if those
numbers given at the beginning multiplying the numbers produced, produce other
numbers, they also shall be proportional: and so shall it be continuing
infinitely.
SVppose that there be a multitude of numbers in continual proportion, namely,
A, B, C, as A is to B, so let B be to C. And let A, B, C, multiplying each
himself bring forth the numbers D, E, F, and multiplying the numbers D, E, F,
let the^ bring forth the numbers G, H, K. The^ I say that D, E, F, are in
continual proportion, and also that. G, H, K, are in continual proportion.
Construction.
For it is manifest that the numbers D, E, F, are square numbers, and that the
numbers G, H, K, are cube numbers. Let A multiplying B produce L. And let A and
B multiplying L produce M and N. And again let B multiplying C produce X: and
let B and C multiplying X produce O and P. Demonstration.
Now by the discourse of the proposition going before we may prove that D, L,
E, and also G, M, N, H, are in continual proportion and in the same proportion
that A is to B and likewise that E, X, F, and also H, O, P, K, are in
continual proportion and in the same proportion that B is to C. But as A is to
B, so is B to C. Wherefore D, L, E, are in one and the same proportion with E,
X, F and moreover G, M, N, H, are in one and the same proportion with H, O, P,
K, and the multitude of these numbers D, L, E, is equal to the multitude of
these numbers E, X, F, and likewise the multitude of these numbers G, M, N, H,
is equal to the multitude of these numbers H, O, P, K, wherefore of equality
(by the 14. of the seventh) as D is to E, so is E to F. And as G is to H, so is
H to K: which was required to be proved.

The 12. Theoreme. The 14. Proposition. If a square number measure a square
number, the side also of the one shall measure the side of the other. And if
the side of the one measure the side of the other, the square number also shall
measure the square number.
SVppose that there be two square numbers A and B, and let the sides of them be
C and D^ and let A measure B. Wherefore C also shall measure D. The first part
of this proposition.
Let C multiplying D produce E. Wherefore (by the 17. and 18. of the seventh,
and 13. of the eight) those numbers A, E, B, are in continual proportion, and
are in the same proportion that C is to D. And forasmuch as A, E, B, are in
continual proportion, and A measures B; therefore (by the 7. of the eight) A
measures E. But as A is to E, so is C to D: wherefore C measures D.



But now suppose that the side C do measure the side D. The second part is the
converse of the first.
Then I say, that the square number A also measures the square number B. For
the same order of construction remaining, we may in like sort prove, that the
numbers A, E, B, are in continual proportion, and in the same proportion, that
C is to D. And for that as C is to D, so is A to E, but C measures D: therefore
A measures E: and A, E, B, are in continual proportion: wherefore A measures
B. If therefore a square number measure a square number, the side also of the
one shall measure the side o^ the other. And if the side of the one measure the
side of the other, the square number also shall measure the square number:
which was required to be demonstrated.

The 13. Theoreme. The 15. Proposition. If a cube number measure a cube number,
the side also of the one shall measure the side of the other. And if the side
of the one measure the side of the other, the cube number also shall measure
the cube number.
SVppose that the cube number A do measure the cube number B, and let the side
of A be C, and the side of B be D. Then I say, that C measures D. Let C
multiplying him self produce E, and multiplying D let it produce F. And let D
multiplying him self produce G. And moreover let C and D multiplying F produce
H and K. The first part of this proposition.
Now it is manifest (by the 17, and 18. of the seventh, and 12. of the eight)
that those numbers E, F, G, and also A, H, K, B, are in continual proportion,
and in the same proportion that C is to D. And forasmuch as A, H, K, B, are in
continual proportion, and A measures B, therefore (by the 7. of the eight) A
also measures H. But as A is to H, so is C to D. Wherefore C also measures D.



The second part is the converse of the first.
But now suppose that the side C do measure the side D. Then I say, that the
cube number A also measures the cube number B. For the same order of
construction being kept, in like sort may we prove, that A, H, K, B, are in
continual proportion, and in the same proportion that C is to D. And forasmuch
as C measures D, but as C is to D, so is A to H, therefore A measures H:
wherefore A also measures B. If therefore a cube number measure a cube number,
the side also of the one shall measure the side of the other. And if the side
of the one measure the side of the other, the cube number also shall measure
the cube number: which was required to be proved.

The 14. Theoreme. The 16. Proposition. If a square number measure not a square
number, neither shall the side of the one measure the side of the other. And if
the side of the one measure not the side of the other, neither shall the square
number measure the square number.
A negat^ue proportion.

The first part of this proposition.


SVppose that A and B be two square numbers, and let the side of A be C: and let
the side of B be D. And be it that A measures not B. Then I say, that neither
shall C measure D. For if C do measure D, then (by the 14. of the eight) A also
measures B. But A by supposition measures not B: wherefore neither does C
measure D.

The second part is the co^uerse of the first.
But now again suppose that the side C measure not the side D. Then I say, that
neither shall the square number A measure the square number B. For if A do
measure B, then shall C (by the 14. of the eight) measure D. But (by
supposition) C measures not D. Wherefore neither does A measure B: which was
required to be proved.

The 15. Theoreme. The 17. Proposition. If a cube number measure not a cube
number, neither shall the side of the one measure the side of the other. And if
the side of the one measure not the side of the other, neither shall the cube
number measure the cube number.
SVppose that the cube number A do not measure the cube number B: A negative
proposition.
and let the side of A be C: and the side of B be D. Then I say, that C shall
not measure D. For if C do measure D, then (by the 15. of the eight) A also
shall measure B. The first part of this proposition.
But (by supposition) A measures not B: wherefore neither shall C measure D.

But now suppose that the side C measure not the side D. The second part is the
co^uerse of the first.
Then I say, that neither shall the cube number A measure the cube number B.
For if A do measure B, then also (by the 15. of the eight) shall C measure D.
But (by supposition) C measures not D. Wherefore neither shall A measure B:
which was required to be proved.

The 16. Theoreme. The 18. Proposition. Between two like plain or superficial
numbers there is one mean proportional number. And the one like plain number
is to the other like plain number in double proportion of that which the side
of like proportion, is to the side of like proportion.
SVppose that there be two like plain or superficial numbers A and B. And let
the sides of A be the numbers C, D: and the sides of B be the numbers E, F. And
forasmuch as like plain numbers are those which have their sides proportional
(by the 22. definition of the seventh) therefore as C is to D, so is E to F.
Demonstration of the first part of this proposition.
Then I say that between A and B there is one mean proportional number, and
that A is unto B in double proportion of that which C is unto E, or of that
which D is unto F, that is, of that which side of like proportion is to side of
like proportion. For for that as C is to D, so is E to ^, therefore alternately
(by the 13. of the seventh) as C is to E, so is D to F. And forasmuch as A is a
plain or superficial number, and the sides thereof are C and D: therefore D
multiplying C produced A. And by the same reason also E multiplying F produced
B. Let D multiplying E produce G. And forasmuch as D multiplying C produced A,
and multiplying E produced G, therefore (by the 17. of the seventh) as C is to
E, so is A to G. But as C is to E, so is D to F, wherefore as D is to F, so is
A to G. Again forasmuch as E multiplying D produced G, and multiplying ^
produced B, therefore (by the 17. of the seventh) as D is to F, so is G to B.
But it is proved that as D is to F, so is A to G: wherefore as A is to G, so is
G to B. Wherefore these numbers A, G, B, are in continual prorortion.
Wherefore between A and B there is one mean proportional number.

Demonstration of the second part.
Now also I say that A is unto B in dooble proportion of that which side of like
proportion is to side of like proportion, that is, of that which C is unto E,
or of that which D is unto F. For forasmuch as A, G, B, are in continual
proportion, therefore (by the 10. definition of the ^ift) A is unto B in double
proportion of that which A is unto G. But as A is to G, so is C to E, and D to
F: wherefore A is unto B in double proportion of that which C is to E, or D to
F: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 17. Theoreme. Th 19. Proposition. Between two like solid numbers, there
are two mean proportional numbers. And the one like solid number, is to the
other like solid number in treble proportion of that which side of like
proportion is to side of like proportion.
SVppose that there be two like solid numbers A and B. And let the sides of
the number A, be the numbers C, D, E. And let the sides of the number B, be the
numbers F, G, H. And forasmuch as (by the 22. definition of the seventh) like
solid numbers have their sides proportional, therefore as C is to D, so is F
to G, and as D is to E, so is G to H. Then I say that between A and B, there
are two mean proportional numbers. And that A is unto B in treble proportion
of that which C is to F, or of that which D is to G, or moreover of that which
E is unto H.

For let C multiplieng D produce K. And let F multiplieng G, produce L.
Demonstration of the first part of this proposition.
And forasmuch as C, D, are in the self same proportion that F, G, are, and of
C and D is produced K, and of F and G is produced L, therefore K and L are like
plain numbers. And therefore between those numbers K and L, there is one mean
proportional number (by the 18. of the se^enth) Let the same be M. Wher^ore M
is produced of D and F, as it is ma^^fest by the proposition going before.
Wherefore as K is to M, so is M to L. And forasmuch as D multiplieng C produced
K, and multiplieng F produced M: therefore (by the 17. of the seventh) as C is
to F, so is K to M, but as K is to M, so is M to L. Wherefore these numbers K M,
L, are in continual proportion and in the same proportion that C is to D. And
for that as C is to D, so is F to G, therefore alternately (by the 13. of the
seventh) as C is to F, so is D to G. Again, for that as D is to E, so is G to
H, therefore alternately also as D is to G, so is E to H. Wherefore these numbers
K, M, L, are in continual proportion, and in the same proportion that C is to
F, and that D is to G, and moreover that E is to H. Now let E and H multiplieng
M produce N and X. And forasmuch as A is a solid number, and the sides thereof
are C, D, E, therefore E multiplieng that which is produced of C and D,
produces A. But that which is produced of C and D is K. Wherefore E multiplieng
K produces A. And (by the same reason H multiplieng that which is produced of
F and G, that is multiplieng L produces B. And forasmuch as E multiplieng K
produced A and multiplieng M produced N, therefore (by the 17. of the seventh),
as K is to M, so is A to N. But as K is to M, so is C to F, and D to G. and
moreover E to H, therefore as C is to F, and D to G, and E to H, so is A to N.
Again, forasmuch as E multiplieng M produced N, and H multiplieng M, produced
X, therefore (by the 18. of the seventh) as E is to H, so is N to X. But as E is
to H, so is C to F, and D to ^. Wherefore as C is to F, and D to G, and E to H,
so is A to N, and N to X. Again forasmuch as H multiplieng M, produced X, and
multiplieng L produced B, therefore (by the 17. of the seventh) as M is to L,
so is X to B. But as M is to L, so is C to F, and D to G, and E to H therefore
as C is to F, and D to G, and E to H^ so is not only X to B, but also A to N,
and N to X. Wherefore these numbers A, N, X, B, are in continual proportion,
and that in the proportions of the sides. The second part.
I say moreover that A is unto B in treble proportion of that, which side of
like proportion, is to side of like proportion, that is, of that which the
number C has to the number F, or of that which D has to G, or moreover of
that which E has to H. For forasmuch as there are four numbers in continual
proportion, that is, A, N, X, B, therefore (by the 10. definition of the fifth) A
is unto B in treble proportion of that which A is unto N. But as A is to N, so
is it proved that C is to F, and D to G, and moreover E to H. Wherefore A is
unto B in treble proportion of that which side of like proportion is unto side
of like proportion, that is of that which the number C is to the number F, and
of that which D is to G, and moreover of that which E is ^o H: Which was
required to be proved.

The 18. Theoreme. The 20. Proposition. If between two numbers there be one
mean proportional number: those numbers are like plain numbers.
SVppose that between the two numbers A and B there be one mean proportional
number, and let the same be C. This proposition is the converse of the 18.
proposition.
Then I say, that those numbers A and B are like plain numbers. Take (by the
35. of the seventh) two of the least numbers that have one and the same
proportion with A, C, B: and let the same be the numbers D, E. Construction.
Wherefore as D is to E, so is A to C, but as A is to C, so is C to B,
wherefore as D is to E, so is C to B. Wherefore how many times D measures A,
so many times does E measure C. How many times D measures A, so many unities
let there be in F. Wherefore F multiplying D produces A, and multiplying E it
produces C: wherefore A is a plain number: and the sides thereof are D and F
(by the 17. definition of the seventh). Again forasmuch as D and E are the
lest numbers that have one and the same proportion with C, B, therefore (by the
21. of the seventh) how many times D measures C, so many times does E measure
B. How often E measures B, so many unities let there be in G. Wherefore E
measures B by those unities which are in G: wherefore G multiplying E
produces B: wherefore B is a plain number (by the 17. definition of the
seventh). Demonstration.
And the sides thereof are E and G. Wherefore those two numbers A and B are two
plain numbers. I say moreover that they are like. For forasmuch as F
multiplying E produced C: and G multiplying E produced B: therefore (by the 17.
of the seventh) as F is to G, so is C to B, but as C is to B, so is D to E,
wherefore as D is to E, so is F to G. Wherefore A and B are like plain
numbers, for their sides are proportional: which was required to be proved.

The 19. Theoreme. The 21. Proposition. If between two numbers, there be two
mean proportional numbers, those numbers are like solid numbers.
This proposition is the converse of the 19. proposition.
SVppose that between two numbers A and B, there be two mean proportional
numbers C, D. Then I say that A and B are like solid numbers. Take (by the 3^
of the seventh, or 2. of the eight) three of the least numbers that have one
and the same proportion with A, C, D, B, and let the same be E, F, G. Wherefore
(by the 3. of the eight) their extremes E, G are prime the one to the other.
And forasmuch as between the numbers E and G there is one mean proportional
number: Construction.
therefore (by the 20 of the eight) they are like plain numbers. Suppose that
the sides of E, be H and K. And let the sides of G, be L and M. Now it is
manifest that these numbers E, F, G, are in continual proportion,
Demonstration.
and in the same proportion that H is to L, and that K is to M. And forasmuch
a^ E, F, G are the least numbers that have one and the same proportion with A,
C, D, therefore of equality (by the 14. of the seventh) as E is to G, so is A
to D. But E, G, are (by the 3. of the eight) prime numbers, yea they are prime
and the least, but the least numbers (by the 21. of the seventh) measure those
numbers that have one and the same proportion with them equally, the greater
the greater, and the less the less, that is, the antecedent the antecedent,
and the consequent the consequent: therefore how many time^ E measures A, so
many times G measures D. How many times E measures A, so many unities let
there be in N. Wherefore N multiplieng E, produces A. But E is produced of the
numbers H, K. Wherefore N multiplieng that which is produced of H, K, produces
A. Wherefore A is a solid number, and the sides thereof are H, K, N. Again,
forasmuch as E, F, G, are the least numbers that have one and the same
proportion with C, D, B, therefore how many times E measures C, so many times
G measures B. How oftentimes G measures B, so many unities let there be in X.
Wherefore G measures B by those unities which are in X. Wherefore X multiplieng
G produces B. But G is produced of the numbers L, M. Wherefore X multiplieng
that number which is produced of L and M, produces B. Wherefore B is a solid
number, and the sides thereof are L, M X. Wherefore A, B are solid numbers. I
say moreover that they are like solid numbers. For forasmuch as N and X
multiplieng E produced A and C: therefore by the 18. of the seventh, as N is to
X, so i^ A to C, that is E ^o F. But as E is to F, so is H to L, and K to M:
therefore as H is to L, so is K to M, and N to X. And H, K, N, are the sides of
A, and likewise L, M, X, a^^ the sides of B^ wherefore A, B^ are like solid
numbers: which was required to be proved.

The 20. Theoreme. The 22. Proposition. If three numbers be in continual
proportion, and if the first be a square number, the third also shall be a
square number.
SVppose that there be three numbers in continual proportion A, B, C, and let
the first be a square number. Demonstration.
Then I say that the third is also a square number. For forasmuch as between A
and C there is one mean proportional number^ namely B, therefore (by the 20.
of the eight) A and C are like plain numbers. But A is a square number.
Wherefore C also is a square number: which was required to be proved.

The 21. Theoreme. The 23. Proposition. If four numbers be in continual
proportion, and if the first be a cube number, the fourth also shall be a cube
number.
SVppose that there be four numbers in continual proportion A, B, C, D.
Demonstration.
And let A be a cube number. The^ I say that D also is a cube number. For
forasmuch as between A and D there are two mean proportional numbers B^ C.
Therefore A, D are like solid numbers (by the 21. of this book) But A is a
cube number, wherefore D also is a cube number^ which was required to be
demonstrated.

The 22. Theoreme. The 24. Proposition. If two numbers be in the same
proportion that a square number is to a square number, and if the first be a
square number, the second also shall be a square number.
SVppose that two numbers A and B be in the same proportion, that the square
number C is unto the squ^^^ number D. And let A be a square number.
Demonstration.
Then I say that B also is a square number. For forasmuch as C and D are square
numbers. Therefore G and D are like plain numbers. Wherefore (by the 18. of the
eight) between C and D there is one mean proportional number. But as C is to
D, so is A to B. Wherefore between A and B there is one mean proportional
number (by the 8. of the eight) But A is a square number. Wherefore (by the 22.
of the eight) B also is a square number which was ^equired to be proved.

The 23. Theoreme. The 25. Proposition. If two numbers be in the same
proportion the one to the other, that a cube number is to a cube number, and if
the first be a cube number, the second also shall be a cube number.
SVppose that two numbers A and B be in the same proportion the one to the
other, that the cube number C is unto the cube number D. And let A be a cube
number. Then I say that B also is a cube number. For forasmuch as C, D, are
cube numbers, therefore C, Demonstration.
D are like solid numbers, wherefore (by the 19. of the eight) between C and D
there are two proportional numbers. But how many numbers fall in continual
proportion between C and D, so many (by the 8. of the eight) fall there between
the numbers that have the same proportion with them. Wherefore between A and B
there are two mean proportional numbers which let be E and F. And forasmuch
as there are four numbers in continual proportion, namely, A, E, F, B, and A
is a cube number, therefore (by the 2^. of the eight) B also is a cube number:
which was required to be demonstrated.

A Corollary added by Flussates.
A Corollary added by Flussates.
Between a square number and a number that is not a square number, falls not
the proportion of one square number to an other. For if the first be a square
number, the second also should be a square number which is contrary to the
supposition. Likewis^ between a cube number, and a number that is no cube
number falls not the proportion of one cube number to an other. For if the
first be a cube number, the second also should be a cube number, which is
contrary to the supposition, and therefore impossible.

The 24. Theoreme. The 26. Proposition. Like plain numbers, are in the same
proportion the one to the other, that a square number is to a square number.
SVppose that A and B be like plain numbers. Then I say that A is unto B in
the same proportion that a square number is to a square number. For forasmuch
as A, B, are like plain numbers, Construction.
therefore between A and B there falls one mean proportional number (by the
18. of the eight). Let there fall such a number, and let the same be C. And (by
the 35. of the seventh) take the three least numbers that have one and the same
proportion with A, C, B, and let the same be D, E, F: wherefore (by the
corollary of the 2^ of the eight) their (...) that is D, F, are square numbers.
And for that as D is to F, so is A to B, (by the 14. of the seventh): and D, F,
are square numbers. Therefore A is unto B in that proportion, that a square
number is unto a square num^er: which was required to be proved.

The 25. Theoreme. The 27. Proposition. Like solid numbers are in the same
proportion the one to the other, that a cube number is to a cube number.
SVppose that a A and B be like solid numbers. Then I say that A is unto B, in
the same proportion, that a cube numbe is to to a cube number. For forasmuch as
A, B, are like solid numbers. Construction.
Therefore (by the 19. of the eight) between A and B there fall two mean
proportional numbers. Let there fall two such numbers, and let the same be C
and D. And take (by the 35. of the seventh) the least numbers that have one and
the same proportion with A, C, D, B, Demonstration.
and equal also with the^ in multitude, and let the same be E, F, G, H.
Wherefore (by the corollary of the 2. of the eight) their extremes, that is,
EH, are cube numbers. But as E is to H, so is A to B. Wherefore A is unto B in
the same proportion, that a cube number is to a cube number: which was required
to be demonstrated.

A Corollary added by Flussates.
If two nnmbers be in the same proportion the one to the other that a square
number is to a square number: those two numbers shall be like superficial
numbers. A Corollary added by Flussates.
And if they be in the same proportion the one to the other that a cube number
is to a cube number, they shall be like solid numbers.

First let the number A have unto the number B the same proportion, that the
square number C has to the square number D. Then I say, that A and B are like
superficial numbers. For forasmuch as between the square numbers C and D there
falls a mean proportional (by the 11. of this book) there shall also
between A and B (which have one and the same proportion with C and D) fall a
mean proportional (by the 8. of this book). Wherefore A and B are like
superficial numbers (by the 20. of this book).

But if A be unto B, as the cube number C, is to the cube number D. Then are A
and B like solid numbers. For forasmuch as C and D are cube numbers, there
falls between them ^wo mean proportional numbers (by the 12. of this
book). And therefore (by the 8. of the same) between A and B (which are in the
same proportion that C is to D) there falls also two mean proportional
numbers. Wherefore (by the 21. of this book) A and B are like solid numbers.

An other Corollary added also by Flussates.
If a number multiplying a square number, produce not a square number: the said
number multiplying shall b^ no square number. Another Corollary added by
Flussates.
For if it should be a square number, then should it and the number multiplied
being like superficial numbers (by reason they are square numbers) have a
mean proportional (by the 18. of this book). And the number produced of the
said mean should be equal to the number contained under the extremes, which
are square numbers (by the 20. of the seventh). Wherefore the number produced
of the extremes being equal to the square number produced of the mean, should
be a square number. But the said number by supposition, is no square number.
Wherefore neither is the number multiplying the square number, a square number.

The first part of the first Corollary is the converse of the 26. Proposition
of this book, and has some use in the tenth book. The second part of the
same also is the converse of the 27. Proposition of the same.

The end of the eighth book of Euclides Elements.
The ninth book of Euclides Elements.
IN THIS NINTH BOOK Euclide continues his purpose touching numbers: partly
prosecuting things more fully, The Argument of the ni^th book.
which were before somewhat spoken of, as of square and cube numbers: and
partly setting out the natures and proprieties of such kinds of number, as
have not yet been entreated of: which yet are most necessary to be known. As
are numbers even, and odd: whose passions and conditions are in this book
largely taught, with their compositions, and subductions of the one from the
other: with many other general and special things to be noted, worthy the
knowledge.

The 1. Theoreme. The 1. Proposition. If two like plain numbers multiplying
the one the other produce any number: the number of them produced shall be a
square number.
SVppose that A and B be two like plain numbers. And let A multiplying B
produce the number C. Then I say, that C is a square number. For let A
multiplying him self produce D. Wherefore D is a square number. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as A multiplying him self produced D, and multiplying B
produced C, therefore (by the 17. of the seventh) as A is to B, so is D to C.
And forasmuch as A, B, are like plain numbers, therefore (by the 18. of the
eight) between A and B there falls a mean proportional number. But if
between two numbers fall numbers in continual proportion, how many numbers
fall between them, so many also (by the 8. of the eight) shall there fall
between the numbers that have the same proportion with them. Wherefore between C
and D also there falls a mean proportional number. But D is a square
number. Wherefore (by the 22. of the eight) C also is a square number: which was
required to be proved.

The 2. Theoreme. The 2. Proposition. If two numbers multiplying the one the
other produce a square number: those numbers are like plain numbers.
This proposition is the conu^rse o^ the form^^.
SVppose that two number^ A and B multiplying the one the other do produce C a
square number. Then I say, that A and B are like plain numbers. For let A
multiplying him self produce D. Wherefore D is a square number. And forasmuch
as A multiplying him self produced D, Demonstration.
and multiplying B produced C, therefore (by the 17. of the se^enth) as A is to
B, so is D to C. And forasmuch as D is a square number, and so likewise is C,
therefore D and C are like plain numbers. Wherefore between D and C there is
(by the 18. of the eight) one mean proportional number. But as D is to C, so
is A to B. Wherefore (by the 8. of the eight) between A and B there is one
mean proportional number. But if between two numbers there be one mean
proportional number, those numbers are (by the 20. of the eight) like plain
numbers. Wherefore A and B are like plain numbers: which was required to be
proved.

A Corollary added by Campane.
H^^^^ it is manifest, that two squar^ numbers multiplied the one into the,
other do always produce a squa^^ num^^r. A Corollary a^ded by Campane.
For they are like superficial numbers, and therefore the number produced of
them, is (by the first of this book) a square number. But a square number
mul^^plye^ into a number not square, produces a number not square. For if they
should produce a square number, they should be like superficial numbers (by
this Proposition). But they are not. Wherefore they produce a number not
square. But if a square number multiplied into an other number produce a square
number, that other number shall be a square number. For by this Proposition
that other number is like unto the square number which multiplyeth it, and
therefore is a square number. But if a square number multiplied into an other
number produce a number not square, neither shall that other number also be a
square number. For if it should be a square number, then being multiplied into
the square number it should produce a square number, by the first part of this
Corollary.

The 3. Theoreme. The 3. Proposition. If a cube number multiplying himself
produce a number, the number produced shall be a cube number.
SVppose that A being a cube number multiplieng himself, do produce the number
B. Then I say that B is a cube number. Take the side of A, and let the same be
the number C, and let C multiplieng himself produce the number D. Now it is
manifest that C multiplieng D produces A (by the 20. definition of the
seventh) Demonstration.
And forasmuch as C multiplieng himself produced D, therefore C measures D by
those unities which are in C. But unity also measures C by those unities
which are in C. Wherefore as unity is to C, so is C to D. Again forasmuch as C
multiplieng D produces A: therefore D measures A by those unities which are
in C. But unity measures C by those unities which are in C: wherefore as
unity is to C, so is D to A. But as unity is to C, so is C to D, wherefore as
unity is to C, so is C to D and D to A. Wherefore between unity and A there
are two mean proportional numbers, namely, C, D. Again forasmuch as A
multiplieng himself produced B, therefore A measures B by those unities which
are in A. But unity also measures A by those unities which are in A. Wherefore
as unity is to A, so is A to B. But between A and unity, there are two mean
proportional numbers. Wherefore between A and B also there are two mean
proportional numbers by the 8. of the eight. But if between two numbers, there
be two mean proportional numbers, and if the first be a cube number, the
fourth also shall be a cube number by the 21. of the eight. But A is a cube
number, wherefore B also is a cube number which was required to be proved.

The 4. Theoreme. The 4. Proposition. If a cube number multiplieng a cube
number, produce any number, the number produced shall be a cube number.
SVppose that the cube number A multiplieng the cube number B, do produce the
number C. Then I say that C is a cube number. For let A multiplieng himself
produce D. Wherefore D is a cube number (by the proposition going before).
Demonstration.
And forasmuch as A multiplieng himself produced D, and multiplieng B, it
produced C: therefore (by the 17. of the seventh) as A is to B, so is D to C.
And forasmuch as A and B are cube numbers, therefore A and B are like solid
numbers. Wherefore between A and B (by the 19. of the eight) there are two mean
proportional numbers. Wherefore also (by the 8. of the same) between D and C
there are two mean proportional numbers. But D is a cube number. Wherefore C
also is a cube number (by the 23. of the eight) which was required to be
demonstrated.

The 5. Theoreme. The 5. Proposition. If a cube number multiplying any number
produce a cube number: the number multiplied is a cube number.
SVppose that the cube number A, multiplying the number B, do produce a cube
number, namely, C. Then I say, that B is a cube number. For let A multiplying
him self produce D. Wherefore (by the 3. of the ninth) D is a cube number. And
forasmuch as A multiplying him self produced D, Demonstration.
and multiplying B, it produced C: therefore (by the 17. of the seventh) as A
is to B, so is D to C. And forasmuch as D and C are cube numbers, they are also
like solid numbers. Wherefore (by the 19. of the eight) between D and C there
are two mean proportional numbers. But as D is to C, so is A to B. Wherefore
(by the 8. of the eight) between A and B there are two mean proportional
numbers. But A is a cube number. Wherefore B also is a cube number (by the 23.
of the eight): which was required to be proved.

A Corollary added by Campane.
Hereby it is manifest, that if a cube number multiply a number not cube, it
shall produce a number not cube. A Corollary added by Campane.
For if it should produce a cube number, then the number multiplied should also
be a cube number (by this Proposition) which is contrary to the supposition.
For it is supposed to be no cube number. And if a cube number multiplying a
number produce a number not cube, the number multiplied shall be no cube
number. For if the number multiplied should be a cube number, the number
produced should also be a cube number (by the 4. of this book): which is
contrary to the supposition, and impossible.

The 6. Theoreme. The 6. Proposition. If a number multiplieng himself produce
a cube number: then is that number also a cube number.
SVppose that the number A multiplieng himself, do p^oduce B a cube number.
Then I say that A also is a cube number. Demonstration.
For let A multiplieng B produce C. And forasmuch as A multiplieng himself
produced B, and multiplieng B it produced C: therefore C is a cube number. And
for that A multiplieng himself produced B, and multiplieng B it produced C,
therefore (by the 17. of the seventh) as A is to B, so is B to C. And for that B
and C are cube numbers, they are also like solid numbers. Wherefore (by the 19.
of the eight) between C and B there are two mean proportional numbers. But as
B is to C, so is A to B: wherefore (by the 8. of the eight) between A and B
there are two mean proportional numbers. But B is a cube number. Wherefore A
also is a cube number by the 23. of the eight: which was required to be
demonstrated.

The 7. Theoreme. The 7. Proposition. If a composed number multiplieng any
number, produce a number: the number produced shall be a solid number.
SVppose that the composed number A multiplieng the number B, do produce the
number C. Then I say that C is a solid number. For forasmuch as A is a
composed number, therefore some number measures it (by the 14. definition). Let
D measure it. Demonstration.
And how often D measures A, so many unities let there be in E. Wherefore E
multiplieng D produces A. And forasmuch as two numbers D and E, multiplieng
themsel^es, produce A, which A again multiplieng B produces C: therefore C
produced of three numbers multiplieng the one the other, namely, D, E, and B is
(by the 18. definition of the seventh) a solid number. And the sides thereof
are the numbers D, E, B. If therefore a composed number etc, which was required
to be proved.

The 8. Theoreme. The 8. Proposition. If from unity there be numbers in
continual proportion how many soever: the third number from unity is a square
number, and so are all forward leaving one between. And the fourth number is a
cube number, and so are all forward leaving two between. And the seventh is
both a cube number and also a square number, and so are all forward leaving
five between.
SVppose that from unity there be these numbers in continual proportion A, B,
C, D, E, F. Then I say that the third number from unity, namely, B is a square
number, and so are all forward leaving one between, namely, D and F.
Demonstration of the first part.
And that C the fourth number is a cube number, and so are all forward leauyng
two between. And that F the seventh number is both a cube number and also a
square number, and so are all forward leaving five between. For for that as
unity is to A, so is A to B. Therefore how many times unity measures A, so
many times A measures B. But unity measures A by those unities which are in
A, wherefore A measures B by those unities which are in A. And forasmuch as A
measures B by those unities which are in A. Therefore A multiplieng himself
produces B. Wherefore B is a square number. And forasmuch as these numbers B,
C, D, are in continual proportion, and B is a square number, therefore by the
22. of the eight, D also is a square number. And by the same reason also F is a
square number. And in like sort may we prove that leaving always one between,
all the rest forward are square numbers.



Now also I say that the fourth number from unity, that is, C, is a cube
number, and so are all forward leaving two between. For for that as unity is
to the number A, so is B to C, The second part demonstrated.
therefore how many times unity measures the number A, so many times B
measures C. But unity measures A by those unities which are in A, wherefore B
measures C by those vnit^^s which are in A. Wherefore A multiplieng B produces
C. And forasmuch as A multipli^ng himself produced B, and multiplieng B it
produced C, therefore C is a cube number. And forasmuch as C, D, E, F, are in
continual proportion. But G is a cube number, therefore (by the 23. of the
eight) F also is a cube number.

And it is proved, that F being the seventh number from unity is also a square
number. Demostratio^ of the third part.
Wherefore F is both a cube number, and also a square number. In like sort may
we prove, that lea^ing always five between, all the rest forward, are numbers
both cube and also square: which was required to be proved.

The 9. Theoreme. The 9. Proposition. If from^ unity be numbers in continual
proportion how many soever: and if th^^ number which follows next after
unity be a square number, then all the rest following also be square numbers.
And if that number which follows next after unity be a cube number, then all
the rest following shall be cube numbers.
SVppose that from unity there be these numbers in continual proportion A, B,
C, D, E, F. And let A which follows next unto unity be a square number. Then
I say, that all the rest following also are square numbers. Demostration of the
first part of this proposition.
That the third number, namely, B, is a square number, and so all forward
leaving one between, it is plain by the Proposition next going before. I say
also that all the rest are square numbers. For, forasmuch as A, B, C, are in
continual proportion, and A is a square number, therefore (by the 22. of the
eight) C also is a square number. Again forasmuch as B, C, D, are in
continual proportion, and B is a square number, therefore D also (by the 22. of
the eight) is a square number. In like sort may we prove, that all the rest are
square numbers.

The second p^rt demonstrated.
But now suppose that A be a cube number. Then I say, that all the rest
following are cube numbers. That the fourth from unity, that is, C is a cube
number, and so all forward leaving two between, it is plain (by the
Proposition going before). Now I say, that all the rest also are cube numbers.
For, for that as unity is to A, so is A to B: therefore how many times unity
measures A, so many times A measures B. But unity measures A by those
unities which are in A. Wherefore A also measures B by those unities which are
in A. Wherefore A multiplying him self produces B. But A is a cube number.
But if a cube number mutiplying him self produce any number, the number
produced, is (by the 3. of the ninth) a cube number. Wherefore B is a cube
number. And forasmuch as there are four numbers in continual proportion A, B,
C, D, and A is a cube number, therefore D also (by the 23. of the eight) is a
cube number. And by the same reason E also is a cube number, and in like sort
are all the r^st following: which was required to be proved.

The 10. Theoreme. The 10. Proposition. If from unity be numbers in continual
proportion how many soever, and if that number which follows next after
unity be not a square number, then is none of the rest following a square
number, excepting the third from unity, and so all forward leaving one
between. And if that number which ^olloweth next after unity be not a cube
number, neither is any of the rest following a cube number, excepting the
fourth from unity, and so all forward leaving two between.
SVppose that from unity be these numbers in continual proportion A, B, C, D,
E, F. And let A which follows next after unity be no square number. Then I
say, Demonstration of the first part leaving to an absu^^itie.
that neither is any of the rest a square number, excepting the third from
unity, and so all forward leaving one between, namely, B, D, F, which are
square numbers (by the 8. of this book). For if it be possible, let C be a
square number. But B also is a square number. Wherefore B is unto C in that
proportion that a square number is to a square number. But as ^ is ^o C, so is
A to B. Wherefore A is unto B in th^^ proportion that a square number is to ^
square number. But B is a square number. Wherefore A also is a square number
(by the ^4. of the eigth)^ which is contrary to the supposition. Wherefore C is
not a square number. And by the same reason none of all the other is a square
number, excepting the third from unity, and so all forward leaving one between.

But now suppose that A be not a cube number^ Then I say, Demonstration of the
^^cond p^^^ leading al^o to an absurdity.
that none of all the rest is a cube number, excepting the fourth from unity,
and so all forward leaving two between, namely, C, and F, which (by the 8. of
this book) are cube numbers. For if i^ (...) possible, l^^ D be a cube number.
But C also is a cube number (by the 8. of the ninth). For it is the fourth from
unity. But as C is to D, so is B to C. Wherefore B is unto C, in that
proportion tha^ a cube number is to a cube number. But C is a cube number.
Wherefore B also is a cube number (by the 25. of the eight). And as unity is
to A, so is A to B. But unity measures A by those unities which are in A.
Wherefore A measures B by those unities which are in A. Wherefore A multiplying
him^selfe produceth^ B a cube number. But if a number multiplying him self
produce a cube number, then is that number also a cube number (by the 6. of the
ninth)^ Wherefore A is a cube number: which is contrary to the supposition.
Wherefore D is not a cube number. In like sort may we prove, that neither is
any of the rest a cube number, excepting the fourth from unity, and so all
forward leaving two between: which was required to be proved.

The 11. Theoreme. The 11. Proposition. If from unity be numbers in continual
proportion how many soever, the less measures the greater by some one of them
which are before in the said proportional numbers.
SVppose that from unity A be these numbers in continual proportion B, C, D,
E. Then I say that of these numbers B, C, D, ^^ E being the less, measures E
the greater by one of these numbers C or D. For for that as unity A is unto
the number B, so is D to E, Demonstration.
therefore how many times unity A measures the number B, so many times D
measures E^ wherefore alternately (by the 15. of the seventh) how many times
vniti^ A measures the number D, so many times ^ measures E. But unity A
measures D by those unities which are in D. Wherefore B also measures E by
those unities which are in D. Wherefore ^ the less, measures. E the greater
by some one of the numbers which went before E in the proportional numbers.
And so likewise may we prove that E measures D by some one of the numbers ^,
C, D, namely, by C. And so of the rest. If therefore from unity etc. Which was
required to be proved.

The 12. Theoreme. The 12. Proposition. If from unity be numbers in continual
proportion how many soever, how many prime numbers measure the least^ so many
also shall measure^ the number which follows next after unity.
SVppose that from unity be these numbers in continual proportion A, B, C, D.
The I say that how many prime numbers measure D, so many also do measure A.
Suppose that some prime number namely, E, do measure D. The^ I say that E also
measures A, which is next unto unity. For if E do not measure A, and E is a
prime number, but every number is to every number which it measures not a
prime number (by the 31. of the seventh). Wherefore A and E are prime numbers
the one to the other. And forasmuch as E measures D, let it measure D by the
number F. Demonstration leading to an absurdity.
Wherefore E multiplieng F produces D. Again forasmuch as A measures D by
those unities which are in C, therefore A multiplieng C produces D. But E also
multiplieng F produced D, wherefore that which is produced of the numbers A, C
is equal to that which is produced of the numbers E, F. Wherefore as A is to E,
so is F to C. But A, E, are prime numbers, yea they are prime and the least.
But the lest numbers measure the numbers that have one and the same proportion
with them equally by the 21. of the seventh, namely, the antecedent the
antecedent, and the consequent the consequent. Wherefore E measures C. Let it
measure it by G. Wherefore E multiplieng G produces C. But A also multiplieng
B produces C. Wherefore that which is produced of the numbers A, B, is equal
to that which is produced of the numbers E, G. Wherefore as A is to E, so is G
to B. But A, E are prime numbers, yea they are prime and the least. But the
least numbers (by the 21. of the seventh) measure the numbers that have one and
the same proportion with the^ equally, namely, the antece^^s the antecede^^,
and the co^seque^t the conseqe^t. Wherefore E measures B. Let it measure it by
H. Wherefore B multiplieng H produces B. But A also multiplieng himself
produces B, wherefore that which is produced of the numbers E, H, is equal to
that which is produced of the number A. Wherefore as E is to A, so is A to H.
But AE are prime numbers, yea they are prime and the least, but the least
numbers (by the 21. of the seventh) measure the numbers that have one and the
same proportion with the^ equally, namely, the antecede^t the antecedent, and
the co^sequent the consequent. Wherefore E measures A and it also does not
measure it by ^^pp^sition, which is impossible. Wherefore A and E are not prime
the one to the other, wherefore they are composed. But all composed numbers are
measured of some prime number, wherefore A and E are measured by some prime
number. And forasmuch as E is supposed to be a prime number. But a prime number
is not (by the definition) measured by any other number but of himself.
Wherefore E measures A and E, wherefore B measures A, and it also measures D.
Wherefore E measures these numbers A and D. And in like sort may we prove that
how many prime numbers measure D, so many also shall measure A: which was
required to be proved.

An other more brief demonstration after Flussates.
An other demonstration after Flussates.
Suppose that from unity be numbers in co^^^nuall proportion how many so ever,
namely, A, B, C, D. And let some prime number, namely, ^ measure the last
number which is D. The^ I say that the same E measures A which is the next
number unto unity. For if E do not measure A, then are they prime the one to
the other by the 31. of the seventh. And forasmuch as A, B, C, D, are
proportional from unity, therefore A multiplying himself produces B.
Wherefore B and E ar^ prim^. numbers (by the 27. of the seventh). And forasmuch
as A multiplying B produces C, therefore C is to E also a prime number by the
26. of the seventh. And likewise infinitely A multiplying C produces D:
wherefore D and E are prime numbers the one to the other (b^ (...) same ^6. of
the s^uenth^ Wherefore E measures not D as it was supposed, which is absurd,
wherefore the prime number E measures A, which is next unto unities which
was required to be proved.

The 13. Theoreme. The 13. Proposition. If from unity be numbers in continual
proportion how many soever, and if that which follows next after unity be a
prime number: then shall no other number measure the greatest number, but those
only which are before in the said proportional numbers.
SVppose that from unity be these numbers in continual proportion A, B, C, D,
and let that which follows next after unity, that is, A, be a prime number.
Then I say, that no other number besides these numbers A, B, C, measures the
greatest number of them which is D. Demonstration leading to an absurdity.
For if it be possible, let E measure D. And let E be none of these numbers A,
B, C, D. Now it is manifest that E is not a prime number. For if E be a prime
number, and do also measure D, it shall likewise measure A being a prime number
and not being one and the same with A, by the former Proposition: which is
impossible. Wherefore E is not a prime number. Wherefore it is a composed
number. But every composed number (by the 33. of the seventh) is measured by
some prime number.



Now I say, that no other prime number besides A shall measure E. For if any
other prime number do measure E, and E measures D, therefore that number also
shall measure D (by the 5. common sentence of the seventh). Wherefore it shall
also measure A (by the proposition next going before) being a prime number and
not being one and the same with A: which is impossible. Wherefore every the
prime number A measures E which measures the greatest number D.

And forasmuch as E measures D, let it measure it by F. Now I say, that F is
none of these numbers A, B, C. For if F be one and ^he s^m^ with any of these
numbers A, B, C, and is measures D by ^, therefore one of these numbers A, B,
C, measures D by E. But one of these numbers A, B, C, measures D by some one
of these numbers A, B, C, therefore E is one and the same with one of these
numbers A, B, C, which is cont^^ry (...) the supposition. Wherefore F^^ no^ one
and the same with any of these ^^^bers A, B, C.

In like sort may we pro^e, that only the prime number A measures F, pro^^^g
first that F is not a prime number. For if F be a prime number, and it
measures D, therefore it also measures A being a prime number, and not being
one and the same with A, by the former Proposition: which is impossible.
Wherefore F is not a prime number: wherefore it is a composed number, and
therefore some prime number shall measure it. Now I say, that no other prime
number besides A shall measure it. For if any other prime number do measure F,
and F measures D, therefore that number shall measure D (by the 5. common
sentence of the seventh). Wherefore it shall also measure A (by the former
Proposition) being a prime number and not being one and the same with A: which
is impossible. Wherefore only the prime number A measures F. And forasmuch as
E measures D by F, therefore E multiplying F produces D, But A also
multiplying C produces D, therefore that which is produced if A into C, is
equal to that which is produced of E into F. Wherefore proportionally as A is
to E, so is F to C. But A measures E. Wherefore F measures C. Let F measure C
by G. And in like sort may we prove, that G is not one and the same with any of
these numbers A, B, C, and that G is a composed number, and also that only the
prime number A measures it. And forasmuch as F measures C by G, therefore G
multiplying F produced C. But A also multiplying B produced C. Wherefore that
which is produced of A into B, is equal to that which is produced of F into G.
Wherefore proportionally as A is to F, so is G to B. But A measures F.
Wherefore G also measures B. Let G measure B by H. Now in like sort as before
may we prove, that H is not one and the same with A, and that H is a composed
number, and measured only of the prime number A. And forasmuch as G measures
B by th^se unities which are in H, therefore G multiplying H produced B. But A
multiplying him self produced B. Wherefore that which is produced of H into G,
is equal to the square number which is produced of A. Wherefore as H is to A,
so is A to G. But A measures G. Wherefore H measures A being a prime number
and not being one and the same with it: which is absurd. Wherefore no other
number besides these numbers A, B, C, measures the greatest number D: which
was required to be demonstrated.

An other demonstration of the same after Campane.
An other demonstration after Campane.
Suppose that E not being one and the same with the numbers A, B, C, D do
measure the number D. And let it measure it by the number P. And forasmuch as A
being a prime number measures the number D, which is produced of E into F:
therefore by the 3^. of the fourth, A measures either ^ or ^. Let it measure
E. Now forasmuch as D is produced of A into G, and also of E into F: therefore
by the second part of the 19. of the seventh, A is to E, as F is to C. But A
measures E: wherefore F measures C. Let it measure it by G. Wherefore by the
32. of the seventh A shall measure either F or G. Let it measure F. Wherefore
as before by the second part of the 1^. of the seventh G shall measu^e B. Let
it measure it by H. Now then as before it follows by the 32. of the seventh
that A shall measure either G or H: suppose that it measure G. Wherefore by the
second part of the 20. of the seventh H shall measure ^ (for of A into himself
is produced B, and of H into G also it produced B) I^ therefore H be not equal
unto A, A shall be no prime number. Which is contrary to the supposition. ^^t
if it be equal unto A, then ^uery one of these numbers ^, F, E, shall be some
one of the numbers A, B, C, D, by the 11. proposition of the ninth repeted a^
often as need requires. Wherefore E is not a number diverse from them, but is
one and the same with some one of them: which is contrary to the supposi^ion;
wherefore that is manifest which was required to be proved.

The 14. Theoreme. The 14. Proposition. If there be given the least number,
whom certain prime numbers given, do measure: no other prime number shall
measure that number, besides those prime numbers given.
SVppose that the least number whom these prime numbers B, C, D, do measure, be
A. Then I say that no other prime number besides B, C, D, measures A. For if
it be possible, let E being a prime number measure A, and let E be none of
these numbers B, C, D. Demo^stration leading to an absurdity.
And forasmuch as E measures A, let it measure it by F. Wherefore E multiplieng
I produces A: And these prime numbers B, C, D, measure A. ^ut if two numbers
multiplieng the one the other produce any number. And if some prime number
measure that which is produced, it shall also measure one of th^se numbers
which were put at the beginning (by the 32. of the seventh) Wherefore those
numbers B, C, D, measure one of these numbers E or F. But they measure not E,
for E is a prime number, and is not one and the same with any one of these
numbers B, C, D. Wherefore they measure F being less then A which is
impossible. For A is supposed to be the least whom B, C, D, measure. Wherefore
no prime number besides B, C, D, measures A: which was required to be
demonstrated.

A proposition added by Campane.
If there be numbers how many soever in continual proportion being the least
in that proportion: a number measuring one of them, shall be a number not prime
to one of the two least numbers in that proportion.

Suppose that there be numbers in continual proportion how many soe^^r namely
A, B, C, D, E which let be the least that have the same proportion with them: A
proposition added by Campane.
and let the two least numbers in that proportion be F and G. And let some
number as H measure some one of the numbers A, B, C, D, E, namely, C. Then I
say that H is a number not prime either to F or G. Take (by the 2. of the
eight) the three least numbers in the proportion of A to B: which let be P, Q,
R. And afterward four (by the same) which let be K, L, M, N: and so forward
till you come to the multitude of the numbers given A, B, C, D, E. Now it is
manifest (by the demonstration of the second of the eight) that F multiplied by
P, Q, and R produces K, L, M: and that F multiplied by K, L, M, N produc^th A,
B, C, D. And forasmuch as H measures C: therefore H is either to F or to M not
prime (by the corollary of the 32. of the seventh added by Ca^pane) If it be
not prime unto F: the^ i^ that manifest which was required to be proved. But if
H be not prime unto M. The^ shall it not be prime either to F or to R (by the
same corollary). If again it be not prime unto F, then is that proved which
was required. But if it be not prime unto R, than (by the same corollary) shall
it be a number not prime unto G (which produces R by the 2. of the eight)^ but
G is one of the two least numbers F or G which are in the proportion of the
numbers given at the beginning A, B, C, D, E. If therefore there be numbers how
many soever. etc. which was required to be proved.

The 15. Theoreme. The 15. Proposition. If three numbers in continual
proportion be the least of all numbers that have one and the same proportion
with them: every two of them added together shall be prime to the third.
SVppose that there be three numbers in continual proportion A, B, C, being
the left of all numbers that have one and the same proportion with them. Then I
say, that every two of these numbers A, B, C, added together, Construc^ion.
are prime to the third: namely, that A, B, is prime to C, and B, C, to A, and
A, C, to B. Take (by the 35. of the seventh) two of the numbers that have one
and the same proportion with A, B, C, and let the same be the numbers DE, and
OF.

Now it is manifest (by the said 35. Proposition) that DE multiplying him self
produced A, Demonstration.
and multiplying OF produced B, and moreover OF multiplying him self produced
C.

And forasmuch as DE and OF are the least in that proportion, they are also
prime the one to the other (by the 24. of the seventh). But i^ two numbers be
prime the one to the other, then both of the^ added together, shall be prime to
either of them (by the 30. of the seventh). Wherefore the whole number DF is
prime to either of these numbers DE and OF. But DE also is prime unto OF.
Wherefore DF, and DE are prime unto OF. Wherefore that which is produced of DF
into DE, is (by the 26. of the seventh) prime unto OF. But if two numbers be
prime the one to the other, that which is produced of the one of the^ into
himself, is prime to the other (by the 27. of the seventh). Wherefore that
which is produced of DF into DE, is prime to that which is produced of OF into
himsel^e. But that which is produced of FD into DE, is the square number which
is produced of DE into himsel^e together with that which is produced of DE into
OF (by the 3. of the second). Wherefore the square number which is produced of
DE together with that which is produced of DE into OF, is prime to that which
is produced of OF into himself. But that which is produced of DE into him
self, is the number A, and that which is produced of DE into OF, is the number
B: and that which is produced of OF into himself, is the number C. Wherefore
the numbers A, B, added together are prime unto C.

By the like demonstration also may we prove, that the numbers B, C, are prime
unto the number A.

Now also I say, that the numbers A, C, are prime unto the number B.

For forasmuch as DF is prime to either of these DE and OF: therefore that
which is produced of DF into him self, is prime to that which is produced of DE
into OF. But that which is produced of DF into him self, is equal to the
square numbers which are produced of DE and OF together with that number which
is produced of DE into OF, twice (by the 4. of the second). Wherefore the
square numbers which are produced of DE and OF together with that which is
produced of DE into OF twice are prime to that which is produced of DE into OF.
And by division also (by the 30. of the seventh) the square numbers produced of
DE and OF, together with that which is produced of DE into OF once are prime to
that which is produced of DE into OF. Again (by the same 30. of the seventh)
the square numbers produced of DE and OF, are prime to that which is produced
of DE into OF. But that which is produced of DE into him self is A, and that
which is produced of OF into him self is C, and that which is produced of DE
into OF, is B. Wherefore the numbers A, C, added together are prime unto the
number B: which was required to be demonstrated.

This latter part of the demonstration, which proves that the numbers A, and C
are prime unto B, is somewhat obscurely put of Theon. And therefore I will here
make it playner.

Forasmuch as either of the numbers DE, and OF is prime to the whole DF:
Demonstration to prove that the numbers A and C are prime to B.
(as has before b^ne proved) therefore that which is produced of DE into OF
(which is the number B) is prime unto DF, by the 26. of the seventh. Wherefore
by the 27. of the same that which is produced of DF into himself (which is the
number composed of A and C and of the double of B by the 4. of the second)
shall be prime unto B. Wherefore it follows that the number composed of A and
C is prime unto B. For if a number composed of two numbers, be prime to one of
the said two numbers, as here the number composed of A and C taken as one
number and of the double of B, is prime unto the double of B: then the two
numbers whereof the number is composed, namely, the number composed of A and C,
and the double of B shall be prime the one to the other (by the 30 of the
seventh). And therefore the number composed of A and C shall be prime to B
taken once. For if any number should measure the two numbers, namely the number
composed of A and C, and the number B, it should also measure the number
composed of A and C, and the double of B (by the 5. common sentence of the
seventh): which is not possible, for that they are proved to be prime numbers.

Here have I added an other demonstration of the former Proposition after
Campane, which proves that in numbers how many soever, which is there proved
only touching three numbers: and the demonstration seement somewhat more
perspicous then Theons demonstration. And thus he puts the proposition.

If numbers how many soever being in continual proportion be the least that
have one and the same proportion with them: every one of them shall be to the
number composed of the rest prime.

Suppose that there be numbers in continual proportion how many soever,
Demonstration leading to an absurdi^ie.
and the least in their proportion: namely, A, B, C, D. Then I say that every
one of them, as for example (...) D, is prime to the number composed of the
rest, namely, of A, B, C. For if it be not, let some number, namely E measure
D, and the number composed of A, B, C. Take the two least numbers in the same
proportion that A, B, C, D are (by the 35. of the seventh) which let be F, G.
And forasmuch as E measures one of these number A, B, C, D, the same E shall be
a number not prime either to F or to G (by the proposition before added by
Campane after the 14. proposition) wherefore some number shall measure E and one
of these number^ For G: which let be H. and forasmuch as H measures But shall
also measure D, which number D the number E also measures (by the ^. common
sentence of the seventh). Moreover forasmuch is H (by supposition) measures
one of these numbers F or G, the same H shall measure all the means betwen^ A
and D by the same common sentence. For e^^er of these numbers F or G produces
all the means by the next numbers in continual proportion and in the same
proportion with them (as by L, I, K) by the second of the eight. Again
forasmuch as H measures E, which (by supposition) measures the whole A, B, C:
the same H shall also measure the whole, A, B, C (by the foresaid common
sentence) and it measures the part taken away, namely, the means B, C (as it
has been proved) wherefore it also measures the residue A (by the 4. common
sentence o^ the seventh) wherefore H measures the extremes D and A, which are
prime the one to the other (by the 3. of the eight) which were absurd.
Wherefore D is a number prime to the number composed of the rest, namely, of A,
B, C.

Secondly I say that this is so in every one of them: namely that C is a prime
number to the number composed of A, B, D. For if not, then as before let E
measure C, and the number composed of A, B, D: which E shall be a number not
prime either to F or to G (by the former proposition added by Campane)
wherefore let H measure them. And forasmuch as H measures E, it shall also
measure the whole A, B, C, D whom E measures. And forasmuch as H measures one
of these numbers F or G, it shall measure one of the extremes A or D: which
are produced of F or G (by the second of the eight) if they be multipl^ed into
the means L or K. And moreover the same H shall measure the meames, BC (by the
5. common sentence of the seventh) when as by supposition it measures either F
or G. which measure B, C (by the second of the eight). But the same H measures
the whole A, B, C, D as we have proved, for that it measures E. Wherefore it
shall also measure the residue, namely, the number composed of the extremes A
and D (by the 4. common sentence of the seventh). And it measures one of these
A or D (for it measures one of these F or G which produce A and D) wherefore
the same H shall measure one of these A or D and also the other of them (by the
former common sentence) which numbers A and D are by the 3. of the eight prime
the one to the other. Which were absurd. This may also be proved in every one
of these numbers A, B, C, D. Wherefore no number shall measure one of these
numbers A, B, C, D and the numbers composed of the rest. Wherefore they are
prime the one to the other: If therefore numbers how many soever. etc: which
was required to be proved.

Here as I promised, I have added Campanes demonstrations of those Propositions
in numbers, which Eucl^de in the second book demonstrated in lines. And that
in this place so much the rather, for that Theon as we see in the demonstration
of the 15. Proposition seems to allege the 3. and 4. Proposition of the
second book: which although they concern lines only, yet as we there declared
and proved, are they true also in numbers.

The first Proposition added by Campane.
That number which is produced of the multiplication of one number into numbers
how many soever: is equal to that number which is produced of the
multiplication of the same number into the number composed of them.

This proves that in numbers which the first of the second proved touching
lines. Suppo^^ that the number A being multiplied into the number B, and into
the number C, Demonstratiou.
and into the number D, do produce the numbers E, F and G. Then I say that the
number produced of A multiplied into the number composed of B, C, and D is
equal to the number composed of E, F, and G. For by the converse of the
definition of a number multiplied, what part unity is of A, the self same
part is B of E, and C of F, and also D of G. Wherefore by the 5. of the seventh
what part unity is of A, the self same part is the number composed of B, C,
and D, of the number composed of E, F, and G. Wherefore by the definition that
which is produced of A into the number composed of B, C, D, is equal to the
number composed of E, F, G: which was required to be proved.

The second Proposition.
That number which is produced of the multiplication of numbers how many soever
into one number: is equal to that number which is produced of the
multiplication of the number composed of them into the same number.

This is the converse of the former As if the ^^^bers ^ and G and D multiplied
into the number A do produce the numbers E and F and G. This proposition is
the co^uerse of the former.
Then the number composed of B, C, D. multiplied into the number A shall
produce the number composed of the numbers E, F, G. Which thing is easly proved
by the 16. of the seventh and by the former proposition.

The third Proposition.
That number which is produced of the multiplication of numbers how many soever
into other numbers how many soever, is equal to that number which is produced
of the multiplication of the number composed of those first numbers, into the
number composed of these latter numbers.

As if the numbers A, B, C do multiply the numbers D, E, F, each one each
other, and if the numbers produced be added together. Then I say that the
number composed of the numbers produced is equal to the number produced of the
number composed of the numbers A, B, Demonstration.
C into the number composed of the numbers D, E, F. For by the former
proposition that which is produced of the number composed of A, B, C into D is
equal to that which is produced of every one of the said numbers into D: and
by the same reason that which is produced of the number composed of A, B, C
into E, is equal to that which is produced of every one of the said numbers
into E: and so likewise that which is produced of the number composed of A, B,
C into F is equal to that which is produced of every one of the said numbers
into F. But by the first of these propositions th^^ which is produced of the
number composed of these numbers A, B, C into every one of these numbers D, E,
F is equal to that which is produced of the number composed into the number
composed: wherefore that is manifest which was required to be proved.

The fourth Proposition.
If a number be deu^^^d into parts how many soever: that number which is
produced of the whole into him self, is equal to that number which is
produced of the same number into all his parts.

This pro^eth in numbers that which the second of the second proved in lines.
As if the number A, be divided into the numbers B and C, and D. This answers
to the 2. of the second.
Then I say, that that which is produced of A into himself, is equal to that
which is produced of A into all the said numbers B, C, and D. For putting the
number ^ equal to the number A, it is manifest by the first of these
propositions that that which is produced of E into A, Demonstration.
is equal to that which is produced of E into all the parts of A^ But by the
common sentence that which is produced of E into A is equal to that which is
produced of A into himselfe^ and that which is produced of E into the parts of
A is equal to that which is produced of A into the self same parts.
Wherefore that is manifest which was required to be proved.

The fifth Proposition.
If a number be divided into two parts that which is produced of the whole
in^o one of the parts, as equal ^o that which is produced of the self same
part into him selfe^ and into the other part.

This proves in numbers that which in the 3. of the second was proved in
lines. This answers to the 3. of the thirds.
For let the number A be divided into the numbers B and C. Then I say that that
which is produced of A into C, is equal to that which is produced of C into
himself and into B. For by the 16. of the seventh, that which is produced of A
into C is equal to that which is produced of C into A. Now then put the number
D equal to the number C. Demonstration.
Wherefore that which is produced of A into C is equal to that which is
produced of D into A. But by the first of these propositions that which is
produced of D into A is equal to that which is produced of D into B and of D
into C. Wherefore forasmu^^ ^^ that which is produced of D into A and into B and
into C is ^qu^ll to that which is produced of C into A^ and into B, and into
himself, by reason of the equality of C and D: that is manifest which was
required to be proved.

The sixth Proposition.
If a number be divided into two parts: that which is produced of the
multiplication of the whole unto him self, is equal to that which is produced
of the multiplication of either of the parts into him self, and of the one
into the other ^wise.

This proves in numbers that which the fourth of the second proved touching
lines. As if the number A be divided into the numbers B and C. Then I say that
that which is produced of A into himself is equal to that which is produced of
B into himself, This answer^th to the 4. of the second.
and of C into himself, and of B into C twice. For by the 4 of these
propositions, that which is produced of A into himself, is equal to that
which is produced of A into B, and into C. But that which is produced of A into
B, is equal to that which is produced of B into himself and into C (by the
former proposition). And by the same that which is produced of A into C is
equal to that which is produced of C into himself and into B. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as that which is produced of C into B is equal to that which is
produced of B into C by the 16. of the seventh, it is manifest that that is
true which was required to be proved.

The seventh Proposition.
If a number be divided into two equal parts, and into two unequal parts:
that which is produced of the greater of the unequal parts into the less,
together with the square number of the number set between, is equal to the
square number produced of the half of the whole.

This proves in numbers that which the 5. of the second proved in lines. As if
the number AB be divided into two equal numbers, which let be AC, and CB: and
also in two unequal numbers namely, This answers to the 5. of the second.
AD and DB, of which let AD be the greater, and DB the less. Then I say that
that which is produced of the whole AD into DB together with the square number
of CD, is equal to the square number of CB. For by the former proposition the
square of CB is equal to the square of CD and to the square of DB, and to that
which is produced of BD into CD twice. But that which is produced of BD into
himself and into CD is equal to that which is produced of BD into C B by the
first of these propositions, Demonstration.
and therefore unto that which is produced of BD into AC. Wherefore that which
is produced of BD into himself and into CD twice is equal so that which is
produced of BD into AD. Wherefore by the same the square of C B exceeds that
which is produced of BD into AD by the square of CD: wherefore that is manifest
which was required to be proved.

The 8. Proposition.
If a number be divided into two equal part^s, and if unto it be added an
other number: that which is produced of the multiplication of the whole being
composed into the number added, together with the square of the half, is
equal to the square of the number composed of the half and the number added.

This proves in numbers that which the 6. of the second proved touching lines.
For suppose that the number AB be divided into equal numbers, which let be AC
and CB: and unto it^ add the number BD. This answers to the 6. of the second.
Then I say, that that which is produced of the whole AD into DA together with
the square of BC, is equal to the square of CD. For by the 6. of these
propositio^s the square of CD is equal to the square of DB, and to the square
of BC, and to that which is produced of DB into BC twice. But by the ^. of
these propositions, Demonstration.
that which is produced of BD into himself and into BC twice is equal to that
which is produced of BD into DA (for AC and CB are equal) wherefore the square
of CD exceeds that which is produced of BD into DA by the square of CB.
Wherefore that is manifest which was required to be proved.

The 9. Proposition.
If a number be divided into two parts: that which is produced of the whole
number into him self together with that which is produced of one of the parts
into him self, is equal to that which is produced of the whole into the said
part twice together with that which is produced of the other part into him
self.

This proves in numbers that which the 7. of the second proved in lines. For
let the number A be divided into the numbers B and D. This answers to the 7.
of the second.
Then I say that the square of A together with the square of D is equal to
that which is produced of A into D twice together with the square of B. For it
is manifest by the 6. of these propositions that the square of A is equal to
the squares of B and D together with that which is produced of B into D twice.
Wherefore the square of A together with the square of D, is equal to two
squares of D^ Demonstration.
and to that which is produced of D into B twice together with the square of B.
But by the first of these propositions two squares of D, and that which is
produced of D into B twice is equal to that which is produced of D into A
twice. Wherefore that which is produced of D into A twice together with the
square of B, is equal to the square of A together with the square of D:
wherefore that is manifest which was required to be proved.

The 10. proposition.
If a number be divided into two parts, and unto it be added a number equal
to one of the parts: the square of the whole number composed, is equal to the
quadruple of that which is produced of the first number into the number added,
together with the square of the other part.

This proves in numbers, that which the 8. of the second proved in lines.
Suppose that the number AB be divided into the numbers AC and CB, unto which
add the number BD, which let be equal to the number CB. This answers to the
8. of the second.
Then I say that the square of the whole number composed, namely, AD, is equal
to that which is produced of AB into BD four times together with the square of
AC. For by the 6. of these propositions the square of AD, is equal to the
square AB and to the square of BD together with that which is produced of AB
into BD twice. Demonstratition.
And forasmuch as the square of BD is equal to the square CB: therefore the
square of AD shall be equal to the square of AB and to the square of CB
together with that which is produced of AB into BD twice. But by the former
proposition the square of AB together with the square of CB, is equal to the
square of AC together with that which is produced of AB into BC twice wherefore
the square of AD is equal to that which is produced of AB into BD twice, and to
that which is produced of AB into BC twice together with the square of AC. And
for that that which is produced of AB into BC is equal to that which is
produced of AB into BD, therefore is that manifest which was required to be
proved.

The 11. proposition.
If a number be divided into two equal parts, and into two unequal parts:
the squares of the two unequal parts taken together, are double to the square
of the half, and to the square of the excess of the greater part above the
less, the said two squares being added together.

This proves in numbers that which the 9. of the second proved in lines. For
suppose that the number AB be divided into two equal parts: which let be AC
and CB, and into two unequal parts, which let be AD and D B. This answers to
the 9. of the second.
Then I say that the squares of the two numbers AD and DB, taken together, are
double to the two squares of the two numbers AC and CD, taken together. For by
the 6. of these propositions the square of AD is equal to the squares of AC
and CD, and to that which is produced of AC into CD twice. And forasmuch as the
square of AC is equal to the square of CB, the square of AD shall be equal to
the square of BC and to the square of CD together with that which is produced
of BC into CD twice. Demonstration.
Wherefore the square of AD together with the square of BD, is equal to the
square of BC, and to the square of CD and to that which is produced of BC into
CD twice together with the square of BD. But that which is produced of BC into
CD twice together with the square of BD, is equal to the square of BC and to
the square of CD by the 9. of these propositions. Wherefore the squares of the
two numbers AD and DB are equal to the squares of the two numbers BC and CD,
taken twice. And therefore the squares of the two numbers AD and DB are double
to the squares of the two numbers BC and CD, that is AC and CD (for the numb^rs
AC and BC are by supposition equal) wherefore that is manifest which was
required to be proved.

The 12. proposition.
If a number be divided into two equal parts, and unto it be added an other
number: the square of the whole number composed together with the square of the
number added, is double to the square of the half, together with the square of
the number composed of the half and the number added.

This proves in numbers that which the 10. of the second proved in lines.
Suppose that the number AB be divided into two equal numbers AC and CB: This
answers to the 10. o^ the second.
and unto it add the number BD. Then I say that the square of AD together with
the square of BD, is double to the square of AC together with the square of CD.
For forasmuch as the number CD is divided into two parts, and unto it is added
the number AC which is equal to one of the parts (namely, to CB) therefore by
the 10. of these propositions, Demonstration.
the square of AD is equal to that which is produced of CD into CA four times
together with the square of BD. And forasmuch as AC is equal to CB, therefore
the square of AD, is equal to t^^t which is produced of DC into CB four times
together with the square of BD. Wh^rfore the square of AD together with the
square of DB, is equal to that which is produced of DC into CB ^ower times
together with two squares of BD. But by the 9. of these propositions, that
which is produced of DC into CB four times together with two squares of BD is
double to the square of CD together with the square of CB (for the square of CD
together with the square of CB is equal to that which is produced of DC into CB
twice together with one square of CB). Wherefore forasmuch as the square of CB
is equal to the square of AC, that is mani^est: which was required to be
proved.

The 13. proposition.
It is impossible to divide a number in such sort: that that which is
contained under the whole and one o^ the parts, shall be equal to the square
of the other part.

A negative propositi^n.
That which the 11. of the second taught to be done in lines is here proved to
be impossible to be done in numbers. ^or suppose that there be a number
whatsoever namely AB. Then I say, that it is impossible to divide it in such
sort as is required in the proposition. For so should it be divided according
to a proportion having a mean and two ext^eames. But i^ i^ be possible,
Demonstration lea^ing to an impossibility.
let the number AB be so divided in C. And as AB is to BC, so let BC be to C A.
Wherefore AC shall be less then CB. Now then take away from CB a number equal
to AC which let be CD. And forasmuch as the proportion of the whole AB to the
whole BC, is as the proportion of the part taken away from AB, namely, BC to
the part taken away from BC, namely, CD: therefore the proportion of the
residue of AB, namely, AC, to the residue of BC, namely, to BD, is as the
proportion of the whole AB to the whole BC (by the 11. of the seventh).
Wherefore BC is to CD, as CD is to DB. Wherefore CD is greater then DB.
Wherefore sub^rahing DE out of CD, so that let DE be equal to DB: the
proportion of BC to CD is as the proportion of CD to DE. Wherefore the residue
of CB, namely, DB, shall be to the residue of CD, namely, to CE, as the
proportion of the whole BC to the whole CD. Wherefore CE may be subtrahed out of
ED: wherefore there shall be no end of this subraction: which is impossible.

The 16. Theoreme. The 16. Proposition. If two numbers be prime the one to the
other, the second shall not be to any other number, as the first is to the
second.
SVppose that these two numbers A and B be prime the one to the other. Then I
say that B is not to any other number as A is to B. Demonstration leading to an
absurdity.
For if it be possible, as A is to B, so let B be to C. Now A and B are prime
numbers, yea they are prime and the lest by the 23. of the seventh. But (by the
21. of the seventh) the least measure the numbers that have one and the same
proportion with them equally, the antecedent the antecedent, and the consequent
the consequent. Wherefore the antecedent A, measures the antecedent B, and it
measures also it self. Wherefore A measures these numbers A and B being prime
the one to the other, which is impossible. Wherefore as A is to B, so is not B
to C: which was required to be proved.

The 17. Theoreme. The 17. Proposition. If there be numbers in continual
proportion how many soever, and if their extremes be prime the one to the
other, the less shall not be to any other number, as the first is to the
second.
SVppose that there be these numbers in continual proportion A, B, C, D, and
let their extremes A and D be prime the one to the other. Then I say that D is
not to any other number as A is to B. For if it be possible, as A is to B, so
let D be to E. Wherefore alternately by the 13. of the seventh, as A is to D, so
is B to E. But A and D are prime, Demonstration leading to an abjurditie.
yea they are prime and the least. But the least numbers (by the 21. of the
seventh) measure the numbers that have one and the same proportion with them
equally, the antecedent the antecedent, and the consequent. Wherefore the
antecedent A measures the antecedent B: but as A is to B, so is B to C.
Wherefore B also measures C. Wherefore A also measures C (by the 5. common
sentence of the seventh) and forasmuch as B is to C, so is C to D, but B
measures C. Wher^ore C measures D. But A measures C. Wherefore A also
measures D by the same common sentence, and it also measures it self.
Wherefore A measures these numbers A and D being prime the one to the other,
which is impossible. Wherefore D is not to any other number as A is to B: which
was required to be proved.

The 18. Theoreme. The 18. Proposition. Two numbers being given, to search out
if it be possible a third number in proportion with them.
SVppose that the two numbers given be A and B. It is required to search out
if it be possible a third number proportional with them. Now A, B are either
prime the one to the other or not prime. Three cases in this proposition.
If they be prime, then (by the 16. of the ninth) it is maninifest that it is
impossible to find out a third number proportional with them. But now suppose
that AB be not prime the one to the other. And let B multiplieng himself
produce C. Now A either measures C, or measures it not. First, The first case.
let it measure it and that by D. Wherefore A multiplieng D produces C. The
second case.
But B also multiplieng himself produced C. Wherefore that which is produced of
A into D, is equal to that which is produced of B into himself. Wherefore (by
the second part of the 19. of the seventh) as A is to B, so is B to D. Wherefore
unto these numbers A, B is found out a third number in proportion, namely, D.

But now suppose that A do not measure C^ The third case.
Then I say that it is impossible to ^inde out a third number in proportion
with these numbers A, B. For if it be possible, let there be found out such a
number, and let the same be D. Wherefore that which is produced of A into D, is
equal to that which is produced of B into himself, but that which is produced
of B into himself is C. Wherefore that which is produced of A into D is equal
unto C. Wherefore A multiplieng D produced C. Wherefore A measures G by D. But
it is supposed also not to measure it, which is impossible. Wherefore it is not
possible to find out a third number in proportion with A and B, whenever A
measures not C: which was required to be proved.

The 19. Theoreme. The 19. Proposition. Three numbers being given, to search
out if it be possible the fourth number proportional with them.
Divert cases ^n this proposition.
SVppose that the three numbers given be A, B, C. It is required to search out
if it be possible a ^ourth number proportional with them. Now A, B, C, are
either in continual proportion, and their extremes A, C are prime the one to
the other or they are not in continual proportion, and their extremes are yet
prime the one to the other: or they are in continual proportion, and their
extremes are not prime the one to the other: or they are neither in continual
proportion, nor their extremes are prime the one to the other.

The first case.
If A, B, C, be in continual proportion, and their extremes be prime the one to
the other, it is manifest (by the 17. of the ninth) that it is impossible to
find out a fourth number proportional with them.

But now suppose that A, B, C, be not in continual proportion, The second case.
and yet let their extremes be prime the one to the other. Then I say that so
also it is impossible to find out a fourth number proportional with the^. For
if it be possible, let there be found such a number, and let the same be D. So
that as A is to B, so let C be to D, and as B is to C, so let D bet^ E. And for
that as A is to B, so is C to D, and as B is C, so is D to E, therefore of
equallitie (by the 14. of the seventh) as A is to C, so is C to E. But A and C
are prime the one to the other, yea they are prime, and the least: but the lest
measure the numbers that have one and the same proportion with them equally,
the antecedent, the antecedent, and the consequent the consequent (by the 21.
of the seventh). Wherefore A measures C, namely, the antecedent the antecedent,
and it also measures it self. Wherefore A measures these numbers A and C
being prime the one to the other, which is impossible. Wherefore it is not
possible to find out a fourth number proportional with these numbers A, B, C.

But now again suppose that A, B, C, be in continual proportion, The third
case.
and let A and C not be prime the one to the other. Then I say that it is
pos^ible to find out a fourth number proportional with them. For let B
multiplieng C produce D. Now A either measures D, or measures it not. First
let it measure it, and that by E. Wherefore A multiplieng E produced D. But B
also multiplieng C produced D. Wherefore that which is produced of AE is equal
to that which is produced of BC: wherefore in what proportion A is to B, in ye
same is C to E. Wherefore there is found out a fourth number, namely, E,
proportional with these numbers A, B, C.

But now suppose that A do not measure D. Then I say that it is not possible to
find out a fourth number proportional with these numbers A, B, C. For if it
be possible, let there be found such a number, and let the same be E. Wherefore
that which is produced of A into E is equal to that which is produced of B
into C. But that which is produced of B into C is D. Wherefore that which is
produced of A into E is equal unto D. Wherefore A multiplieng E produced D,
wherefore A measures D, but it also measures it not, which is impossible.
Wherefore it is impossible to find out a fourth number proportional, with
these numbers A, B, C, whenever A measures not D.

But now suppose that A, B, The fourth case.
C be neither in continual proportion, neither also their extremes be prime
the one to the other. And let B multiplieng C produce D. And in like sort may
we prove that if A do measure D, it is possible to find out a fourth number
proportional with them. But if it do not measure D, the^ is it impossible:
which was required to be proved.

The 20. Theoreme. The 20. Proposition. Prime numbers being given how many
soever, there may be given more prime numbers.
SVppose that the prime numbers given be A, B, C. Two cases in this Proposition.
Then I say, that there are yet more prime numbers besides A, B, C. Take (by
the 38. of the seventh) the lest number whom these numbers A, B, C do measure,
and let the same be DE. And unto DE add unity DF. Now OF is either a prime
number or not. First let it be a prime number, The first case.
then are there found these prime numbers A, B, C, and OF more in multitude
then the prime numbers first given A, B, C.

But now suppose that OF be not prime. The second case.
Wherefore some prime number measures it (by the 24. of the seventh). Let a
prime number measure it, namely, G. Then I say, that G is none of these numbers
A, B, C. For if G be one and the same with any of these A, B, C. But A, B, C,
measure the number DE: wherefore G also measures DE: and it also measures the
whole OF. Wherefore G being a number shall measure the residue DF being vnitie^
which is impossible. Wherefore G is not one and the same with any of these
prime numbers A, B, C: and it is also supposed to be a prime number. Wherefore
there are ^ound these prime numbers A, B, C, G, being more in multitude then
the prime numbers given A, B, C: which was required to be demonstrated.

A Corollary.
By this Proposition it is manifest, that the multitude of prime numbers is
infinite.

The 21. Theoreme. The 21. Proposition. If even numbers how many soever be
added together: the whole shall be eue^.
SVppose that these even numbers AB, BC; CD, and DE, be added together. Then I
say, that the whole number, namely, AE, is an even number. Demonstration.
For forasmuch as every one of these numbers AB, BC, CD, and DE, is an even
number, therefore every one of them has an half. Wherefore the whole AE also
has an half. But an even number (by the definition) is that which may be
divided into two equal parts. Wherefore AE is an even number: which was
required to be proved.

The 22. Theoreme. The 22. Proposition. If odd numbers how many soever be
added together, and if their multitude be even, the whole also shall be even.
SVppose that these odd numbers AB, BC, CD, and DE, being even in multitude,
be added together. Then I say, that the whole AE is an even number. For
forasmuch as every one of these numbers AB, BC, CD, and DE, is an odd number,
is ye take away unity from every one of them, Demonstration.
that which remains o^ every one of the^ is an even number. Wherefore they
all added together, are (by the 21. of the ninth) an even number: and the
multitude of the unities taken away is even. Wherefore the whole AE is an even
number: which was required to be proved.

The 23. Theoreme. The 23. Proposition. If odd numbers how many soever be
added together, and if the multitude of them be odd, the whole also shall be
odd.
SVppose that these odd numbers, AB, BC, and CD being odd in multitude be
added together. Then I say that the whole AD is an odd number. Take away from
CD, unity DE, wherefore that which remains CE is an even number. But AC also
(by the 22. of the ninth) is an even number. Demonstration
Wherefore the whole AE is an even number. But DE which is unity being added to
the even number AE, makes the whole AD a^ odd number: which was required to
be proued^

The 24. Theoreme. The 24. Proposition. If from an even number be taken away an
even number, that which remains shall be an even number.
SVppose that AB be an even number, and from it take away an even number CB.
Demonstration.
Then I say that that which remains, namely, AC is an even number. For
forasmuch as AB is an even even number, it has an half, and by the same
reason also BC has an half. Wherefore the residue CA has an half. Wherefore
AC is an even number: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 25. Theoreme. The 25. Proposition. If from an even number be taken away an
odd number, that which remains shall be an odd number.
SVppose that AB be an even number, and take away from it BC an odd number.
Then I say that the residue CA is an odd number. Demonstration.
Take away from BC unity CD. Wherefore DB is an even number. And AB also is an
even number, wherefore the residue AD is an even number (by the ^ormer
proposition) But CD which is unity, being taken away from the even number AD
makes the residue AC an odd number: which was required to be proved.

The 26. Theoreme. The 26. Proposition. If from an odd number be taken away an
odd number, that which remains shall be an even number.
SVppose that AB be an odd number, and from it take away an odd number BC.
The^ I say that the residue CA is an even number. Demonstration.
For forasmuch as AB is an odd number, take away from it unity BD. Wherefore
the residue AD is even. And by the same reason CD is an even number: wherefore
the residue CA is an even number (by the 24. of this book)^ which was required
to be proved.

The 27. Theoreme. The 27. Proposition. If from an odd number be taken a way
an even number, the residue shall be an odd number.
SVppose that AB be an odd number, and from it take away an even number BC.
Demonstration.
Then I say that the residue CA is an odd number. Take away from AB unity AD.
Wherefore the residue DB is an eue^ number, and BC is (by supposition) even.
Wherefore the residue CD is an even number. Wherefore DA which is unity, being
added unto CD which is an even number makes the whole AC an ^dde number: which
was required to be proved.

The 28. Theoreme. The 28. Proposition. If an odd number multiplieng an even
number produce any number, the number produced shall be an even number.
SVppose that A being an odd number multiplieng B being an even number, do
produce the number C. Then I say that C is an even number. Demonstration.
For forasmuch as A multiplieng B produced C, therefore C is composed of so many
numbers equal unto B as there be in unities in A. But B is an even number:
wherefore C is composed of so many even numbers, as there are unities in A. But
if eue^ numbers how many soeu^r be added together, the whole (by the 21. of the
ninth) is an even number: wherefore C is an even number: which was required to
be demonstrated.

The 29. Theoreme. The 29. Proposition. I^ an odd number multiplying an odd
number produce any number, the number produced shall be an odd number
SVppose that A being an odd number multiplying B being also an odd number,
do produce the number C. Then I say that C is an odd number. For forasmuch as
A multiplying B produced C, therefore C is composed of so many numbers equal
unto B as there be unities in A. Demonstration.
But either of these numbers A and B is an odd number. Wherefore C is composed
of odd numbers, whose multitude also is odd. Wherefore (by the 23. of the
ninth) C is an odd number: which was required to be demonstrated.

A proposition added by Campane.
A proposition added by Campa^e.
If an odd number measure an even number, it shall measure it by an even
number.

For if it should measure it by an odd number, then of an odd number
multiplied into an odd number should be produced an odd number, which by the
former proposition is impossible.

An other proposition added by him.
An other added by him.
If an odd number measure an odd number, it shall measure it by an odd
number.

For if it should measure it by an even number, then of an odd number
multiplied into an even number should be produced an odd number which by the
28. of this book is impossible.

The 30. Theoreme. The 30. Proposition. If an odd number measure an even
number, it shall also measure the half thereof.
SVppose that A being an odd number do measure B being an even number. Th^^ I
say that it shall measure the half thereof. For forasmuch as A measures B let
i^ measure it by C. Demonstration leading to an absurdity.
The^ I say that C is an even number. For if not then, if it be possible le^ i^
be odd. And forasmuch as A measures B by C: therefore A multiplying C
produces B. Wherefore B is composed of odd numbers whose multitude also is
odd. Wherefore B is an odd number (by the 29. of this book) which is absurd^
for it is supposed to be even: wherefore C is an even num^er. Wherefore A
measures B by an even number: and C measures B by A. But either of these
numbers C and B has an half part wherefore as C is to B, so is the half to
the half. But C measures B by A. Wherefore the half of C measures the half
of B by A: wherefore A multiplying the half of C produces the half of B.
Wherefore A measures the half of B: and it measures it by the half of C.
Wherefore A measures the half of the number B: which was required to be
demonstrated.

The 31. Theoreme. The 31. Proposition. If an odd number be prime to any
number, it shall also be prime to the double thereof.
SVppose that A being an odd number be prime unto the number B: and let the
double of B be C. Demonstration.
Then I say, that A is prime unto C. For if A and C be not prime the one to the
other, some one number measures them both. Let there be such a number which
measures them both, and let the same be D. But A is an odd number. Wherefore
D also is an odd number. (For if D which measures A should be an even number,
then should A also be an even number (by the 21. of this book): which is
contrary to the supposition. For A is supposed to be an odd number: and
therefore D also is an odd number). And forasmuch as D being an odd number
measures C, but C is an eue^ number (for that it has an half, namely, B).
Wherefore (by the Proposition next going before) D measures the half of C. But
the half of C is B. Wherefore D measures B: and it also measures A.
Wherefore D measures A and B being prime the one to the other: which is
absurd. Wherefore no number measures the numbers A and C. Wherefore A is a
prime number unto C. Wherefore these numbers A and C are prime the one to the
other: which was required to be proved.

The 32. Theoreme. The 32. Proposition. Every number produced by the doubling
of two upward, is euenly even only.
SVppose that A be the number two: and from A upward double numbers how many
soever; as B, C, D. Then I say, that B, C, D, are numbers euenly even only.
That every one of them is euenly even, it is manifest: Demonstration.
for every one of them is produced by the doubling of two. I say also, that
every one of them is euenly even only. Take unity E. And forasmuch as from
unity are certain numbers in continual proportion, and A which follows
next after unity is a prime number, therefore (by the 13. of the third) no
number measures D being the greatest number of these numbers A, B, C, D,
besides the self same numbers in proportion. But every one of these numbers A,
B, C, is euenly even. Wherefore D is euenly even only. In like sort may we
prove, that every one of these numbers A, B, C, is euenly even only: which was
required to be proved.

The 33. Theoreme. The 33. Proposition. A number whose half part is odd, is
euenly odd only.
SVppose that A be a number whose half part is odd. Then I say that A is
euenly od only. That it is euenly odd it is manifest: for his half being
odd measures him by an eue^ number, namely, by 2. Demonstration leading to an
absurdity.
(by the definition). I say also that it is euenly odd only. For if A be
euenly even, his half also is even. For (by the definition) an even number
measures him by an even number. Wherefore that even number which measures him
by an even number shall also measure the half thereof being an odd number by
the 4. common sentence of the seventh which is absurd. Wherefore A is a number
euenly odd only: which was required to be proved.

An other demonstration to prove the same.
Suppose that the number A have to his half an od number, namely, B. The^ I
say that A is eue^ly od only. That it is euenly odd needs no proof:
forasmuch as the number 2. an even number measures it by the half thereof
which is an odd number. An other demonstration.
Let C be the number 2. by which B measures A (for that A is supposed to be
double unto B). And let an even number, namely, D measure A (which is possible
for that A is an even number by the definition) by F. And forasmuch as that
which is produced of C into B is equal to that which is produced of D into F,
therefore by the 19. of the seventh, as C is to D, so is B to F. But C the
number two measures D being an even number: wherefore F also measures B which
is the half of A. Wherefore F is an odd number. For if F were an even number
then should it in the B whom it measures an odd number also by the 21. of
this book, which is contrary to the supposition. And in like manner may we
prove that all the eue^ numbers which measure the number A^ do measure it by
odd numbers. Wherefore A is a number euenly odd only: which was required to
be proved.

The 34. Theoreme. The 34. Proposition. If a number be neither doubled from
two, nor has to his half part an odd number, it shall be a number both euenly
even, and euenly odd.
SVppose that the number A be a number neither doubled from the number two,
neither also let it have to his half part an odd number. Then I say that A is
a number both euenly even, and euenly odd. Demonstration.
That A is euenly even it is manifest, for the half thereof is not odd, and is
measured by the number 2. which is an even number. Now I say that it is euenly
odd also. For if we divide A into two equal parts, and so continuing still,
we shall at the length light upon a certain odd number which shall measure A
by an even number. For if we should not light upon such an odd number, which
measures A by an even number, we should at the length come unto the number
two, and so should A be one of those numbers which are doubled from two upward,
which is contrary to the supposition. Wherefore A is euenly odd. And it is
proved that it is euenly eue^: wherefore A is a number both euenly even and
euenly odd: which was required to be demonstrated.

This proposition and the two former manifestly declare that which we noted
upon the tenth definition of the seventh book namely, that Campane and
Flussates and diverse other interpreters of Euclide (only Theon except) did not
rightly understand the 8. and 9. definitions of the same book concerning a
number euenly even, and a number euenly odd. For in the one definition they
add unto Euclides words extant in the Greek this word only (as we there
noted) and in the other this word all. So that after their definitions a number
can not be euenly even unless it be measured only by even numbers: likewise a
number can not be euenly odd unless all the even numbers which do measure
it, do measure it by an odd number. The contrary whereof in this proposition
we manifestly see. For here Euclide proves that one number may be both euenly
even and euenly odd. And in the two former propositions he proved that some
numbers are euenly even only, and some euenly odd only: which word only had
been in vain of him added, if no number euenly even could be measured by an
odd number, or if all the numbers that measure a number euenly odd must
needs measure it by an odd number. Although Campane and Flussates to avoid
this absurdity have wreasted the 32. proposition of this book from the true
sense of the Greek and as it is interpreted of Theon. So also has Flussates
wreasted the 33. proposition. For whereas Euclide says, Every number produced
by the doubling of two upward, is eue^ly eue^ only: they say, only the numbers
produced by the doubling of two, are euenly even. Likewise whereas Euclide
says, A number whose hafle part is odd, is euenly odd only, Flussates
says, only a number whose half part is od, Is eue^ly od. Which their
interpretation is not true, neither can be applied to the propositions as they
are exta^t in the Greek. In deed the said 32. and 33. propositions as they put
the^ are true touching those numbers which are euenly even only, or eue^ly od
only. For no number is euenly even only, but those only which are doubled
from two upward. Likewise no numbers are euenly odd only, but those only
whose half is an odd number. But this lets not, but that a number may be
euenly even although it be not doubled from two upward and also that a number
may be eue^ly odd although it have not to his half an odd number. As in this
34. proposition Euclide has plainly proved. Which thing could by no means be
true, if the foresaid 32. and 33. propositons of this book should have that
sense and meaning wherein they take it.

The 35. Theoreme. The 35. Proposition. If there be numbers in continual
proportion how many soever, and if from the second and last be taken away
numbers equal unto the first, as the excess of the second is to the first, so
is the excess of the last to all the numbers going before the last.
SVppose that these numbers A, BC, D, and OF, be in continual proportion
beginning at A the least. And from BC, which is the second, take away CG equal
unto the first, namely, to A, and likewise from OF the last take away FH equal
also unto the first, namely, to A. Then I say, that as the excess BG is to A
the first, so is HE the excess, to all the numbers D, BC, and A, which go
before the last number, namely, OF. Demonstration.
Forasmuch as OF is the greater (for the second is supposed greater then the
first) put the number FL equal to the number D, and likewise the number FK
equal to the number BC. And forasmuch as FK is equal unto CB, of which FH is
equal unto GC, therefore the residue HK is equal unto the residue GB. And for
that as the whole F^, is to the whole FL, so is the part taken away FL, to the
part taken away FK, therefore the residue LE is to the residue KL, as the whole
^E is to the whole FL (by the 11. of the seventh). So likewise for that FL is
to FK, as FK is to FH, KL shall be to HK, as the whole FL is to the whole FK
(by the same Proposition). But as FE is to FL, and as FL is to FK, and FK to
FH, so were FE to D, and D to BC, and BC (...) A. Wherefore as LE is to KL, and
as KL is to HK, so is D to BC. Wherefore alternately (by the 23. of the
seventh) as LE is to D, so is KL to be BC, and as KL is to BC, so is HK to A.
Wherefore also as one of the antecedentes is to one of the consequentes; so are
all the antecedentes to all the consequentes. Wherefore as KH is to A, so are
HK, KL, and LE, to D, BC, and A (by the 12. of the seventh). But it is proved,
that KH is equal unto BG. Wherefore as BG, which is the excess of the second,
is to A, so is EH the excess of the last unto the numbers going before D, BC,
and A. Wherefore as the excess of the second is unto the first, so is the
excess of the last to all the numbers going before the last: which was
required to be proved.

The 36. Theoreme. The 36. Proposition. If from unity be taken numbers how
many soever in double proportion continually, until the whole added together
be a prime number, and if the whole multiplying the last produce any number,
that which is produced is a perfect number.
This proposition teach^th how to find out a perfect number.
SVppose that from unity be taken these numbers A, B, C, D, in double
proportion continually, so that all those numbers A, B, C, D, and unity added
together, make a prime number: and let E be the number composed of all those
numbers A, B, C, D, and unity added together: and let E multiplying D, which
is the last number, produce the number FG. Then I say, that FG is a perfect
number.



Construction.
How many in multitude A, B, C, D, are, so many in continual double proportion
take beginning at E, which let be the numbers E, HK, L, and M. Wherefore of
equality (by the 13. of the seventh) as A is to D, so is E to M. Wherefore
that which is produced of E into D, is equal to that which is produced of A
into M. But that which is produced of E into D, is the number FG. Wherefore
that which is produced of A into M, is equal unto FG. Wherefore A multiplying
M produces FG. Wherefore M measures FG by those unities which are in A. But
A is the number two. Wherefore FG is double to M. And the numbers M, L, HK,
and E, are also in continual double proportion. Wherefore all the numbers E,
HK, L, M, and FG, are continually proportional in double proportion. Take from
the second number KH, and from the last FG a number equal unto the first,
namely, to E: and let those numbers taken be HN, and FX. Demonstration.
Wherefore (by the Proposition going before) as the excess of the second
number is to the first number, so is the excess of the last to all the numbers
going before it. Wherefore as NK is to E, so is XG to these numbers M, L, KH,
and E. But NK is equal unto E (for it is the half of HK, which is supposed to
be double to E). Wherefore XG is equal unto these numbers M, L, HK, and E.
But XF is equal unto E, and E is equal unto these numbers A, B, C, D, and
unto unity. Wherefore the whole number FG is equal unto these numbers E, HK,
L, M, Demonstration leading to an absurdity.
and also unto these numbers A, B, C, D, and unto unity. Moreover I say, that
unity and all the numbers A, B, C, D, E, HK, L, and M, do measure the number
FG. That unity measures it, it needs no proof. And forasmuch as FG is
produced of D into E, therefore D and E do measure it. And forasmuch as the
double from unity, namely, the numbers A, B, C, do measure the number D (by
the 13. of this book) therefore they shall also measure the number FG (whom D
measures) by the ^. common sentence. By the same reason forasmuch as the
numbers E, HK, L, and M, are unto FG, as unity and the numbers A, ^, C, are
unto D (namely, in subduple proportion) and unity and the numbers A, B, C, do
(...) D, therefore also the numbers E, HK, L, and M, shall measure the number
FG: No^ I say also, that no other number measures FG besides these numbers A,
B, C, D, E, HK, L, M, and unity. For if it be possible, let O measure FG. And
let O not be any of these numbers A, B, C, D, E, HK, L, and M. And how often O
measures FG, (...) unities let there be in P. Wherefore O multiplying P
produces FG. But E also multiplying D produced FG. Wherefore (by the 19. of
the seventh) as E is to O, so is P to D. Wherefore alternately (by the 9. of
the seventh) as E is to P, so is O to D. And forasmuch as from unity are these
numbers in continual proportion A, B, C, D, and the number A which is next
after unity is a prime number, therefore (by the 13. of the ninth) no other
number measures D besides the numbers A, B, C. And it is supposed that O is
not one and the same with any of these numbers A, B, C. Wherefore O measures
not D. But as O is to D, so is E to P. Wherefore neither does E measure P. And
E is a prime number. But (by the 31. of the seventh) every prime number, is to
every number that it measures not, a prime number. Wherefore E and P are prime
the one to the other: yea they are prime and the least. But (by the 21. of the
seventh) the least measure the numbers that have one and the same proportion
with them equally, the antecedent the antecedent, and the consequent the
consequent. And as E is to P, so is O to D. Wherefore how many times E
measures O, so many times P measures D. But no other number measures D
besides the numbers A, B, C (by the 13. of this book). Wherefore P is one and
the same with one of these numbers A, B, C. Suppose that P be one and the same
with B, and how many B, C, D, are in multitude, so many take from E upward,
namely, E, HK, and L. But E, HK, and L, are in the same proportion that B, C,
D, are. Wherefore of equality, as B is to D, so is E to L. Wherefore that
which is produced of B into L, is equal to that which is produced of D into E.
But that which is produced of D into E, is equal to that which is produced of
P into O. Wherefore that which is produced of P into O, is equal to that
which is produced of B into L. Wherefore as P is to B, so is L to O: and P is
one and the same with B: wherefore L also is one and the same with O: which is
impossible. For O is supposed not to be one and the same with any of the
numbers given. Wherefore no number measures FG besides these numbers A, B, C,
D, E, HK, L, M, and unity. And it is proved, that FG is equal unto these
numbers A, B, C, D, E, HK, L, M, and unity, which are the parts thereof (by
the 39. of the seventh). But a perfect number (by the definition) is that which
is equal unto all his parts. Wherefore FG is a perfect number^ which was
required to be proved.

The end of the ninth book of Euclides Elements.
The tenth book of Euclides Elements.
IN THIS TENTH BOOK does Euclide entreat of lines and other magnitudes
rational and irrational, The Argument of the tenth book.
but chiefly of irrational magnitudes, commensurable and incommensurable: of
which hitherto, in all his former 9. books he has made no mention at all. And
herein differs number from magnitude, Difference between number and magnitude.
or Arithmetike from Geometry: for that although in Arithmetike, certain
numbers be called prime numbers in consideration of themselves, or in respect
of an other, and so are called incommensurable, for that no one number
measures them, but only unity. Yet in deed and to speak absolutely and
truly, there are no two numbers incommensurable, but have one common measure
which measures the^ both, if none other, yet have they unity, which is a
common part and measure to all numbers, and all numbers are made of unities, as
of their parts. A line is not made of points as number is made of unities.
As has before been showed in the declaration of the definitio^s of the
seventh book. But in magnitude it is far otherwise, for although many lines,
plain figures, and bodies, are commensurable, and may have one measure to
measure them, yet all have not so, nor can have. For that a line is not made of
points, as number is made of unities, and therefore cannot a point be a common
part of all lines, and measure them, as unity is a common part of all numbers
and measures them. Unity taken certain times makes any number. For there
are not in any number infinite unities: but a point taken certain times, yea
as often as ye list, never makes any line, for that in every line there are
infinite points. Wherefore lines, figures, and bodies in Geometry, are
oftentimes incommensurable and irrational. Now which are rational, and which
irrational, which commensurable, and which incommensurable, how many and how
sundry sorts and kinds there are of them, what are their natures, passions,
and properties, does Euclide most manifestly show in this book, and
demonstrate them most exactly.

This tenth book has ever hitherto of all men, and is yet thought and
accounted, to be the hardest book to understand of all the books of Euclide.
This book the hardest to understand of all the books of Euclide.
Which common received opinion, has caused many to shrink, and has (as it
were) deterred them from the handeling and treaty thereof. There have been in
deed in times past, and are presently in these our days, many which have
dealt, and have taken great and good diligence in commenting, amending, and
restoryng of the six first books of Euclide, and there have stayed themselves
and gone no farther, being deterred and made afraid (as it seems, by the
opinion of the hardness of this book) to pass forth to the books following.
Truth it is that this book has in it somewhat an other and stranger manner of
matter entreated of, In this book is entreated of a stranger manner of matter
then in the former.
the^ the other books before had, and the demonstrations also thereof, and the
order seem likewise at the first somewhat strange and unaccustomed, which
things may seem also to cause the obscurity thereof, and to fear away many
from the reading and diligent study of the same, so much that many of the well
learned have much complained of the darkness and difficulty thereof, and have
thought it a very hard thing, and in manner impossible to attain to the right
and full understanding of this book, Many even of the well learned have
thought that this book can not well be understood without Algebra.
without the aid and help of some other knowledge and learning, and chiefly
without the knowledge of that more secret and subtle part of Arithmetike,
commonly called Algebra, which undoubtedly first well had and known, would
give great light thereunto: yet certainly may this book very well be entered
into, and fully understand without any strange help or succor, only by
diligent observation of the order, and course of Euclides writings. So that he
which diligently has perused and fully understands the 9. books going
before, and marketh also earnestly the principles and definitions of this ^enth
book, he shall well perceive that Euclide is of himself a sufficient teacher
and instructor, The nine former books and the principles of this ^ooke well
understood, this book will not be hard to understand.
and needs not the help of any other, and shall soon see that this tenth
book is not of such hardness and obscurity, as it has been hitherto thought.
Yea, I doubt not, but that by the travel and industry taken in this
translation, and by addicions and emendations gotten of others, there shall
appear in it no hardness at all, but shall be as easy as the rest of his
books are.

Definitions.
The f^rst definition.
1 Magnitudes commensurable are suchwhich one and the self same measure does
measure.
First he shows what magnitudes are commensurable one to an other. To the
better and more clear understanding of this definition, note that that measure
whereby any magnitude is measured, is less then the magnitude which it
measures, or at least equal unto it. For the greater can by no means measure
the less. Farther it behooves, that that measure if it be equal to that which
is measured, taken once make the magnitude which is measured: if it be less,
then oftentimes taken and repeted, it must precisely render and make the
magnitude which it measures. Which thing in numbers is easily seen, for that
(as was before said) all numbers are commensurable one to an other. And
although Euclide in this definition comprehends purposedly, only magnitudes
which are continual quantities, as are lines, superficieces, and bodies, yet
undoubtedly the explication of this and such like places, is aptly to be sought
of numbers as well rational as irrational. For that all quantities
commensurable have that proportion the one to the other, which number has to
numbers. In numbers therefore, 9 and 12 are commensurable, because there is one
common measure which measures them both, namely, the number 3. First it
measures 12, for it is less then 12. and being taken certain times, namely,
4 times, it makes exactly 12: 3 times 4 is 12, it also measures 9, for it is
less then 9. and also taken certain times, namely, 3 times, it makes
precisely 9: 3 times 3 is 9. Likewise is it in magnitudes, if one magnitude
measure two other magnitudes, those two magnitudes so measured, are said to be
commensurable. As for example, if the line C being doubled, do make the line B,
and the same line C tripled, do make the line A, then are the two lines A and
B, lines or magnitudes commensurable. For that one measure, namely, the line C
measures the^ both. First, the line C is less the^ the line A, and alsolesse
the^ the line B, also the line C taken or repeted certain times, namely, 3
times, makes precisely the line A, and the same line C taken also certain
times, namely, two times, makes precisely the line B. So that the line C is a
common measure to them both, and does measure them both. And therefore are the
two lines A and B lines commensurable. And so imagine ye of magnitudes of other
kinds, as of superficial figures, and also of bodies.

2 Incommensurable magnitudes are such, which no one common measure does
measure. The second definition.

This diffinition neadeth no explanation at all, Contraryes made manifest by
the comparing of the one to the other.
it is easily understood by the diffinition going before of lines
commensurable. For contraries are made manifest by comparing of the one to the
other: as if the line C, or any other line oftentimes iterated, do not render
precisely the line A, nor the line B, the^ are the lines A and B
incommensurable. Also if the line C, or any other line certain times repeted,
do exactly render the line A, and do not measure the line B: or if it measure
the line B, and measures not also the line A, the lines A and B, are yet lines
inco^mensurable: and so of other magnitudes as of superficieces, and bodies.

3 Right lines commensurable in power are such, whose squares one and the self
same superficies, area, or plat does measure. The third definition.

To the declaration of this diffinition we must first call to mind what is
understood and meant by the power of a line: which as we have before in the
former books noted is nothing else but the square thereof, or any other plain
figure equal to the square thereof. And so great power and ability ^s a line
said to have, as is the quantity of the square, which it is able to describe,
or a figure superficial equal to the square thereof. What the power of a line is.
(...) This i^ also to be noted that of lines, some are commensurable in
length, the one to the other, and some are commensurable the one to the other
in power. Of lines commensurable in length the one to the other, was given an
example in the declaration of the first diffinitio^, namely, the lines A and B,
which were commensurable in length, one and the self measure, namely, the line
C measured the length of either of them. Of the other kind is given this
diffinition here set: for the opening of which take this example. Let there be
a certain line, namely, the line BC, and let the square of that line be the
square BCDE. Suppose also an other line, namely, the line FH, and let the
square thereof be the square FHIK, and let a certain superficies, namely, the
superficies A, measure the square BCDE, taken 16. times: which is the number of
the little areas, squares, plats, or superficieces contained and described
within the said squares each of which is equal to the superficie: A. Again let
the same superficies A measure the square FHIK 9. times taken, according to the
number of the field^s or superficieces contained and described in the same. Ye
see the^ that one and the self same superficies, namely, the superficies A, is
a common measure to both these squares, and by certain repeticions thereof,
measures them both. Wherefore the two lines BC and FH, which are the sides or
lines producing these squares, and whose powers these squares are, are by this
diffinition lines commensurable in power.

4 Lines incommensurable are such, whose squares no one plat or superficies
does measure. The fourth definition.

This diffinition is easy to be understood by that which was said in the
diffinition last set before this, and neadeth no farther declaration. And
thereof take this example. If neither the superficies A, nor any other
superficies do measure the two squares B CDE, and FHIK: or if it measure the
one, ^^rely BCDE, and not the other FHIK, or if it measure the square FHIK, and
not the square BCDE: the two lines BC and FH, are in power incommensurable, and
therefore also incomme^surable in length. For whatsoever lines are
incomme^surable in power, the same are also incommensurable in length as shall
afterward in the 9. proposition of this book be proved. And therefore such
lines are here defined to be absolutely incommensurable. These things thus
standing it may easily appear, that if a line be assigned and laid before us,
there may be innumerable other lines commensurable unto it, and other
incommensurable unto it: of commensurable lines some are commensurable in
length and power, and some in power only.

5 And that right line so set forth is called a rational line.
The fifth ^efi^^tion.
These principles, diffinitions and grounds of this tenth book ought well to
be paysed, they are somewhat more strange and more hard, then are the
diffinitions and principles of the other books of Euclide going before, and
therefore at the first sight or reading are not straight way conceived, but
ought often to be repeted, The principles of this book ought well to be
pe^sed, for that they are more straun^e then the principles of the former books.
and by use to be confirmed. For the propositions following, bring unto them
much light, and facility of understanding. First there is a line supposed, and
laid before us, which may be any line whatsoever, of what length, or shortness
ye will: this line thus first supposed i^ imagined to have such divisions and
so many parts as ye list to conceive in mind, as 3. 4. 5. and so forth, which
may be applied to any kind of measure, as it shall happen, as to inches,
feet, pases, and such other. Unto this line says Euclide may be compared
innumerable lines, of which some shall be commensurable, and other some
incommensurable: of commensurable lines, some are commensurable both in length
and in power, other some are co^mensurable in power only. As if any part of
the line proposed which let be the line AB, do mesure also the line OF and
again if any one superficies do measure the square of the line AB, which let
be the square ABCD: and also do measure the square of the line OF, which let
be the square EFGH: the^ is the line OF to the supposed line and first set,
namely, to the line AB, a line commensurable both in length and power, as ye
may see in the first example here set.

And if it so be that one and the self same superficies do measure both the
squares of these two lines AB and OF, namely the squares ABCD and EFGH: and no
one line do measure the lines AB and OF: then is the line OF (compared to the
supposed ^^d first line AB) commensurable in power only. As in this example ye
may easily perceive. For the triangle or superficies ACD, twice taken,
measures the square ABCD, namely, the square of the line AB: and the self
same triangle ACD taken four times measures the other square, namely, the
square of the line OF. But no one measure or line can be assigned to measure
both the lines AB and OF, because the sides of a square and the diameter are
incommensurable in length the one to the other, as afterward shall be showed.
Wherefore they are in length incommensurable, and commensurable in power only,
that is by reason of their squares, which are commensurable the one to the
other.

Again if it so be that no one line may be found to be a common measure, to
measure both the first line, namely, AB, and also the line OF: nor yet any one
superficies to measure the square or powers of these two lines, then is the
line OF, to the first line set and supposed, incommensurable both in length and
in power. As is supposed to be in this example.

Thus may ye see, how to the supposed line first set may be compared infinite
lines, Unto the supposed line first set may be compared infinite lines.
some commensurable both in length and power, and some commensurable in power
only, and incommensurable in length, and some incommensurable both in power
and in length. And this first line so set, whereunto, and to whose squares the
other lines and their squares are compared, is called a rational line,
commonly of the most part of writers. Why some mislike that the line first set
should be called a rational line.
But some there are which mislike that it should be called a rational line,
and that not without just cause. In the Greek copy it is called (...), rete,
which signifies a thing that may be spoken, and expressed by word, a thing
certain, granted and appointed. Wherefore Flussates, a man which bestowed
great travel and diligence in restoring of these elements of Euclide, leaving
this word rational, calls this line supposed and first set, a line certain,
because the parts thereof into which it is divided are certain, Flussates
calls this line, a line certain.
and known, and may be expressed by voice, and also be coumpted by number:
other lines, being to this line incommensurable, whose parts are not distinctly
known, but are uncertain, nor can be expressed by name nor assignd by number,
which are of other men called irrational, he calls uncertain and surd
lines. Petrus Montaureus although he does not very well like of the name, yet he
alters it not, but uses it in all his book. Likewise will we do here, for
that the word has been and is so universally received. And therefore will we
use the same name, and call it a rational line. For it is not so great a
matter what names we give to things, so that we fully understand the things
which the names signify.

This rational line thus here defined, is the ground and foundation of all the
propositions almost of this whole tenth book. This rational line the ground in
a manner of all the propositions in this tenth book.
And chiefly from the tenth proposition forwards. So that unless ye first
place this rational line, and have a special and continual regard unto it
before ye begin any demonstration, ye shall not easily understand it. For it is
as it were the touch and trial of all other lines, by which it is known
whether any of them be rational or not. Note.
And this may be called the first rational line, The line Rational of purpose.
the line rational of purpose or a rational line set in the first place, and
so made distinct and severed from other rational lines, of which shall be
spoken afterward. And this must ye well commit to memory.

The sixth de^inition.
6 Lines which are commensurable to this line, whether in length and power, or
in power only, are also called rational.
This definition needs no declaration at all, but is easily perceived, if the
first definition be remembered, which ^heweth what magnitudes are commensurable,
and the third, which ^heweth what lines are commensurable in power. Here not^,
how aptly and naturally, Euclide in this place uses these words commensurable
either in length and power, or in power only. Because that all lines which are
commensurable in length, are also commensurable in power^ when he speaks of
lines commensurable in length, he ever adds and in power, but when he
speaks of lines commensurable in power, he adds this word Only, and
adds not this word in length, as he in the other added this word in power.
For not all lines which are commensurable in power, are straight way
commensurable also in length. Of this definition, take this example. Let the
first line rational of purpose, which is supposed and laid forth, whose
parts are certain and known, and may be expressed, named, and nu^bred be AB,
the quadrate whereof let be ABCD: then suppose again an other line, namely, the
line OF, which let be commensurable both in length and in power to the first
rational line, that is, (as before was taught) let one line measure the length
of each line, and also let one super^icies measure the two squares of the said
two lines, as here in the example is supposed and also appears to the eye,
then is the line E F also a rational line.

Moreover if the line OF be commensurable in power only to the rational line
AB first set and supposed, so that no one line do measure the two lines AB and
OF: As in example y^ see to be (for that the line OF, is made equal to the
line AD, which is the diameter of the square ABCD, of which square the line AB
is a side, it is certain that the ^ide of a square is inco^me^surable in
length to the diameter of the same square: if there be yet found any one
superficies, which measures the two squares ABCD, and EFGH (as here does the
triangle ABD, or the triangle ACD noted in the square ABCD, or any of the four
triangles noted in the square EFGH, as appears somewhat more manifestly in the
second example, in the declaration of the last definition going before) the
line OF is also a rational line. Note that these lines which here are called
rational lines, are not rational lines of purpose, or by supposition, as was
the first rational line, but are rational only by reason of relation and
comparison which they have unto it, because they are commensurable unto it
either in length and power, or in power only. Farther here is to be noted,
that these words length, and power, and power only, are joined only with
these worde^ commensurable or incommensurable, and are never joined with these
words rational or irrational. So that no lines can be called rational in
length, or in power, nor like wise can they be called irrational in length, or
in power. Wherein undoubtedly Campanus was deceived, Camp^nus ^ath caused much
o^scuritie in this tenth book.
who using those words and speeches indifferently, caused and brought in great
obscurity to the propositions and demonstrations of this book, which he shall
easily see which marketh with diligence the demonstrations of Campanus in this
book.

7 Lines which are incommensurable to the rational line, are called
irrational. The seventh definition.

By lines incommensurable to the rational line supposed in this place, he
understands such as be incommensurable unto it both in length and in power.
For there are no lines incommensurable in power only: for it cannot be that
any lines should so be incommen^urable in power only, that they be not also
incommensurable in length. What so ever lines be incomme^surable in power, the
same be also incommensurable in length. Neither can Euclide here in this place
mean lines incommensurable in length only, for in the diffinition before, he
called them rational lines, neither may they be placed amongst irrational
lines. Wherefore it remains that in this diffintion he speaks only of those
lines which are incommensurable to the rational line first given and supposed,
both in length, and in power. Which by all means are incommensurable to the
rational line, and therefore most aptly are they called irrational lines. This
diffinition is easy to be understood by that which has been said before. Yet
for the more plainenes see this example. Let the ^^rst rational line supposed,
be the line AB, whose square or quadrate, let be ABCD. And let there be given
an other line OF which let be to the rational line incommensurable in length
and power, so that let no one line measure the length of the two lines, AB and
OF: and let the square of the line OF be EFGH. Now if also there be no one
superficies which measures the two squares ABCD, and EFGH, as is supposed to
be in this example, the^ is the line OF an irrational line, which word
irrational (As before did this word rational) misliketh many learned in this
knowledge of Geometry. Flussates, Flussates in steed of this word irrational
uses this word uncertain.
as he left the word rational, and in stead thereof used this word certain,
so here he leaves the word irrational, and uses in place thereof this word
uncertain, and ever names these lines uncertain lines. Petrus Montaureus
also misliking the word irrational, would rather have them to be called surd
lines, yet because this word irrational has ever by custom and long use, so
generally been receiued^ he uses continually the same. In Greek such lines
are called (...), alogoi, which signifies nameles, unspeakable, uncertain,
in determinate, Why they are called irrational lines.
and with out proportion: not that these irrational lines have no proportion
at all, either to the first rational line, or between them selves: but are so
named, for that their proportions to the rational line cannot be expressed in
number. That is undoubtedly very untrue, which many write, that their
proportions are unknown both to us and to nature. Is it not think you a thing
very absurd to say that there is any thing in nature, and produced by nature,
to be hid from nature, and not to be known of nature? it can not be said
that their proportions are utterly hid and unknown to us (much less unto
nature) although we cannot give them their names, and distinctly express them
by numbers: otherwise should Euclide have taken all this travel and wonderful
diligence bestowed in this booke^ in vain and to no vse^ in which he does
nothing ell^ but teach the proprieties and passions of these irrational lines^
and shows the proportions which they have the one to the other.

Here is also to be noted, which thing also Tartalea has before diligently
noted^ that Campanus and many other writers of Geometry^ over much ^^^ed and
were deceived in that they wrote and taught, that all these lines whose squares
were not s^gnified and might be expressed by a square number (although they
might by any other number: as by 11. 12. 14. and such others not square
numbers) are irrational lines. Which is manifestly repugnant to the grounds
and principles of Euclide, who will, that all lines which are commensurable to
the rational line, whether it be in length and power, or in power only,
should be rational. Undoubtedly this has been one of the chiefest and
greatest causes of the wonderful confusion and darkness of this book, The
cause of the obscurity and confusednes in this book.
which so has tossed, and tormoyled the wits of all both writers and
readers, masters and scholars, and so overwhelmed them, that they could not
with out infinite travel and sweat, attain to the truth and perfect
understanding thereof.

The eighth definition.
8 The square which is described of the rational right line supposed, is
rational.
Until this diffinition has Euclide set forth the nature and propriety of
the first kind of magnitude, namely, of lines how they are rational or
irrational, now he b^ginneth to show how the second kind of magnitudes,
namely superficies are one to the other rational or irrational. This
diffinition is very plain. Suppose the line AB, to be the rational line,
having his parts and divisions certaynely known: the square of which line let
be the square ABCD. Now because it is the square of the rational line AB, it
is also called rational: and as the line AB, is the first rational line, unto
which other lines compared are coumpted rational, or irrational so is the
quadrat or square thereof, the first rational superficies unto which all other
squares or figures compared, are coumpted and named rational or irrational.

9 Such which are commensurable unto it, are rational.
The ninth definit^on.
In this di^^inition, where it is said, such as are commensurable to the square
of the rational line, are not understand only other squares or quadrates, but
all other kinds of rectiline figures plain plats and superficieses. What so
ever so that if any such figure be co^mensurable unto that rational square^ it
is also rational. As suppose that the square of the rational line, which is
also rational, be ABCD: suppose (...) so some other square as the square EFGH,
to be commensurable to the same: the^ is the square EFGH also rational. So also
if the rectiline figure KLMN, which is a figure on the one side longer, be
commensurable unto the said square as is supposed in this example^ it is also a
rational superficies and so of all other superficieses.

10 Such which are incommensurable unto it, are irrational.
The tenth de^inition.
Where it is said in this diffinition such which are incommensurable, it is
generally to be taken: as was this word co^mensurable in the diffinitio^
before. For all superficieses, whether they be squares or figures on the one
side longer, or otherwise what manner of right lined figure so ever it be, if
they be incommensurable unto the rational square supposed, the^ are they
irrational. As let the square ABCD be the square of the supposed rational
line which square therefore is also rational: suppose also also an other
square, namely the square E, suppose also any other figure, as for example sake
a figure of one side longer, which let be F: Now if the square E and the figure
F, be both incommensurable to the rational square ABCD, then is (...) of these
figures E and F irrational. And so of other.

11 And these lines whose poweres they are, are irrational. If they be
squares, then are their sides irrational. If they be not squares, The eleventh
de^inition.
but some other rectiline figures, then shall the lines, whose squares are
equal to these rectiline figures, be irrational.
Suppose that the rational square be ABCD. Suppose also an other square,
namely the square E, which let be inco^me^surable to the rational square, and
therefore is it irrational: and let the side or line which produces this
square be the line FG: then shall the line FG by this diffinition be an
irrational line: because it is the side of an irrational square. Let also the
figure H being a figure on the one side longer (which may be any other
rectiline figure rectangled or not rectangled, triangle, pentagone, trapezite,
or what so ever else) be incommensurable to the rational square ABCD, then
because the figure H is not a square, it has no side or root to produce it
yet may there be a square made equal unto it: for that all such figures may be
reduced into triangles, and so into squares, by the 14. of the second. Suppose
that the square Q be equal to the irrational figure H. The side of which
figure Q let be the line KL: then shall the line KL be also an irrational line,
because the power or square thereof, is equal to the irrational figure H: and
thus conceive of others the like.

These irrational lines and figures are the chiefest matter and subject, which
is entreated of in all this tenth book: the knowledge, of which is deep, and
secret, and pertains to the highest and most worthy part of Geometry,
wherein stands the pith and mary of the hole science: the knowlede hereof
brings light to all the books following, with out which they are hard and
cannot be at all understood. And for the more plainenes, ye shall note, that
of irrational lines there be di^ers sorts and kinds. But they, whose names
are set in a table here following, and are in number 13. are the

A mediall line. A binomiall line. A first bimediall line. A second bimediall
line. A greater line. A line containing in power a rational superficies and a
mediall superficies. A line containing in power two mediall superficieces. A
residuall line. A first mediall residuall line. A second mediall residuall
line. A less line. A line making with a rational superficies the whole
superficies mediall. A line making with a mediall superficies the whole
superficies mediall. Of all which kinds the diffinitions together with there
declarations shall be set here after in their due places.
The 1. Theoreme. The 1. Proposition. Two unequal magnitudes being given, if
from the greater be taken away more then the half, and from the residue be
again taken away more then the half, and so be done still continually, there
shall at length be left a certain magnitude lesser then the less of the
magnitudes first given.
SVppose that there be two unequal magnitudes AB, and C, of which let AB be
the greater. Then I say, that if from AB, be taken away more then the half,
Construction.
and from the residue be taken again more then the half, and so still
continually, there shall at the length be left a certain magnitude, lesser
then the less magnitude given, namely, then C. For forasmuch as C is the less
magnitude, therefore C may be so multiplied, that at the length it will be
greater then the magnitude AB (by the 5. definition of the fifth book).
Demonstration.
Let it be so multiplied, and let the multiplex of C greater then AB, be DE.
And divide DE into the parts equal unto C, which let be DF, FG, and GE. And
from the magnitudes AB take away more then the half, which let be BH: and
again from AH, take away more then the half, which let be HK. And so do
continually until the divisions which are in the magnitude AB, be equal in
multitude unto the divisions which are in the magnitude DE. So that let the
divisions AK, KH, and HB, be equal in multitude unto the divisions DF, FG, and
GE. And forasmuch as the magnitude DE is greater then the magnitude AB, and
from DE is taken away less then the half, that is, EG (which detraction or
taking away is understand to be done by the former division of the magnitude DE
into the parts equal unto C: for as a magnitude is by multiplication
increased, so is it by division diminished) and from AB is taken away more then
the half, that is, BH: therefore the residue GD is greater then the residue HA
(which thing is most true and most easy to conceive, if we remember this
principle, that the residue of a greater magnitude, after the taking away of
the half or less then the half, is ever greater then the residue of a less
magnitude, after the taking away of more then the half). And forasmuch as the
magnitude GD is greater then the magnitude HA, and from GD is taken away the
half, that is, GF: and from AH is taken away more then the half, that is, HK:
therefore the residue DF is greater then the residue AK (by the foresaid
principle). But the magnitude DF is equal unto the magnitude C (by
supposition). Wherefore also the magnitude C is greater then the magnitude AK.
Wherefore the magnitude AK is less then the magnitude C. Wherefore of the
magnitude AB is left a magnitude AK less then the less magnitude given,
namely, then C which was required to be proved. In like sort also may it be
proved if the halfes be taken away.

A Corollary.
A Corollary.
Of this Proposition it follows, that any magnitude being given how little
soever it be, there may be given a magnitude less then it: so that it is
impossible that any magnitude should be given then which can be given no loss.

An other demonstration of the same.
Suppose that the two unequal magnitudes given be AB and C. And let C be the
less. And forasmuch as C is the less, therefore C may so be multiplied, that
it shall at the length be greater then A^. Construction.
Let it be so multiplied, and let the multiplex of C exceeding AB be the
magnitude FM. And divide FM into his parts equal unto C, that is, into the
magnitudes MH, HG, and GF. And from AB take away more then the half, which let
be the magnitude BE: and likewise from EA take away again more then the half,
namely, the magnitude ED. And thus do continually until the divisions which
are in the magnitude FM, be equal in multitude to the divisions which are in
the magnitude AB: and let those divisions be the magnitudes BE, ED, and DA. And
how multiplex the magnitude FM is to the magnitude C, so multiplex let the
magnitude KX be to the magnitude DA. Demonstration.
And divide the magnitude KX into the magnitudes equal to the magnitude DA:
which let be KL, LN, and NX. Now then the divisions which are in the magnitude
KX, are equal unto the divisions which are in the magnitude MF. And forasmuch
as BE is greater then the half of AB, therefore BE is greater then the residue
EA Wherefore BE is much more greater then DA. But DA is equal unto XN.
Wherefore BE is greater then XN. Again forasmuch as DE is greater then the
half of EA, therefore DE is greater then the residue DA: but DA is equal unto
LN: wherefore DE is greater then LN. Wherefore the whole magnitude DB is greater
the^ the whole magnitude XL. But DA is equal unto LK. Wherefore the whole
magnitude AB is greater then the whole magnitude KX. And the magnitude MF is
greater then the magnitude BA: wherefore MF is much greater the^ KX. And
forasmuch as those magnitudes XN, NL, and LK, are equal the one to the other,
and likewise these magnitudes MH, HG, and GF, are equal the one to the other,
and the multitude of those magnitudes which are in MF, is equal to the
multitude of those magnitudes which are in KX: therefore as KL is to FG, so is
LN to GH, and NX to HM. Wherefore (by the 12. of the fifth) as one of the
antecedentes, namely, KL, is to one of the consequences, namely, to FG, so are
all the antecedentes, namely, the whole KX to all the consequentes, namely, to
the whole FM. But FM is greater then KX. Wherefore FG is greater then LK. But
FG is equal unto C: and KL unto DA (by supposition). Wherefore the magnitude C
is greater then the magnitude AD: which was required to be proved.

The 2. Theoreme. The 2. Proposition. Two unequal magnitudes being given, if
the less be continually taken from the greater, and that which remains
measures at no time the magnitude going before: then are the magnitudes given
incommensurable.
This proposition teaches that incontinuall quantity which the first of the
seventh taught in discrete quantity.
SVppose that there be two unequal magnitudes AB, and CD, and let AB be the
less: and taking away continually by a certain alternate detraction the less
from the greater, let not the residue measure the magnitude going before. Then
I say, that those two magnitudes AB and CD, are incommensurable. For if they be
commensurable, then (by the first definition of the tenth) some one magnitude
shall measure them both: Let there be such a magnitude, if it be possible, and
let the same be E. And let AB measuring DF, Construction.
leave a less then it self, namely, CF ( that is, from the greater magnitude
CD, take away a certain part as DF, which let be equal to AB, or if it be not
equal unto it, yet let it be such, that that less magnitude AB being more
then once repeated may make the magnitude DF^ For this is the meaning of this
let AB measuring DF. etc. And this detraction made, of the less I say out of
the greater, let there be left of the greater a certain portion CF, less then
the magnitude AB. And this is the meaning of that which in the Theoreme was
said, And that which remains measures at no time the magnitude going
before). Likewise let CF measuring BG leave a less then it self, namely, AG:
and do this continually as often as need requires, until there be found such
a magnitude that is less then E: which must needs at the length happen (by
the Proposition going before)^ Let there be found such a magnitude less then
E, which let be AG. And forasmuch as the magnitude E measures the magnitude
AB, but AB measures DF: therefore E measures the magnitude DF (by this common
sentence, If a magnitude measure an other magnitude it shall also measure every
magnitude whom it measures). Demonstration leading to an ab^urditie.
And it measures also the whole CD (for it is supposed to be a common measure
to the magnitudes AB and CD). Wherefore also it measures the residue CF (by
this common sentence, If a magnitude measure an whole and a part taken away, it
shall also measure the residue). And forasmuch as E measures CF, but CF
measures BG, therefore E also measures BG (by the first foresaid common
sentence): and it measures the whole AB. Wherefore it shall also measure the
residue AG (by the other foresaid common sentence) namely, the greater
magnitude shall measure the less: which is impossible. Wherefore no magnitude
measures these magnitudes AB and CD. Wherefore the magnitudes AB and CD are
incommensurable. If therefore two unequal magnitudes being given, the less be
continually taken from the greater, and that which remayneth^ measures at no
time the magnitude going before, then are the magnitudes given incommensurable:
which was required to be demonstrated.

A Corollary added by Montaureus.
By this proposition it is manifest, that if the two unequal magnitudes given
be not incommensurable, but commensurable, then the less being continually
subtrahed out of the greater, the residue shall of necessity measure that
which went before.

The 1. Problem. The 3. Proposition. Two magnitudes commensurable being given,
to find out, their greatest common measure.
SVppose that the two commensurable magnitudes given be AB and CD, of which let
AB be the less. It is required to find out the greatest common measure of the
magnitudes AB and CD. Two cases in this proposition.
Now AB either measures CD, or not. If it measure it, and seeing it also
measures it self, The first case.
wherefore AB is a common measure unto the magnitudes AB and CD. This
proposition teaches, that in continual quantity, which the 2. of the s^^ith
taught in numbers.
And it is manifest that it is the greatest common measure to them. For no
magnitude greater then AB can measure AB. But now suppose that AB do not
measure CD. And taking continually the less from the greater that which
remains shall at length measure that which goes before (by the corollary
before added), for that AB and CD are co^mensurable. Now then let AB measuring
ED which is a part of the magnitude CD, leave a magnitude less then it self,
namely, EC. The second case.
And let EC measuring the magnitude FB, which is a part of the magnitude AB,
leave a less the^ it self, namely, FA, and let FA precisely measure the
magnitude CE ( And this is the meaning of this, That which remains shall at
the length measure that which goes before, when there is nothing left after
the measuring made) And forasmuch as AF measures the magnitude CE, but CE
measures FB: wherefore AF also measures FB, and it measures it self:
wherefore AF measures also the whole AB. But AB measures DE, wher^ore AF also
measures DE. And AF also measures CE, wherefore it measures the whole
magnitude CD. Wherefore the magnitude AF measures both the magnitudes AB and
CD. Wherefore AF is a common measure unto AB and CD. I say also that it is the
greatest common measure unto them. For if not, then is there some magnitude
greater the^ the magnitude AF which measures both the magnitudes AB and CD.
Let there be such a one if it be possible, and let the same be the magnitude G.
Demonstration leading to an absurdity.
And forasmuch as G measures AB, and AB measures ED: therefore G also
measures ED, and by supposition, it measures the whole CD, wherefore G
measures also the residue CE. But CE measures FB, wherefore G also measures
FB. And by supposition it measures the whole AB. Wherefore it measures the
residue AF, namely, the greater magnitude the less, which is impossible.
Wherefore no magnitude greater then AF, measures these magnitudes AB and CD.
Wherefore AF is the greatest common measure unto the magnitudes AB and CD.
Wherefore unto two commensurable magnitudes given, namely, AB and CD is found
out their greatest common measure, namely, the magnitude AF^ which was required
to be done.

Corollary.
Hereby it is manifest that if a magnitude measure two magnitudes, A Corollary.
it shall also measure their greatest common measure. For if it measure the
wholes and the parts taken away, it shall also measure the residues, of which
one is the greatest common measure, as we may see by the latter end of the
former demonstration.

Monta^reus reduces this Problem into a Theoreme after this manner.
Two unequal and commensurable magnitudes being given, if the less do measure
the greater, This Problem reduced to a Theoreme.
then is it the greatest common measure to them both. But if not, then the
less being continually by a mutual detraction (as before has been taught)
taken out of the greater, whenever the residue precisely measures that which
w^nt before leaving nothing, the said residue shall be the greatest common
measure to both the magnitudes given.

The 2. Problem. The 4. Proposition. Three magnitudes commensurable being
given, to find out their greatest common measure.
This proposition teaches, that in continual quantity, which the 3. of the
second taught in numbers.
SVppose that the three commensurable magnitudes given be A, B, C. It is
required of these three magnitudes to find out the greatest common measure.
Take (by the former proposition) the greatest common measure of the two
magnitudes A, B and let the same be D. Now then this magnitude D either
measures the third magnitude, which is C, or not. First let it measure C. And
forasmuch as D measures C, and it measures also the magnitudes A, B^ therefore
D measures the three magnitudes A, B, C. Wherefore D is a common measure unto
the magnitudes A, B, C. And it is manifest, that it is the greatest common
measure. Construction.
For no magnitude greater then D can measure the magnitudes A, B, C. Two cases
in this Proposition.
For if it be possible let the magnitude E being greater then the magnitude D,
measure the magnitude A, B, C. The first case.
And forasmuch as E measures the magnitudes A, B, C, it measures the two
first magnitudes AB. Demonstration leading to an absurdity.
Wherefore it shall also (by the Corollary of the former proposition) measure
the greatest common measure of the magnitudes A, B which is D, namely, the
greater shall measure the less, which is impossible.

The second case.
But now let D not measure the magnitude C. First I say that the magnitudes C,
D, are commensurable. For forasmuch as the magnitudes A, B, C are
commensurable, some magnitude shall measure them, which shall also measure the
magnitudes AB taken a part. A Le^ma neces^ary to be pr^^^d be^o^e (...) ^all to
the demo^^^ration.
Wherefore it shall also (by the corollary going before) measure the greatest
common "measure of A, B, that is, D: and (by supposition) it measures the
magnitude C. Wherefore that said magnitude shall measure the magnitudes C and D.
Construction.
Wherefore the magnitudes C, D are comme^surable. Take by the third of this
tenth, their greatest common measure, and let the same be the magnitude E. And
forasmuch as E measures D, but D measures the magnitudes A, B. Wherefore E
also measures the magnitudes A, B, and it also measures the magnitude C.
Wherefore E is a common measure to ^he three magnitudes A, B, C. Demonstration
leading to an absurdity.
I say also that it is the greatest common measure. For if it be possible, let
there be a magnitude, namely, F, greater then the magnitude E. And let F
measure the three magnitudes A, B, C. And forasmuch as F measures the
magnitudes A, B, C, it also measures the two first magnitudes A, B. Wherefore
(by the corollary going before) it shall also measure the greatest common
measure of the magnitudes A, B. But the greatest common measure of the
magnitudes A, B, is D. Wherefore F measures D, and it also measures C.
Wherefore F measures the magnitudes CD. Wherefore F shall also measure the
greatest common measure of the magnitudes C, D. But the greatest common measure
of the magnitudes C, D, is E. Wherefore F measures E, namely, the greater, the
less, which is impossible. Wherefore no magnitude greater then E measures the
magnitudes A, B, C. Wherefore E is the greatest common measure of the magnitudes
ABC. If D do not measure the magnitude C. But if D do measure C, then is D the
greatest common measure. Wherefore three magnitudes commensurable being given,
there is found their greatest common measure: which was required to be done.

Corollary.
Hereby it is manifest, that if a magnitude measure three magnitudes, A
Corollary.
it shall also measure their greatest common measure. In like sort also in
magnitudes comme^surable how many soever being given, may be found out their
greatest common measure, and the corollary will ever be true.

This Problem also Montaureus reduces into a Theoreme after this manner. This
Problem reduced to a Theoreme.

Three magnitude^ being commensurable, if the greatest common measure to two of
them, do measure the third it shall be the greatest common measure to all the
three magnitudes given. But if it do not measure it, the greatest common
measure of the third and of the greatest common measure of the two first, is
the greatest common measure of all the three magnitudes.

The 3. Theoreme. The 5. Proposition. Magnitudes commensurable, have such
proportion the one to the other, as number has to number.
SVppose that A and B be magnitudes co^mensurable. Then I say that A has unto
B such proportion as number has to number. For forasmuch as A and B are
co^mensurable, therefore some magnitude measures them, let there be a magnitude
that measures them, and let the same be C. Construction.
And how often C measures A, so many unities let there be in the number D. And
how often C measures B, so many unities let there be in the number E, and let
F be unity. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the magnitude C measures the magnitude A by those unities
which are in the number D, and unity F measures the number D by those unities
which are in the number D: therefore how many times unity measures the number
D, so many times does the magnitude C measure the magnitude A: wherefore as the
magnitude C is to the magnitude A, so is unity F to the number D. Wherefore
contrary wise (by the corollary of the fourth proposition of the fifth book) as
the magnitude A is to the magnitude C, so is the number D to unity F. Again
forasmuch as the magnitude C measures the magnitude B by those unities which
are in the number E, and unity F measures the number E by those unities which
are in the number E: therefore how many times unity F measures the number E,
so many times does the magnitude C measure the magnitude B. Wherefore as the
magnitude C is to the magnitude B, so is unity F to the number E, and it is
proved that as the magnitude A is to the magnitude C, so is the number D to
unity F. Wherefore of equality (by the 22. of the fifte) as the magnitude A is
to the magnitude B, so is the number D to the number E. Wherefore the
commensurable magnitudes A and B have that proportion the one to the other that
the number D has to the number E. Magnitudes therefore commensurable, have such
proportion the one to the other, as number has to number: which was required
to be proved.

Magnitudes are said to have such proportion the one to the other, as number
has to number, How magnitudes are said to be in proportion the on^ to the
other, as number is to number.
when as what soever proportion is between those magnitudes, the same is found
between some certain numbers: as if a magnitude be unto a magnitude either
equal, as the number 2. is to the number 2, or double, as the number 4. to the
number 2, or triple, as 6. to 2, or in any other multiplex proportion. And so
also touching the other kinds o^ proportion, either superparticular, or
superpartient.

The 4. Theoreme. The 6. Proposition. I^ two magnitudes have such proportion
the one to the other, as number has to number: those magnitudes are
commensurable.
SVppose that these two magnitudes A and B have that proportion the one to the
other, This pro^osition is the converse of form^r.
that the number D has to the number E. Then I say, that the magnitudes A, B,
are commensurable. How many unities there are in the number D, into so many
equal parts divide the magnitude A (by the 9. of the sixth) and let the
magnitude C be equal to one o^ the parts thereof. And how many unities there
are in the number E, o^ so many magnitudes equal unto the magnitude C let the
magnitude F be composed. And let G be unity. Con^truction.
Now forasmuch as how many unities there are in the number D, so many
magnitudes also are there in the magnit^de A equal unto the magnitude C:
Demonstration.
therefore what part unite G is of the number D, the same part is the magnitude
C of the magnitude A. Wherefore as the magnitude C is to the magnitude A, so is
unity G to the number D. But unity G measures the number D. Wherefore the
magnitude C also measures the magnitude A. And for that as the magnitude C is
to the magnitude A, so is unity G to the number D: therefore contrariwise (by
the Corolla^y of the fourth of the fifth) as the magnitude A is to the magnitude
C, so is the number D to unity G. Again forasmuch as how many unities there
are in the number E, so many magnitudes also are there in the magnitude F
equal unto the magnitude C: therefore as the magnitude C is to the magnitude
F, so is unity G to the number E. And it is proved that as the magnitude A is
to the magnitude C, so is the number D to unity G. Wherefore of equality (by
the 22. of the fifth) as the magnitude A is to the magnitude F, so is the number
D to the number E. But as the number D is to the number E, so is the magnitude
A to the magnitude B. Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as the magnitude A is
to the magnitude B, so is the same magnitude A to the magnitude F: wherefore A
has unto either of these magnitudes B and F one and the same proportion.
Wherefore (by the 9. of the fifth) the magnitude B is equal unto the magnitude
F. But the magnitude C measures the magnitude F: wherefore it also measures
the magnitude B: and it likewise measures the magnitude A. Wherefore the
magnitude C measures the magnitudes A and B. Wherefore the magnitudes A and B
are commensurable. If therefore two magnitudes have such proportion the one to
the other, as number has to number, those magnitudes are co^mensurable: which
was required to be proved.

Corollary.
Hereby it is manifest, that if there be two numbers, A Corollary.
as D and E, and a right line, as A, it is possible to give an other line, unto
which the line A shall have the same proportion, that the number D has to the
number E. For divide the line A into so many equal parts as there are unities
in the number D (by the 9. of the sixth). And take an other line, as F, which
let be composed of so many parts equal to the parts of the line A, as there
be unities in the number E. Wherefore the line A shall be to the line F, as the
number D is to the number E. And by this means you may unto any line given
give an other line commensurable in length. For if two lines be in proportion
the one to the other, as number is to number, they shall also be commensurable
in length, by this 6. Theoreme.

An Assumpt.
Two numbers being given, and also a right line: as the one number is to the
other, so to make the square of ye line given to be to the square of an other
line.

Suppose that the numbers given be D and E: and let the right line given be A.
It is required, as the number D is to the number E, so to make the square of
the line A to be to the square of an other line. As the number D is to the
number E, so let the line A be to the line F (by the former Corollary).
Construction.
And take between those two lines A and F the mean proportional (by the 13.
of the sixth) which ^et be the line B: Demonstration.
Now for that as the number D is to the number E, so is the line A to the line
F: and as the line A is to the line F, so is the square of the line A to the
square of the line B (by the second Corollary of the 20. of the sixth).
Wherefore as the number D is to the number E, so is the square of the line A to
the square of the line B: which was required to be done.

An other demonstration of the 6. Proposition.
Suppose that these two magnitudes given A and B, have that proportion the one
to the other, that the number C has to the number D. The^ I say, that th^se
magnitudes are comme^surable. Construction.
How many unities there are in the number C, into so many equal parts let the
magnitude A be divided, and let the magnitude E be equal unto one of those
parts. Demonstration.
Wherefore as unity is to the number C, so is the magnitude E to the magnitude
A. And as the number C is to the number D, so is the magnitude A to the
magnitude B. Wherefore of equality (by the 22. of the fifth) as unity is to
the number D, so is the magnitude E to the magnitude B. But unity measures
the number D. Where^ore the magnitude E measures the magnitude B. And it also
measures the magnitude A (^or that unity measures the number C). Wherefore
the magnitude E measures either of these magnitudes A and B. Wherefore ^he
magnitu^es A and B are commensurable, and the magnitude E is their common
measure.

The 5. Theoreme. The 7. Proposition. Magnitudes incommensurable, have not that
proportion the one to the other, that number has to number.
SVppose that the magnitudes A and B be incommensurable. Then I say, that A
has not to B, Demon^tration leading to an ab^urdi^ie.
that proportion that number has to number. For if A have unto B that
proportion that number has to number, then is A comensurable unto B (by the 6.
of this tenth). But (by supposition) it is not. Wherefore A has not unto B
that proportion that number has to number. Magnitudes incommensurable therefore
have not that proportion the one to the other that number has to number: which
was required to be demonstrated.

The 6. Theoreme. The 8. Proposition. If two magnitudes have not that
proportion the one to the other that number has to number, those magnitudes
are incommensurable.
SVppose that these two magnitudes A and B, have not that proportion the one to
the other that number has to number. Then I say, that A and B are magnitudes
incommensurable. This is the (...) demons^^ation.
For if A and B be commensurable, then shall A have unto B, that proportion
that number has to number (by the 5. of this tenth). But (by supposition) it
has not that proportion that number has to number. Wherefore A and B are
incommensurable magnitudes. If therefore two magnitudes have not that proportion
the one to the other that number has to number, those magnitudes are
incommensurable: which was required to be proved.

The 7. Theoreme. The 9. Proposition.
SVppose that A and B be lines co^mensurable in length. The first part
demonstrat^d.
Then I say that the square of the line A has unto the square of the line B,
that proportion that a square number has to a square number. For forasmuch as
the lines A and B are commensurable in length: therefore the line A has unto
the line B that proportion that number has to number (by the 5. of this
tenth). Let the line A have unto the line B that proportion, that the number C
has to the number D, Now for that as the line A is to the line B, so is the
number C to the number D: but the square of the line A is unto the square of
the line B in double proportion of that which the line A is unto the line B
(for like rectiline figures (by the first corollary of the 20. of the sixth) are
in double proportion of that which the sides of like proportion are) and
likewise the square number produced of C is to the square number produced of D,
in double proportion of that which the number C is to the number D (for by the
11. of the eight between two square numbers there is one mean proportional
number and a square number is to a square number in double proportion of that
which side is unto side). Wherefore as the square of the line A is to the
square of the line B, so is the square number produced of the number C, to the
square number produced of the number D.

An other demonstration to prove the same.
Forasmuch as the lines A and B are commensurable, therefore (by the 5 of this
tenth) A has unto B the same proportion that number has to number. An other
demonstration of the first part.
Let them have that proportion that the number C has to the number D. And let
the number C multiplying himself produce the number E, and multiplying the
number D, let it produce the number F: and let the number D multiplying
himself produce the number G. And forasmuch as the number C multiplying
himself produced the number E, and multiplying the number D it produced the
number F: therefore (by the 17. of the seventh) as the number C is to the
number D, that is, the line A to the line B so is the number E to the number F.
But as the line A is to the line B, so is the square of the line A to the
parallelograme contained under the lines A and B (by the first of the sixth)
Wherefore as the square of the line A is to that which is contained under the
lines A and B, so is the number E to the number F. Again for as much as the
number C multiplying the number D produced the number F, and the number D
multiplying himself produced the number G: therefore (by the 17. of the
seventh) as the number C is to the number D, that is, as the line A is to the
line B, so is the number F to the number G. But as the line A is to the line B,
so is parallellograme contained under the lines A and B to the square of the
line B (by the first of the sixth). Wherefore as that which is contained under
the lines A and B is to the square of the line B, so is the number F to the
number G. But as the square of the line A is to that which is contained under
the lines A and B, so is the number E to the number F. Wherefore of equality
(by the 22. of the fifte) as the square of the line A is to the square of the
line B, so is the number E to the number G. But either of these numbers E and G
is a square number. For E is produced of the number C multiplied into him
self, and G is produced of the number D multiplied into him self. Wherefore
the square of the line A has unto the square of the line B that proportion
that a square number has to a square number: which was required to be
demonstrated.

An other demonstration of the same first part after Montaureus.
Suppose that there be two lines commensurable in length A and B. Then I say
that the squares described of those lin^s shall be in proportion the one to the
other as a square number is to a square number. An other demon^^ra^ion o^ the
same first part after Montaureus.
For forasmuch as the lines A and B are comme^surable in length, they shall be in
proportion the one to the other as number is to number (by the 5. of this
book). Let A be to B in duple proportion, which is in such proportion as
number is to number, namely, as 4. is to 2, and 6. to 3, and so of many other.
And (by the second o^ the eight) take three least numbers in continual
proportion, and in duple proportion, and let the same be the numbers 4.2.1:
whe^fore by the corrollary of the second of the eight, the numbers 4. and 1.
shall be square numbers. (For as 4. is a square number produced of 2. multiplied
into him self, so is 1. also a square number, for it is produced of unity
multiplied into him self.) I say moreover that those are the square numbers,
whose proportion the squares of the lines A and B have the one to the other.
For as the number 4. is to the number 2. so is the line A to the line B (^or
either proportion is double by supposition): but as the line A is to the line
B, so is the square of the line A to the parallelograme contained under the
lines A and B (by the first of the sixth). Wherefore as the number 4. is to the
number 2: so shall the square of the line A be to the parallelograme contained
under the lines A and B. Likewise as the number 2. is to the number 1. so is
the line A to the line B (For either proportion is duple by supposition): but
as the line A is to the line B, so is the parallelograme contained under the
lines A and B to the square of the line B (by the self same first of the
sixth). Wherefore as the number 2. is to 1. so is the parallelograme contained
under the lines A and B to the square of the line B: wherefore of equallitie
(by the 22. of the fifth) as the square of the line A is to the square of the
line B, so is the number 4. to 1. which are proved to be square numbers.

Demonstration of the second part which is the co^^erse of the former.
But now suppose that the square of the line A, be unto the square of the line
B, as the square number produced of the number C is to the square number
produced of the number D. Then I say that the lines A and B are co^mensurable
in length. For for that as the square of the line A is to the square of the
line B, so is the square number produced of the number C to the square number
produced of the number D: but the proportion of the square of the line A, is
unto the square of the line B double to that proportion which the line A has
unto the line B (by the corollary of the 20. of the sixth). And the proportion
of the square number which is produced of the number C to the square number
produced of the number D is (by the 11. of the eight) double to that proportion
which the number C has unto the number D. Wherefore as the line A is to the
line B, so is the number G to the number D. Wherefore the line A has unto the
line B the same proportion that the number C has to the number D. Wherefore
(by the 6. of this book) the lines A and B are commensurable in length: which
was required to be proved.

An other demonstration to prove the same.
^Vppose again that the square of the line A have unto the square of the line
B, An other demonstration of the second part.
the same proportion, that the square number E has to the square number G.
Then I say that the lines A and B are commensurable in length. For suppose that
the side of the square number E be the number C, and let the side of the square
number G be the number D: and let the number C multiplying the number D produce
the number F. Wherefore these numbers E, F, G, are in continual proportion,
and in the same proportion that the number C is to the number D (by the 17. and
18. of the seventh). This Assump^ follows as a Corollary of the 25: but (so
as it might also be here in Method, placed) you shall ^inde it after the 53.
of this book, absolutely demonstrated: for there it serves to the 54. his
demons^ration.
And forasmuch as the mean proportional between the squares of the lines A
and B is that which is contained under the lines A and B. (Which though it
might briefly be proved: yet we take it as now). And likewise the mean
proportional between the numbers E and G is the number F (by the 20. of the
seventh): therefore as the square of the line A is to that which is contained
under the lines A and B, so is the number E to the number F, and as that which
is contained under the lines A and B is to the square of the line B, so is the
number F to the number G. But as the square of the line A is to that which is
contained under the lines A and B, so is the line A to the line B (by the first
of the sixth). Wherefore the lines A and B are in the same proportion that the
number E is to the number F, that is, that the number C is to the number D.
Wherefore the lines A and B are commensurable in length (by the 6. of this
tenth) which was required to be proved.

But now suppose that the lines A and B be incommensurable in length. Then I
say that the square of the line A has not unto the square of the line B that
proportion that a square number has to a square number. Demo^stratio^ of the
third part.
For if the square of the line A have unto the square of the line B, the same
proportion that a square number has to a square number, the^ shall the lines A
and B be co^mensurable in length (by the second part of this proportion). But
by supposition they are not. Wherefore the square of the line A, has not unto
the square of the line B that proportion that a square number has to a square
number: which was required to be proved. Demo^stratio^ of the fourth part which
is the co^uerse of the ^.


Again suppose that the square of the line A have not unto the square of the
line B, the same proportion that a square number has to a square number. Then
I say that the lines A and B are incommensurable in length. For if the lines A
and B be commensurable in length, then the square of the line A should have
unto the square of the line B, the same proportion that a square number has to
a square number, by the first part of this proposition, but by supposition it
has not, wherefore the lines A and B are not commensurable in length.
Conclusion of the whole proposition.
Wherefore they are incomensurable in length. Wherefore squares made of right
lines commensura- in length, have that proportion the one to the other, that a
square number has to a square number. And squares which have that proportion
the one to the other, that a square number has to a squa^e number, shall also
have the sides commensurable in length. But squares described of right lines
incommensurable in length, have not that proportion the one to the other that a
square number has to a square number. And squares which have not that
propo^tion the one to the other, that a s^uare number has to a square number,
have not also their sides comm^nsurable in length: which was all that was
required to be proved.

Corrollary.
Hereby it is manifest, that right lines co^mensurable in length, are also ever
commensurable in power. But right lines commensurable in power, are not always
commensurable in length. A Cor^llary.
And right lines inco^mensurable in length are not always incommensurable in
power. But right lines incommensurable in power, are ever also incommensurable
in length.

For forasmu^h as squares made of right lines commensurable in length, have
that proportion the one to the other, Pro^e of the first part of the Corollary.
that a square number has to a square number (by the first part of this
proposition), but magnitudes which have that proportion the one to the other,
that number simply has to number, are (by the sixth of the tenth)
commensurable. Wherefore right lines commensurable in length, are commensurable
not only in length, but also in power.

Proof of the second part.
Again forasmuch as there are certain squares which have not that proportion
the one to the other that a square number has to a square number, but yet have
that proportion the one to the other which number simply has to number: their
sides in deed are in power commensurable, for that they describe squares which
have that proportion which number simply has to number, which squares are
therefore commensurable (by the 6. of this book): but the said sides are
incommensurable in length by the latter part of this proposition. Wher^fore it
is true that lines commensurable in power, are not straight way commensurable
in length also. Proof of the third p^rt.


And by the self same reason is proved also that third part of the corollary,
that lines incommensurable in length, are not always incommensurable in power.
For they may be incomm^nsurable in length, but yet commensurable in power. As
in those squares which are in proportion the one to the other, as number is to
number, but not as a square number is to a square number.

Pro^e o^ the fourth part.
But right lines incommensurable in power, are always also incommensurable in
length. For i^ they be commensurable in length, they shall also be commensurable
in power by the first part of this Corollary. But they are supposed to be
incommensurable in length, which is absurd. Wher^ore right lines
incommensurable in power, are ever incommensurable in length^

For the better understanding of this proposition and the other following, I
have here added certain annotacions taken out of Montaureus. Certain
annotations ^ut of Montau^^us.
And first as touching the signi^ication o^ words and terms herein used,
which ar^ such, that unless they be well marked and peysed, the matter will be
obscure and hard, and in a manner inexplicable.

First, this ye must note, that lines to be commensurable in length, and lines
to be in proportion the one to the other, as number is to number is all one. So
that whatsoever lines are commensurable in length, are also in proportion the
one to the other, as number is to number. And conuersedly what so ever lines
are in proportion the one to the other, as number is to number, are also
comme^surable in length, as it is manifest by the 5 and 6 of this book.
Likewise lines to be incommensurable in length, and not to be in proportion the
one to the other, as number is to number is all one, as it is manifest by the
7. and 8. of this book. Wherefore that which is said in this Theoreme, ought to
be understand of lines commensurable in length, and incommensurable in length.

This moreover is to be noted, that it is not all one, numbers to be square
numbers, and to be in proportion the one to the other, as a square number is to
a square number. For although square numbers be in proportion the one to the
other, as a square number is to a square number, yet are not all those numbers
which are in proportion the one to the other, as a square number is to a square
number, square numbers. For they may be like superficial numbers, and yet not
square numbers, which yet are in proportion the one to the other, as a square
number is to a square number. Although all square numbers are like superficial
numbers. For between two square numbers there ^alleth one mean proportional
number (by the 11. of the eight). But if between two numbers, there fall one
mean proportional number, those two numbers are like superficial numbers (by
the 20. of the eight). So also if two numbers be in proportion the one to the
other, as a square number is to a square number, they shall be like
superficial numbers by the first corollary added after the last proposition of
the eight book.

And now to know whether two superficial numbers given, be like superficial
numbers or no, Rules to know whether two superficial numbers be like or no.
it is thus found out. First if between the two numb^rs given, there fall no
mean proportional, then are not these two numbers like superficial numbers
(by the 18. of the eight. But if there do fall between them a mean
proportional, then are they like super^iciall numbers (by the 20. of the
eight) Moreover two like superficial numbers multiplied the one into the
other, do produce a square number (by the first of the ninth). Wherefore if they
do not produce a square number, then are they not like superficial numbers.
And if the one being multiplied into the other, they produce a square number,
then are they like superficial (by the 2. of the ninth). Moreover if the said
two superficial numbers be in superperticular, or superbipartient proportion,
then are they not like superficial numbers. For if they should be like, then
should there be a mean proportional between them (by the 20. of the eight).
But that is contrary to the Corollary of the 20. of the eight.

And the easilier to conceive the demonstrations following, take this example
of that which we have said.

Suppose that there be a line, namely, C, which imagine to be four foot long:
and let there be an other line D, which let be three foot long. And (by the
13. of the sixth) take the mean proportional between the lines A, D, which let
be the line B. Wherefore the square of the line B shall be equal to the
rectangle parallelogramme contained under the line C and D (by the 17. of the
sixth). Which square shall contain 12. foot, and so much also shall the
parallelogramme described of the lines C and D contain. Take also two other
lines E and F, of which let E be 3. foot long, and let F be a foot long. And
let the mean proportional between the lines E and F, be the line A. Now then
the square of the line A shall contain 3. foot, as also does the
parallelogra^me described of the lines E, F. The^ I say, that the square of the
line B, which contains 12. foot, is to the square of the line A, which
contains 3. foot, in that proportion that a square number is to a square
number. For as the number 12. is to the number 3, so is the square of the line
B, which contains 12. foot, to the square of the line A, which contains 3
foot. But the numbers 12. and 3. are like superficial numbers, for the sides
of 12. which are 2. and 6, are proportional with the sides of 3. which are 1.
and 3. Wherefore the square of the line B, which contains 12. foot, shall be
unto the square of the line A, which contains 3. foot, in that proportion
that a like superficial number is to a like superfici^ll number. But like
superficial numbers are in proportion the one to the other, as a square number
i^ to a square number, which square numbers are 4. and 1. (by the 26. of the
eight). Wherefore the square of the line B, which contains 12. foot, is to
the square of the line A, which contains 3. foot, in that proportion that a
square number is to a square number, namely, that the number 4. is to the
number 1: which proportion is quadruple. For the greater square which is 12,
contains the less square which is 3, four times. Wherefore the side of the
square 12, which is the line B, is double to the side of the square 3, which is
the line A. Wherefore the line B is to the line A, in that proportion that
number is to number. Whe^fo^e (by the 5. of this book) the lines B and A are
commensurable in length. Which is a supposition necessary to conclude the first
part of this Theoreme, namely, that the squares of such lines are in proportion
the one to the other, that a square number is to a square number.

So also the number which denominateth the greater term of the proportion of
the line B to the line A, which is 2, if it be multiplied into it self, it
makes a square number, namely, 4. Likewise the number which denominateth the
less term, namely, 1. if it be multiplied into it self, it makes no more
but 1. Which unity is also in power a square number. Wherefore the square of
the line B, is to the square of the line A, in that proportion that a square
number is to a square number, namely, that 4. is to 1. By this you see (which
thing was before noted) that it is not all one, numbers to be square numbers,
and to be in proportion the one to the other, as a square number is to a square
number. For it is manifest, that the numbers 12. and 3. are not square numbers,
when yet the squares expressed by those numbers are in that proportion. But the
side of the square 12. although it can not of it self be expressed by number
distinctly, to say that the side thereof is so many foot long, which feet
square taken, make the whole square 12: yet b^ing referred or compared to an
other thing, namely, to the side of the square 3, which side also of it self
can not be expressed by number, it is unto the said side of the square 3, in
double proportion. For the one square being quadruple to the other square (as
is the square of the line B, which contains 12. foot, to the square of the
line A, which contains 3. foot) has his side double to the side of the
other square, by this general Corollary of the 10. of the sixth, like rectiline
figures are in double proportion the one to the other that their sides of like
proportion are. Now if a man will say, that the side of the square 12. may be
measured, for that his proportion which it has to the side of the square 3, is
measured by 2 (forasmuch as it is dupla proportion: this is to be considered,
that in so saying, you say not, that that magnitude can of it self be
measured, but the proportion thereof. For, that magnitude, namely, the side of
the square 12, should by it self be measured, when without any respect of the
proportion of it to an other thing, we may say that the side of the square,
which contains 12. foot, is so many foot long, the number of which foot
multiplied into it self should make that number 12. But this is not possible,
for that 12. is not a square number. Wherefore thus you may say: In as much as
that square 12. is considered by it self, without having any respect of the
proportion of it to any other thing, but only as it is 11. foot, it has no
side which of it self can be expressed by number. But if it be compared to any
other thing, namely, to the square of 3. foot, then may you say that the side
of the square 12. is 2, and the side of the square 3. is 1. But this is the
denomination of that propo^tion which is called duple, which proportion can not
be or considered in fewer terms then two, when as it is a relation of one
thing to an other thing: wherefore 2. is not the number of such feet, of which
there are 12. in the square. Again, if the number 2. should be the side of
the square 12, so that that side should be 2, then of the multiplication of 2.
into it self, should not be made that square 12, but an other square which
should be 4. foot: as of the number 2. multiplied into him self is produced
the square number 4. Neither also if any other number. measure the sid^ of the
square 12, and the said number be multiplied into him self shall it ever make
the number 12. When yet all numbers denominating the side of any square number,
if they be multiplied into them selves, they make the number which denominateth
the square, whose sides they denominate. As 2. multiplied into him self makes
4: 3. makes 9: 4. makes 16: and so likewise of all others. Wherefore it is
not all one, magnitudes to be in proportion the one to the other, as number is
to number, and every one of them to be measured b^ him self without any
respect had of the proportion. As here the side of the square 12. can of it
self by no means be measured, but being compared to any other magnitude,
namely, to the side of the square 3, the proportion thereof is expressed by
number. So also the side of the square 3, and of all other square figures,
whose areas yet can not be expressed by square numbers. And that which we here
say, is manifest even by the words of Euclide in the 5.6. 7. and 8. Theoremes
of this book. Where he says not, that magnitudes commensurable and
incommensurable are of the^ selves or of their own nature expressed by
numbers, Note.
but that either they have or have not that proportion which number has to
number. Which thing not being well considered, it should seem has caused many
to err as hereafter shall be made manifest. And in deed they which have
demonstrated this Theoreme, may seem to some rather to have demo^strated it
particularly and not universally. And doubtless I judge there are some which
understand their sayings otherwise then they meant: when as they think, that
they suppose certain lines not only commensurable in length, as they are
supposed to be in the Proposition, but also such, that each of them apa^^ may be
expressed by some certain number. Wherefore for want of right understanding,
this might they say of their demonstrations: that whereas they thought that
they had concluded that generally, which is in this theoreme of Euclide,
Squares described of lines co^mensurable in length, are in proportion the one
to the other that a square number is to a square number: they conclude
particularly, this only: Squares described of lines which may by them selves
be expressed by some certain number, are in proportion. etc. which yet is
otherwise, and their demo^strations are right and agreeable with the Theoreme.
Only the picture of the figures which the Greek book has, may seem to bring
some doubt. For the squares are so described with certain little areas, that the
number of them may be denominated by a square number: whereby it might seem
that the lines A and B which describe the squares, ought to be such that they
may be expressed by some certain number. As the line A to be 5. foot, and the
line B 3. foot. As the two former figures here set declare. Which thing yet
Euclide supposes not, but only requires that they be commensurable in length,
as in the former example of the two squares, the whole area of one of which is
12, and the whole area of the other is 3. For although their sides ca^ not by
them selves be expressed by some certain number, yet are they commensurable in
length. Moreover this describing of the squares of the lines A and B, divided
by certain little areas, may cause this error, that a man should think that it
is all o^e two numbers to be square numbers, and to be in proportion the one to
the other as a square number is to a square number. For the number of the areas
in the square of the line A is a square number, namely, 25. produced of the
root 5, which is the length of the line A^ Likewise the number of the areas of
the square of the line B, is a square number, namely, 9, which is produced of
the root 3, which is the length of the line B. But we have before declared
that it is not all one, numbers to be called square numbers, and to be in
proportion the one to the other, as a square number is to a square number.
Wherefore as touching those areas contained in the greater square, which is of
the line A, and which are in number 25, they do express that square number 25,
which is produced of the number 5. multiplied into him self, which number 5.
is the greater extreme of the proportion between 5. and 3, which is the
proportion of the lines A and B. And this proportion, namely, of 5. to 3.
causes that the lines A and B are commensurable in length (by the 6. of this
book). The same may be said also of the areas of the less square. Neither is
it of necessity that you understand those area^ to be squares, as either fe^te
square or pases square which make the whole square, although in deed they may
be such, so that the sides of those squares be so many foot long, as 5. foot
or 3. foot. Howbeit this is of necessity that the numbers which express the
number of the feet square or pases square, contained in the squares, be either
both of the square numbers, as in these square figures of the lines A, B, or
that both of them be like supe^ficiall numbers, as in the former squares which
were 12. and 3: of which numbers it is manifest by that which has before been
said, that they are like superficial numbers, and therefore have that
proportion the one to the other, that a square number has to a square number.
And therefore you may describe the squares of the lines A, B, without any
distinction of such little areas, so that the squares may be void and empty,
and contained only of four right lines, as in the figure here put.

An Assumpt.
Forasmuch as in the eight book in the 26. proposition it was proved, that
like plain numbers have that proportion the one to the other, that a square
number has to a square number: and likewise in the 24. of the same book it
was proved, that if two numbers have that proportion the one to the other, This
assumpt is the converse of the 26. of the eight.
that a square number has to a square number, those numbers are like plain
numbers. Hereby it is manifest, that unlike plain numbers, that is, whose
sides are not proportional, have not that proportion the one to the other,
that a square number has to a square number. For if they have, then should
they be like plain numbers, which is contrary to the supposition. Wherefore
unlike plain numbers have not that proportion the one to the other, that a
square number has to a square number. And therefore squares which have that
proportion the one to the other, that unlike plain numbers have, shall have
their sides incommensurable in length (by the last part of the former
proposition) for that those squares have not that proportion the one to the
other that a square number has to a square number.

The 8. Theoreme. The 10. Proposition. If four magnitudes be proportional,
and if the first be commensurable unto the second, the third also shall be
commensurable unto the fourth. And if the first be incommensurable unto the
second, the third shall also be incommensurable unto the fourth.
SVppose that these four magnitudes A, B, C, D, be proportional. As A is to
B, so let C be to D, and let A be commensurable unto B. Then I say that C is
also commensurable unto D. Demons^ra^io^ o^ the first part.
For forasmuch as A is commensurable unto B, it has (by the fifth of the tenth)
that proportion that number has to number. But as A is to B, so is C to D.
Wherefore C also has unto D that proportion that number has to number.
Wherefore C is commensurable unto D (by the 6. of the tenth). But now suppose
that the magnitude A be incommensurable unto the magnitude B. Demonstration of
the second part^
Then I say that the magnitude C also is incommensurable unto the magnitude D.
For forasmuch as A is incommensurable unto B, therefore (by the 7. of this
book) A has not unto B such proportion as number has to number. But as A is
to B, so is C to D. Wherefore C has not unto D such proportion as number has
to number. Wherefore (by the 8. of the tenth) C is incommensurable unto D. If
therefore there be four magnitudes proportional, and if the first be
commensurable unto the second, the third also shall be commensurable unto the
fourth. And if the first be incommensurable unto the second, the third shall
also be incommensurable unto the fourth: which was required to be proved.

A Corollary added by Montaureus.
If there be four lines proportional, and if the two first, or the two last
be commensurable in power only, the other two also shall be commensurable in
power only. A Corollary.
This is proved by the 22. of the sixth, and by this tenth proposition. And this
Corollary Euclide uses in the 27. and 28. propositions of this book, and in
other propositions also.

The 3. Problem. The 11. Proposition. Unto a right line first set and given
(which is called a rational line) to find out two right lines
incommensurable, the one in length only, and the other in length and also in
power.
SVppose that the right line first set and given, which is called a rational
line of purpose be A. It is required unto the said line A, to find out two
right lines incommensurable, the one in length only, the other both in length
and in power. To find out the first line incommensurable in length only to
the line given.
Take (by that which was added after the 9. proposition of this book) two
numbers B and C, not having that proportion the one to the other, that a square
number has to a square number, that is, let them not be like plain numbers
(for like plain numbers by the 26. of the eight have that proportion the one
to the other that a square number has to a square number). And as the number B
is to the number C, so let the square of the line A be unto the square of an
other line, namely, of D (how to do this was taught in the assumpt put before
the 6. proposition of this book.) Wherefore the square of the line A, is unto
the square of the line D commensurable (by the sixth of the tenth.) And
forasmuch as the number B has not unto the number C, that proportion that a
square number has to a square number, therefore the square of the line A has
not unto the square of ye line D, that proportion that a square number has to
a number. Wherefore by the 9. of the tenth, the line A is unto the line D
incommensurable in length only. And so is found out the first line, namely, D
incommensurable in length only to the line given A. To find out the second
line incommensurable both in length and in power to the line given.
Again take (by the 13. of the sixth) the mean proportional between the lines
A and D, and let the same be E. Wherefore as the line A is to the line D, so is
the square of the line A to the square of the line E (by the Corollary of the
20. of the sixth). But the line A is unto the line D incommensurable in length.
Wherefore also the square of the line A is unto the square of the line E
incommensurable by the second part of the former proposition. Now forasmuch as
the square of the line A is inco^me^surable to the square of the line E, it
follows (by the definition of incommensurable lines) that the line A is
incommensurable in power to the line E. Wherefore unto the right line given, and
first set, A, which is a rational line, and which is supposed to have such
divisions and so many parts as ye list to conceive in mind, as in this
example 11, whereunto, as was declared in the 5. definition of this book, may
be compared infinite other lines, either commensurable or incommensurable, is
found out the line D incommensurable in length only. Wherefore the line D is
rational (by the sixth definition of this book) for that it is incommensurable
in length only to the line A, which is the first line set, and is by
suppositio^ rational. There is also found out the line E, which is unto the
same line A incommensurable, not only in length but also in power, which line
E compared to the rational line A, is by the definition irrational. For
Euclide always calls those lines irrational, which are incommensurable both
in length and in power to the line first set, and by supposition rational.

The 9. Theoreme. The 12. Proposition. Magnitudes commensurable to one and the
self same magnitude: are also commensurable the one to the other.
SVppose that either of these magnitudes A and B, be commensurable unto the
magnitude C: Then I say that the magnitude A is commensurable unto the
magnitude B. Construction.
For ^orasmuch as the magnitude A is commensurable unto the magnitude C,
therefore (by the 5. of the tenth) A has unto C such proportion as number has
to number. Let A have unto C that proportion that the number D has to the
number E. Again forasmuch as B is commensu^able unto C, therefore (by the
self same) C has unto B that proportion that number has to number. Let C
have unto B that proportion that the number F has unto the number G. Now then
take the least numbers in continual proportion and in these proportions given,
namely, that the number D has to the number E, and that the number F has to
the number G (by the 4. of the eight): which let be the numbers ^, K, L.
Demonstration.
So that as the number D is to the number E, so let the number H be to the
number K, and as the number F is to the number G, so let the number K be to the
number L. Now for that as A is to C, so is D to E, but as D is to E so is H to
K, therefore as A is to C, so is H to K. Again for that as C is to B, so is F
to G, but as F is to G so is K to L: therefore as C is to B, so is K to L. But
it is now proved that as A is to C, so is H to K. Wherefore of equality (by
the 22. of the fifth) as A is to B, so is the number H to the number L.
Wherefore A has unto B such proportion as number has to number. Wherefore (by
the sixth of the tenth) the magnitude A is commensurable unto the magnitude B.
Magnitudes therefore commensurable to one and the self same magnitude, T^is is
wi^h Zambert an A^^^mpt, but v^^e^ly improperly: ^l^ssate^ ma^eth i^ a
Corollary, but the Gree^e and Montaureus ma^e it a proposition: but every way
an ^nfallible truth (...).
are also commensurable the one to the other: which was required to be proved.

An Assumpt.
If there be two magnitudes compared to one and the self same magnitude, and
if the one of them be commensurable unto it, and the other incommensurable:
those magnitudes are incommensurable the one to the other.

SVppose that there be two magnitudes, namely, Demonstration leading to an
absurdity.
A and B and let C be a certain other magnitude. And let A ^e commensurable
unto C, and let B be comme^surable unto the self same C. Then I say that the
magnitude A is incommensurable unto B. For if A be commensurable unto B,
forasmuch as A is also comme^surable unto C therefore (by the 12. of the tenth)
B is also comme^surable unto C: which is contrary to the supposition.

The 10. Theoreme. The 13. Proposition. If there be two magnitudes
commensurable, and if the one of them be incommensurable to any other
magnitude: the other also shall be incommensurable unto the same.
SVppose that these two magnitudes A, B be commensurable the one to the other,
and let the one of them, namely A, be incommensurable unto an other magnitude,
Demonstration leading to an absurdit^e.
namely, unto C. Then I say that the other magnitude also, namely B, is
incommensurable unto C. For if B be commensurable unto C, then forasmuch as A
is commensurable unto B, therefore (by the 12. of the tenth) the magnitude A
also is commensurable unto the magnitude C. But it is supposed to be
incommensurable unto it, which is impossible. Wherefore the magnitudes B and C
are not commensurable. Wherefore they are incommensurable. If therefore there
be two magnitudes commensurable, and if the one of them be incommensurable to
any other magnitude, the other also shall be incommensurable unto the same: which
was required to be proved.

A Corollary added by Montaureus.
Magnitudes commensurable to magnitudes incomme^surable, are also
incommensurable the one to the other. A Corollary.


Suppose that the magnitudes A and B be incommensurable the one to the other,
and let the magnitud^ C be co^mensurable to A, and let the magnitude D be
co^mensurable unto B. Then I say that the magnitu^^s C and D are
incommensurable the one to the other. For A and C are commensurable, of which
the magnitude A is incommensurable unto B, wherefore by this 13. proposition
the magnitudes C and B are also incommensurable: but the magnitude^ B and D are
co^mensurable wherefore by the same, or by the former assumpt, the magnitudes C
and D are incommensurable the one to the other. This corollary, Theon uses
often times as in the 22. 26. and 36 propositions of this book, and in other
propositions also.

An Assumpt.
Two unequal right lines being given, to fi^de out how much the greater is in
power more then the less.

Suppos^ that the two unequal right lines given, be AB and C, of which let AB
be the greater. It is required to find out how much more in power the line AB
is then the line C. Describe upon the line AB a semicircle ADB. Construction
And unto it from the point A apply (by the first of the fourth) a right line
AD, equal unto the line C, and draw a right line from D to B. Demonstration.
Now it is manifest that the angle ADB is a right angle (by the 31. of the
third): and that the line AB is in power more then the line AD, that is, then
the line C, by the line DB, by the 47. of the first.

A Corollary.
And like in sort, two right lines being given, by this means may be found
out a right line which contains them both in power. Suppose that the two
right lines given be AD and DB. It is required to ^inde out a right line that
contains them both in power. Let the lines AB and DB be so put, that they
comprehend a right angle ADB, and draw a right line from A to B. Now again it
is manifest (by the 47. of the first) that the line AB contains in power the
lines AD and DB.

The 11. Theoreme. The 14. Proposition. If there be sower right lines
proportional, and if the first be in power more then the second by the square
of a right line commensurable in length unto the first, the third also shall be
in power more then the fourth, by the square of a right line commensurable unto
the third. And if the first be in power more then the second by the square of a
right line incommensurable in length unto the first, the third also shall be in
power more then the fourth by the square of a right line incommensurable in
length to the third.
SVppose that these four right lines A, B, C, D, be proportional. As A is to
B, so let C be to D. And let A be in power more then B, by the square of the
line E. And likewise let C be in power more then D, by the square of the line
F. Demonstration.
Then I say that if A be commensurable in length unto the line E, C also shall
be commensurable in length unto the line F. And if A be incommensurable in
length to the line E, C also shall be incommensurable in length to the line F.
For for that as A is to B, so is C to D, therefore as the square of the line A
is to the square of the line B, so is the square of the line C to the square of
the line D (by the 22. of the sixth). But by supposition unto the square of the
line A are equal, the squares o^ the lines E and B, and unto the square of the
line C are equal the squares of the of the lines D and F: Wherefore as the
squares of the lines E and B (which are equal to the square of the line A) are
to the square of the line B, so are the squares of the lines D and F (which are
equal to the square of the line C) to the square of the line D (by the seventh
of the fifth). Wherefore (by the 17. of the fifth) as the square of the line ^ i^
to the square of the line B, so is the square of the line F to the square of
the line D. Wherefore also as the line E is to the line ^, so is the line F to
the line D (by the second part of the 22. of the sixth) wherefore contrariwise
(by the Corollary of the fourth of the fifth) as B is to E so is D to F. But (by
supposition) ^s A is to B, so is C to D, Wherefore of equallitie (by the 22. of
the fifth) a^ A is to ^, so is C is F. If therefore A be commensurable in length
unto E, C also shall be comm^nsurable in length unto F: and if it ba
incommensurable in length unto E, C also shall be incommensurablel in length unto
F, by the 10. of this book. If therefore there be four right tlines
proportional, and if the first be in power more then the secondby the square
of a right line commensurable in length unto the first, the third also shall be
in power more then the fourth, by the square of a right line commensurable in
length unto the third and if the first be in power more the^ the second, by the
square of a right line inco^mensurable in length unto the first, the third also
shall be in power more the the fourth, by the square of a right line
incommensurable in length to the third: which was required to be proved.

Note that the line A may be proved to be in proportion to the line E, as the
line C is to the line F, by an other way, namely, by conversion of proportion
(of some^ as we have before noted, An other way to prove that the lines A, E,
C, F, are proportional.
called inuerse proportion) by the 19. of the fifth. For, forasmuch as the four
lines A, B, C, D, are proportional: therefore (by the 22. of the sixth) their
squares also are proportional. And forasmuch as the antecedent, namely, the
square of the line A excedeth the consequent, namely, the square of the line B,
by the square of the line E: and the other antecedent, namely, the square of
the line C, excedeth the other consequent, namely, the square of the line D, by
the square of the line F, therefore as the square of the line A is to the
excess, namely, to the square of the line E, so is ^he square of the line C to
the excess; namely, to the square of the line F. Wherefore (by the second part
of the 22. of the sixth) as the line A is to the line E, so is the line C to the
line F.

The 12. Theoreme. The 15. Proposition. If two magnitudes commensurable be
composed, the whole magnitude composed also shall be commensurable to either of
the two parts. And if the whole magnitude composed be commensurable to any one
of the two parts, those two parts shall also be commensurable.
LEt these two commensurable magnitudes AB and BC, be composed or added
together. Then I say, that the whole magnitude AC is co^mensurable to either of
these parts AB and BC: For forasmuch as AB and BC are commensurable, therefore
(by the first definition of the tenth) some one magnitude measures them both.
Demonstration of the first part.
Let there be a magnitude that measures them, and let the same be D. Now
forasmuch as D measures AB and BC, it shall also measure the whole magnitude
composed AC, by this common sentence, what soever magnitude measures two other
magnitudes, shall also measure the magnitude composed of them. But the same D
measures AB and BC (by supposition). Wherefore D measures AB, BC, and AC.
Wherefore AC is commensurable to either of these magnitudes AB and BC.

But now suppose that the whole composed magnitude AC be commensurable to any
one of these two magnitudes AB or BC, let it be commensurable I say unto AB.
Demonstration of the second part which is the converse of the first.
Then I say, that the two magnitudes AB and BC are commensurable. For forasmuch
as AB and AC are commonsurable, some one magnitude measures them (by the first
definition of the tenth). Let some magnitude measure them, and let the same be
D. Now forasmuch as D measures AB and AC, it also measures the residue BC, by
this common sentence, what soever measures the whole and the part taken away,
shall also measure the residu^. But the same D measures the magnitude AB (by
supposition). Wherefore D measures either of these magnitudes AB and BC.
Wherefore the magnitudes AB and BC are commensurable. If therefore two
magnitudes commensurable be composed, the whole magnitude composed also shall
be commensurable to either of the two parts. And if the whole magnitude
composed be commensurable to any one of the two parts, those two parts shall
also be commensurable: which was required to be demonstrated.

A Corollary added by Montaureus.
A Corollary.
If an whole magnitude be commensurable to one of the two magnitudes which make
the whole magnitude, it shall also be commensurable to the other of the two
magnitudes. For if the whole magnitude AC be commensurable unto the magnitude
BC, then by the 2. part of this 15 Proposition: the magnitudes AB and BC are
commensurable. Wherefore (by the first part of the same) the magnitude AC shall
be commensurable to either of these magnitudes AB and BC. This Corollary Theon
uses in the demonstration of the 17. Proposition and also of other
Propositions. Howbeit Euclide left it out, for that it seemed easy as in a
manner do all other Corollaryes.

The 13. Theoreme. The 16. Proposition. If two magnitudes incommensurable be
composed, the whole magnitude also shall be incommensurable unto either of the
two parts co^ponentes. And if the whole be incommensurable to one of the
parts componentes, those first magnitudes also shall be incommensurable.
Demonstration of the first part by an argument leadindg to an absurdity.
LEt these two incommensurable magnitudes AB and BC, be composed, or added
together. Then I say, that the whole magnitude AC, is incommensurable to either
of these magnitudes AB and BC. For if AC and AB be not incommensurable, then
some one magnitude measures them (by the first definition of the tenth). Let
there be such a magnitude, if it be possible, and let the same be D. Now
forasmuch as D measures CA and AB, it also measures the residue BC, and it
likewise measures AB. Wherefore D measures AB and BC. Wherefore (by the first
definition of the tenth) the magnitudes AB and BC are commensurable. But it is
supposed that they are incommensurable: which is impossible. Wherefore no
magnitude does measure the magnitudes AB and AC. Wherefore the magnitudes CA
and AB are incommensurable. In like sort also may we prove, that the magnitudes
AC and CB are incommensurable.

Demonstration of the second part leading also to an impossibility. And this
second part is the converse of the first.
But now suppose that the magnitude AC be incommensurable to one of these
magnitudes AB or BC, and first let it be incommensurable unto AB. Then I say,
that the magnitudes AB and BC are incommensurable. For if they be commensurable
some one magnitude measures them. Let some one magnitude measure them, and let
the same be D. Now forasmuch as D measures AB and BC, it also measures the
whole magnitude AC. And it measures AB: Wherefore D measures these magnitudes
CA and AB. Wherefore CA and AB. are commensurable. And they are supposed to be
inco^mensurable^ which is impossible. Wherefore no magnitude measures AB and
BC. Wherefore the magnitudes AB and BC are incommensurable. And in like sort
may they be proved to be incommensurable, if the magnitude AC be supposed to be
incommensurable unto BC. If therefore there be two magnitudes incommensurable
composed, the whole also shall be incommensurable unto either of the two parts
component, and if the whole be incommensurable to one of the parts component,
those first magnitudes shall be incommensurable: which was required to be
proved.

A Corollary added by Montaureus.
If an whole magnitude be incommensurable to one of the two magnitudes which
make the whole magnitude, it shall also be incommensurable to the other of the
two magnitudes. For if the whole magnitude AC be inco^mensurable unto the
magnitude BC, then by the 2 part of this 16. Theor^me, the magnitudes AB and BC
shall be incommensurable. Wherefore by the first part of the same Theoreme, the
magnitude AC shall be incommensurable to either of these magnitudes AB and BC.
This Corollary (...) uses in the demonstration of the ^3. Theoreme, and also
of other Propositions.

An Assumpt.
If upon a right line be applied a parallelogramme wanting in figure by a
square: the parallelogramme so applied, is equal to that parallelogramme which
is contained under the segmentes of the right line, which segmentes are made by
reason of that application.

Suppose that upon a right line AB be applied a parallelogra^me AG, wanting in
form by the square GB. Then I say, that AG is equal unto that which is
contained under AD and DB, which thing is of it self manifest. For forasmuch as
GB is a square, therefore the line DG is equal unto the line DB: and the
parallelogramme AG is that which is contained under the lines AD and DG, that
is, under the lines AD and DB. If therefore upon a right line be applied a
parallelogramme wanting in figure by a square: the parallelogra^me applied is
equal to the parallelogra^me which is contained under the segmentes of the
right line, which are made by reason of that application. which was required to
be demonstrated.

This Assumpt I before added as a Corollary out of Flussates after the 28.
Proposition of the sixth book.

The 14. Theoreme. The 17. Proposition. If there be two right lines unequal,
and if upon the greater be applied a parallelogramme equal unto the fourth
part of the square of the less line, and wanting in figure by a square, if
also the parallelogramme thus applied divide the line where upon it is applied
into parts commensurable in length: then shall the greater line be in power
more then the less, by the square of a line commensurable in length unto the
greater. And if the greater be in power more then the less by the square of a
right line commensurable in length unto the greater, and if also upon the
greater be applied a parallelogra^me equal unto the fourth part of the square
of the less line, and wanting in figure by a square: then shall it divide the
greater line into parts commensurable.
SVppose that these two right lines A and BC, be unequal: of which let BC be
the greater. And upon the line BC let there be applied (by the 28. of the sixth)
a parallelogramme equal unto the fourth part of the square of the line A being
the less (that is, equal unto the square described upon half of the line A)
and wanting in figure by a square. And let the same parallelogramme be th^^
which is contained under the lines BD and DC. And (by supposition) let the
lines BD and DC be commensurable in length. The^ I say, that the line BC, is in
power more then the line A, by the square of a line commensurable in length
unto the said line BC. Divide (by the 10. of the first) the line BC into two
equal parts in the point E. Construction.
And (by the third of the first) unto the line DE p^^ an equal line OF.
Wherefore the resi^ue DC is equal unto the residue BF. And forasmuch as the
right line BC is divided into two equal parts in the point E, Demonstration
of the first part.
and into two unequal parts in the point D, therefore (by the 5. of the
second) the rectangle figure comprehended under the lines BD and DC together
with the square of the line ED, is equal to the square of the line EC. And in
the same proportion are they each being taken four times by the 15. of the
fifth. Wherefore that which is contained under the lines BD and DC taken four
times together with the square of the line ED taken also four times, is equal
to the square of the line EC taken four times. But unto that which is
contained under the lines BD and DC four times is equal the square of the line
A by supposition: for the parallelograme contained under the lines BD and DC
once is supposed to be equal to the fourth part of the square of the line A.
And unto the square of the line DE taken four times is equal the square of
the line DF, for the line DF is double to the line DE. And unto the square of
the line EC four times taken, is equal the square of the line BC, ^or the
line BC is also double to the line CE. Wherefore the squares o^ the lines A and
DF are equal unto the square of the line BC. Wherefore the square of the line
BC, is greater then the square of the line A, by the square of the line. DF.
Wherefore the greater line BC is in power more then the less line A, by the
square of the line DF. Now rests to prove that the line BC is commensurable
in length unto the line DF. Forasmuch as by suposition the line BD is
commensurable in length unto DC, therefore (by the 15. of the tenth) the whole
line BC is commensurable in length unto the line DC: but the line DC equal to
the line BF. Wherefore the whole line BC is commensurable in length unto the
lines BF and CD. Let the two lines BF and CD be imagined to be so composed that
they make one line. Now forasmuch as the whole line BC is commensurable in
length to the two lines BF and CD taken as one line: therefore the lines BF and
CD taken as one line are commensurable in length to the line FD (by the 2. part
of the 15. of the tenth). Wherefore also the whole line BC is commensurable in
length to the line FD by the first part of the same: this may also be proved by
the corollary put after the 16. proposition of this book. Wherefore the line
BC is in power more then the line A by the square of a line commmensurable in
length unto the line BC.

But now suppose that the line BC be in power more then the line A, by the
square of a line commensurable in length unto the line BC. Demonstration of the
second part which is the converse of the first.
And upon the line BC let there be applied a rectangle parallelograme equal
unto the fourth part of the square of the line A, and wanting in figure by a
square, and let the said parallelograme be that which is contained under the
lines BD and DC. Then must we prove that the line BD is unto the line DC
commensurable in length. The same constructions and suppositions, that were
before, remaining, we may in like sort prove that the line BC is in power more
then the line A, by the square of the line FD. But by suppositio^ the line BC
is in power more the^ the line A by the square of a line co^mensurable unto it
in length. Wherefore the line BC is unto the line FD co^mensurable in length.
Wherefore the line composed of the two lines BF and DC is co^mensurable in
length unto the line FD (by the second part of the 15. of the tenth). Wherefore
(by the 12. of the tenth or by the first part of the 15. of the tenth) the line
BC is commensurable in length to the line composed of BF and DC. But the whole
line conposed BF and DC is commensurable in length unto DC. For BF (as before
has been proved) is equal to DC. Wherefore the line BC is commensurable in
length unto the line DC (by the 12. of the tenth). Wh^^^fore also the line BD
is commensurable in length unto the line DC (by the second part of the 15. of
the tenth). If therefore there be two right lines unequal, and if upon the
greater be appli^d a parallelograme equal unto the fourth part of the square
of the less and wanting in figure by a square, if also the parallelograme thus
applied divide the line whereupon it is applied into parts commensurable in
length: then shall the greater line be in power more then the less by the
square of a line commensurable in length unto the greater. And if the greater
be in power more then the less by the square of a line comme^surable in length
unto the greater, and if also upon the greater be applied a parallelograme
equal unto the fourth part of the square made of the less and wanting in
figure by a square: then shall it divide the greater line into parts
commensurable in length: which was required to be proved.

Campan^ after this proposition reaches how we may redily apply upon the line
BC a parallelograme equal to the fourth part of the square of half of the
line A, and wanting in figure by a square after this manner.

Divide the line BC into two lines in such sort that half of the line A shall be
the mean proportional between those two lines, which is possible, when as the
line BC is supposed to be greater then the line A, and may thus be done. How to
divide the line BC redely in such sort as i^ required in the proposition.
Divide the line BC into two equal parts in the point E and describe upon the
line BC a semicircle BHC. And unto the line BC, and from the point C erect a
perp^dicular line CK and put the line CK equal to half of the line A^ And by
the point K draw unto the line EC a parallel line KH cutting the semicircle in
the point H, (which it must needs cut, fo^asmuch as the line BC is greater
then the line A). And from the point H draw unto the line BC a perpendicular
li^e HD: which line HD^ forasmuch as by the 34: of the first it is equal unto
the line KC, shall also be equal to half of the line A: draw the lines BH and
HC. Now then by the ^^. of the third the angle BHC is a right a^gle. Wherefore
by the corollary of the eight of the sixth book the line HD is the mean
proportional between the lines BD and DC. Wherefore the half of the line A
which is equal unto the line HD is the mean proportional between the lines
BD and DC. Wherefore that which is contained under the lines BD and DC is
equal to the fourth part of the square of the line A. And so if upon the line
BD be described a rectangle parallelograme having his other side equal to the
line DC, there shall be applied upon the line BC a rectangle parallelograme
equal unto the square of half of the line A, and wanting in figure by a
square: which was required to be done.

The 15. Theoreme. The 18. Proposition. If there be two right lines unequal,
and if upon the greater be applied a parallelograme equal unto the fourth part
of the square of less, and wanting in figure by a square, if also the
parallelograme thus applied divide the line whereupon it is applied into parts
incommensurable in length: the greater line shall be in power more then the less
line by the square of a line incommensurable in length unto the greater line.
And if the greater line be in power more then the less line, by the square of
a line incomme^surable in length unto the greater, and if also upon the greater
be applied a parallelograme equal unto the fourth part of the square of the
less and wanting in figure by a square: then shall it divide the greater line
into parts incommensurable in length.
SVppose that these two right lines A and BC be unequal the one to the other,
of which let BC be the greater. And upon the same BC apply a parallelograme
equal unto the fourth part of the square of the line A, and wanting in figure
by a square: which how to do was before taught in the end of the former
proposition. And let the said parallelograme be that which is contained under
the lines BD and DC. And let BD be incommensurable in length unto DC. Then I
say that the line BC is in power more then the line A, by the square of a right
line incommensurable in length unto the line BC. First let the same order of
construction, and demonstration be observed in this which was in the former
proposition. And we may in like sort prove that the line BC is in power more
the^ the line A by the square of the line DF. Now then must we prove that the
lines BC and DF are incommensurable in length. Demonstration of the first part.
Forasmuch as by supposition the line BD is incommensurable in length unto the
line DC: therefore (by the 16. of the tenth) the line BC is incommensurable in
length unto the line CD. But DC is commensurable to these two lines BF and DC
added together. For BF is equal unto DC. Wherefore (by the 13. of the tenth)
BC is incommensurable unto these two lines BF and DC composed. Wherefore by the
second part of the 16. of the tenth the line composed of the lines BF and DC
taken as one line in incommensurable in length unto the line FD. Wherefore by
the first part of the same 16. proposition the line BC is incommensurable in
length unto the line FD. Wherefore the line BC is in power more then the line A
by the square of a line incommensurable in length unto the line BC.

But now suppose that the line BC be in power more then the line A by the
square of a line incommensurable in length unto BC. Demonstr^tion of the second
part which is the converse of the former.
And upon the line BC let there be applied a parallelogramme equal unto the
fourth part of the square of the line A, and wanting in figure by a square, and
let the said parallelogramme be that which is contained under the lines BD and
DC. Then must we prove that the line BD is unto the line DC incommensurable in
length. The same order of construction and demonstration being kept, we may in
like sort prove that the line BC is in power more then the line A by the square
of the line FD. But now (by supposition) the line BC is in power more then the
line A by the square of a line incommensurable in length unto BC. Wherefore the
line BC is unto the line FD incommensurable in length. Wherefore the line
composed of BF and DC taken as one line, shall be incommensurable in length to
the line FD (by the second part of the 16. of the tenth): wherefore also by the
first part of the same, the line BC shall be incommensurable in length to the
line composed of the lines BF and DC. But the line composed of the lines BF and
DC is commensurable in length to the line DC (for that BF (as before has been
proved) is equal to DC). Wherefore the line BC is inco^mensurable in length to
the line DC (by the 13. of the tenth). Wherefore by the second part of the 16.
of the tenth, the line BD is incomme^surable in length unto the line DC. If
therefore there be two right lines unequal, and if upon the greater be applied
a parallelogramme equal unto the fourth part of the square of the less line,
and wanting in ^igure by a square, if also the parallelogramme thus applied
divide the line whereupon it is applied into parts incommensurable in length:
the greater line shall be in power more then the less line by the square of a
line incommensurable in length unto the greater. And if the greater line be in
power more then the less, by the square of a line incommensurable in length
unto the greater, and if also upon the greater be applied a parallelogramme
equal unto the fourth part of the square of the less line, and wanting in
figure by a square, then shall it divide the greater line into parts
incommensurable in length: which was required to be demonstrated.

This Proposition may also be demonstrated by the former proposition, namely,
the first part of this by the second part of the former, and the second part of
this by the first part of the former, by an argument leading to an absurdity.
An other demonstration^y an argument leading to an absurdity.
For as touching the first part of this proposition, the line BC containing in
power more then the line A by the square of the line FD, if the line BG be not
incommensurable unto the line FD, then is it commensurable unto it. Wherefore
(by the second part of the 17. proposition) the lines BD and DC also are
commensurable, which is impossible, for they are supposed to be
incommensurable. So likewise as touching the second part of the same, the line
BC containing in power more then the line A by the square of the line FD, if
the line DB be not incommensurable to the line DC, then is it commensurable
unto it: wherefore (by the first part of the ^^, proposition) the lines BC and
FD are also commensurable, which were absu^de. For the lines BC and FD are
supposed to be incommensu^able: which was required to be proved.

An assumpt.
Forasmuch as it has been proved that lines commensurable in length, An
Assumpt.
are always also commensurable in power, but lines commensurable in power are
not always commensurable in length, but may be in length both commensurable
and also incommensurable: it is manifest, that if unto the line propounded,
which is called rational of purpose, a certain line be co^mensurable in
length, it ought to be called rational and co^mensurable unto it, not only in
length, but also in power: for lines commensurable in length are also always
commensurable in power. But if unto the line propounded which is called
rational of purpose, a certain line be commensurable in power, then if it be
also commensurable unto it in length, it is called rational and commensurable
unto it both in length and in power. But again if unto the said line given
which is called rational, a certain line be commensurable in power, and
incommensurable in length, that also is called rational, commensurable in
power only.

An annotacion of Proclus.
He calls those lines rational, which are unto the rational line first set
co^mensurable in length and in power, or in power only. And there are also
other right lines, which are unto the rational line first set, incommensurable
in length, and are unto it commensurable in power only, and therefore they are
called rational, and comme^surable the one to the other^ for which cause they
are rational. But even these lines may be commensurable the one to the other,
either in length, and therefore in power, or else in power only. Now if they be
commensurable in length, then are those lines called rational, commensurable
in length, but yet so that they be understand to be in power commensurable: but
if they be commensurable the one to the other in power only, they also are
called rational commensurable in power only.

A Corollary.
And that two lines or more being rational and commensurable in length to the
rational line first set, are also commensurable the one to the other in length,
hereby it is manifest: A Corollary added by Montaureu^.
for forasmuch as they are rational and commensurable in length to the
rational line first set, but those magnitudes which are commensurable to one
and the self same magnitude, are also commensurable the one to the other (by
the 12. of the tenth) wherefore the rational lines, commensurable in length to
the rational line first set, are also commensurable in length the one to the
other. And as touching those which are rational commensurable in power only
to the rational line first set, they also must needs be at the least
commensurable in power the one to the other. For forasmuch as their squares are
rational they shall be commensurable to the square of the rational line
first set. Wherefore by the 12. of this book, they are also commensurable the
one to the other. Wherefore their lines are at the least commensurable in power
the one to the other. And it is possible also that they may be comme^surable in
length the one to the other. For suppose that A be a rational li^e first set,
and let the line B be unto the same rational line A commensurable in power
only, that is, incommensurable in length unto it. Let there be also an other
line C commensurable in length to the line B (which is possible by the
principles of this book.) Now by the 13. of the tenth, it is manifest that the
line C is incommensurable in length unto the line A. But the square of the line
A is co^me^surable to the square of the line B by supposition, and the square
of the line C is also commensurable to the square of the line B by supposition.
Wherefore by the 12. of this book, the square of the line C is commensurable
to the square of the line A. Wherefore by the definition, the line C shall be
rational commensurable in power only to the line A, as also is the line B.
Wherefore there are given two rational lines commensurable in power only to
the rational line first set, and comme^surable in length the one to the other.

Here is to be noted, which thing also we before noted in the definitions, that
Campane and others which followed him, brought in these phrases of speeches, to
call some lines rational in power only, Cause.
and other some rational in length and in power, which we cannot find that
Euclide ever used. For these words in length and in power are never referred
to rationalitie or irrationalitie, but always to the commensurabilitie or
incommensurablitie of lines. Which perverting of words (as was there declared)
has much increased the difficulty and obscurenes of this book. Cause of
increasing the difficulty of this book.
And now I think it good again to put you in mind, that in these
propositions which follow, we must ever have before our eyes the rational line
first set, Note.
unto which other lines compared are either rational or irrational, according
to their commensurability or incommensurabilitie.

The 16. Theoreme. The 19. Proposition. A rectangle figure comprehended under
right lines commensurable in length, being rational according to one of the
foresaid ways: is rational.
SVppose that this rectangle figure AC be comprehended under these right lines
AB and BC being commensurable in length, and rational according to one of the
foresaid ways. Then I say that the superficies AC is rational, describe (by
the 46. o^ the first) upon the line AB a square AD. Construction.
Wherefore that square AD is rational by the definition. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the line AB is commensurable in length unto the line BC, and
the line AB is equal unto the line BD, therefore the line BD is commensurable
in length unto the line BC. And as the line BD is to the line BC, so is the
square DA to the superficies AC (by the first of the sixth): but it is proved
that the line BD is commensurable unto the line BC, wherefore (by the 10. of the
tenth) the square DA is commensurable unto the rectangle superficies AC. But
the square DA is rational, wherefore the rectangle superficies AC also is
rational by the definition. A rectangle figure therefore comprehended under
right lines commensurable in length, being rational according to one of the
foresaid ways is rational: which was required to be proved.

Diverse ca^es in this proposition.
Where as in the former demonstration the square was described upon the less
line, we may also demonstrate the Proposition, if we describe the square upon
the greater line, and that after this manner. Suppose that the rectangle
superficies BC be contained of these unequal lines AB and AC, which let be
rational commensurable the one to the other in length. And let the line AC be
the greater. The second case.
And upon the line AC describe the square DC. Then I say, that the
parallelogramme BC is rational. The first kind of rational lines
commensurable in length.
For the line AC is commensurable in length unto the line AB by supposition,
and the line DA is equal to the line AC. Wherefore the line DA is
commensurable in length to the line AB. But what proportion the line DA has to
the line AB, the same has the square DC to the para^lelogramme C^ (by the
first of the sixth). Wherefore (by the 10. of this book) the square DC is
commensurable to the parallelogramme CB. But it is manifest, that the square DC
is rational, for that it is the square of a rational line, namely, AC.
Wherefore (by the definition) the parallelogra^me also CB is rational.

Moreover, forasmuch as those two former demonstrations seem to speak of that
parallelogra^me which is made of two lines, of which any one may be the li^e
first set, which is called the first rational line, from which (we said) ought
to be taken the measures of the other lines compared unto it, and the other is
comme^surable in length to the same first rational line, This particle in the
proposition (according to any of the foresaid ways) was not in vain put.

The second kind of rational lines co^mensurable in leng^h.


which is the first kind of rational lines co^mensurable in length: I think
it good here to set an other case of the other kind of rational lines, of
lines I say rational co^mensurable in length compared to an other rational
line first set, to declare the general truth of this Theoreme, and that we
might see that this particle according to any of the foresaid ways was not
here in vain put. Now then suppose first a rational line AB. Let there be
also a parallelogra^me CD contained under the lines CE and ED, which lines let
be rational, that is commensurable in length to the first rational line
propounded AB. Howbeit, let those two lines CE and ED be diverse and unequal
lines unto the first rational line AB. Then I say, that the parallelogramme CD
is rational. The third case.
Describe the square of the line DE, which let be DF. First it is manifest (by
the 12. of this book) that the lines CE and ED, are commensurable in length
the one to the other. For either of them is supposed to be commensurable in
length unto the line AB. But the line ED is equal to the line OF. Wherefore
the line CE is commensurable in length to the line BF. But (...) the line CE is
^o the line ^ F, ^o is the parallelogramme CD to the square DF (by the first of
the sixth). Wh^refore (by the 10. of this book) the parallelogramme CD shall be
commensurable to the square DF. But the square DF is commensurable to the
square of the line AB which is the first rational line propounded. Wherefore
(by the 12. of this book) the parallelogramme CD is commensurable to the
square of the line AB. But the square of the line AB is rational (by the
definition). Wherefore by the definition also of rational figures, the
parallelogramme CD shall be rational.

Now rests an other ca^e of the third kind of rational lines commensurable
in length the one to the other, which are to the rational line AB first set
commensurable in power only, and yet are therefore rational lines. And let the
lines CE and ED be co^mensurable in length the one to the other. The third
kind of rational lines commensurable in length.
Now then let the self same construction remain that was in the former: so
that let the lines CE and ED be rational commensurable in power only unto the
line AB. But let them be commensurable in length the one to the other. Then I
say, that in this case also the parallelogramme CD is rational. First it may
be proved as before, that the parallelogramme CD is commensurable to the square
DF. Wherefore (by the 12. of this book) the parallelogramme CD shall be
commensurable to the square of the line AB^ But the square of the line AB is
rational. The fourth case.
Wherefore (by the definition) the parallelogra^me CD shall be also rational.
This case is well to be noted. For it serves to the demonstration and
understanding of the 25. Proposition of this book.

The 17. Theoreme. The 20. Proposition. If upon a rational line be applied a
rational rectangle parallelogramme: the other side that makes the breadth
thereof shall be a rational line and commensurable in length unto that line
whereupon the rational parallelogramme is applied.
SVppose that this rational rectangle parallelogramme AC, be applied upon the
line AB, which let be rational according to any one of the foresaid ways
(whether it be the first rational line set, This proposition is the converse
of the former proposition.
or any other line commensurable to the rational line first set, and that in
length and in power, or in power only: for one of these three ways, as was
declared in the Assumpt put before the 19. Proposition of this book, is a line
called rational) and making in breadth the line BC. Then I say, that the line
BC is rational and commensurable in length unto the line BA. Construction.
Desrcribe (by the 46. of the first) upon the line BA a square AD. Wherefore (by
the 9. definition of the tenth) the square AD is rational. But the
parallelogramme AC also is rational (by supposition). Demonstration.
Wherefore (by the conversion of the definition of rational figures, or by the
12. of this book) the square DA is commensurable unto the parallelogramme AC.
But as the square DA is to the parallelogramme AC, so is the line DB to the
line BC (by the first of the sixth). Wherefore (by the 10. of the tenth) the line
DB is commensurable unto the line BC. But the line DB is equal unto the line
BA. Wherefore the line AB is co^mensurable unto the line BC. But the line AB is
rational. Wherefore the line BC also is rational and commensurable in length
unto the line BA. If therefore upon a rational line be applied a rational
rectangle parallelogramme, the other side that makes the breadth thereof shall
be a rational line commensurable in length unto that line whereupon the
rational parallelogramme is applied: which was required to be demonstrated.

An Assumpt.
A line containing in power an irrational superficies, is irrational.

An Assumpt.
Suppose that the line AB co^taine in power an irrational superficies, that is,
let the square described upon the line AB, be equal unto an irrational
superficies. Then I say, that the line AB is irrational. For if the line AB be
rational, the^ shall the square of the line AB be also rational. For so was
it put in the definitions. But (by supposition) it is not. Wherefore the line
AB is irrational. A line therefore containing in power an irrational
superficies, is irrational.

The 18. Theoreme. The 21. Proposition. A rectangle figure comprehended under
two rational right lines commensurable in power only, is irrational. And the
line which in power contains that rectangle figure is irrational, and is
called a mediall line.
SVppose that this rectangle figure AC be comprehended under these rational
right lines AB and BC commensurable in power only. Then I say, that the
superficies AC is irrational: and the line which contains it in power is
irrational, and is called a mediall line. Const^uction.
Describe (by the 46. of the first) upon the line AB a square AD.
Demonstration.
Wherefore the square AD is rational. And forasmuch as the line AB is unto the
line BC incommensurable in length, for they are supposed to be commensurable in
power only, and the line AB is equal unto the line BD, therefore also the
line^ BD is unto the line BC incommensurable in length. And (...) ^h^ lin^
(...) is to the line ^ C, so (...) the square AD to the parallelogramme AC (by
the first of the fiu^). Wherefore (by the 10. of the tenth) the square DA is
unto the parallelogramme AC incommensurable. But the square DA is rational.
Wherefore the parallelogramme AC is irrational. Wherefore also the line that
contains the superficies AC in power, that is whose square is equal unto the
parallelogramme AC, is (by the Assumpt going before) irrational. And it is
called a mediall line, for that the square which is made of it, is equal to
that which is contained under the lines AB and BC, and therefore it is (by the
second part of the 17. of the sixth) a mean proportional line between the
lines AB and BC. A rectangle figure therefore comprehended under rational
right lines which are commensurable in power only, is irrational. And the
line which in power contains that rectangle figure is irrational, and is
called a mediall line.

At this Proposition does Euclide first entreat of the generation and
production of irrational lines. And here he searches out the first kind of
them, which he calls a mediall line. And the definition thereof is fully
gathered and taken out of this 21. Proposition, which is this. A mediall line
is an irrational line whose square is equal to a rectangled figure contained
of two rational lines commensurable in power only. Diffinition of a mediall
line.
It is called a mediall line, as Theon rightly says, for two causes, first for
that the power or square which it produceth^ is equal to a mediall superficies
or parallelogramme. For as that line which produces a rational square, is
called a rational line, and that line which produces an irrational square,
or a square equal to an irrational figure generally is called an irrational
line: so i^ tha^ line which produces a mediall square, or a square equal to a
mediall superficies, called by special name a mediall line. Secondly it is
called a mediall line, because it is a mean proportional between the two
lines co^mensurable in power only which comprehend the mediall superficies.

A Corollary added by Flussates.
A rectangle parallelogramme contained under a rational line and an
^rrationall line, is irrational. A Corollary.
For if the line AB be rational, and if the line CB be irrational, they shall
be incommensurable. But as the line BD (which is equal to the line BA) is to
the line BC, so is the square AD to the parallelogra^me AC. Wherefore the
parallelogramme AC shall be incommensurable to the square AD which is rational
(for that the line AB whereupon it is described is supposed to be rational).
Wherefore the parallelogramme AC which is contained under the rational line
AB, and the irrational line BC, is irrational.

An Assumpt.
If there be two right lines, as the first is to the second, so is the square
which is described upon the first to the parallelograme which is contained
under the two right lines.

Suppose that there be two right lines AB and BC. This assumpt is nothing else
but a part of the first proposition of the sixth book.
Then I say that as the line AB is to the line BC, so is the square of the line
AB, ^^ that which is contained under the lines AB and BC. Describe (by the 46.
of the first) upon the line AB a square AD. And make perfect the parallelograme
AC. Now for that as the line AB is to the line BC (for the line AB, is equal
to the line BD); so is the square AD to the parallelograme CA by the first of
the six^ and AD is the square which is made of the line AB, and AC is that
which is contained under the lines BD and BC, that is, under the lines AB and
BC: therefore as the line AB is to the line BC, so is the square described upon
the the line AB to the rectangle figure contained under the lines AB and BC.
And conuersedly as the parallelograme which is contained under the lines AB and
BC is to the square of the line AB, so is the line CB to the line BA.

The 19. Theoreme. The 22. Proposition. If upon a rational line be applied the
square of a mediall line: the other side that makes the breadth thereof shall be
rational, and incommensurable in length to the line whereupon the
parallelograme is applied.
SVppose that A be a mediall line, and let BC be a line rational, and upon the
line BC describe a rectangle parallelograme equal unto the square of the line
A, and let the same be BD making in breadth the line CD. Then I say that the
line CD is rational and inco^mensurable in length unto the line CB. (...)
For forasmuch as A is a mediall line, it contains in power (by the 21. of
the tenth) a rectangle parallelograme comprehended under rational right lines
commensurable in power only. Suppose that is contain in power the
parallelograme GF: and by supposition it also contains in power the
parallelograme BD. Wherefore the parallelograme BD is equal unto the
parallelograme GF: and it is also equiangle unto it, for that they are each
recta^gle. But in parallelogrames equal and equiangle the sides which contain
the equal angles, are reciprocal (by the 14. of the sixth): Wherefore what
proportion the line BC has to the line EG, the same has the line OF to the
line CD. Therefore (by the 22. of the sixth) as the square of the line BC is to
the square of the line EG, so is the square of the line OF to the square of the
line CD. But the square of the line BC is commensurable unto the square of the
line EG (by supposition). For either of them is rational. Wherefore (by the
the 10. of the tenth) the square of the line OF is commensurable unto the
square of the lin^ CD. But the square of the line OF is rational. Wherefore
the square of the line CD is likewise rational. Wherefore the line CD is
rational. And forasmuch as the line OF is inco^mensurable in length unto the
line EG (for they are supposed to be commensurable in power only). But as the
line OF is to the line EG, so (by the assumpt going before) is the square of
the line OF to the parallelograme which is contained under the lines OF and EG.
Wherefore (by the 10. of the tenth) the square of the line OF is
incommensurable unto the parallelograme which is contained under the lines FE
and EG. But unto the square of the line OF the square of the line CD is
commensurable, for it is proved that ^ither of them is a rational lin^. And
that which is contained under the lines DC and CB is commensurable unto that
which is contained under the lines FE and EG. For they are both equal to the
square of the line A. Wherefore (by the 13. of the tenth) the square of the
line CD is incommensurable to that which is contained under the lines DC and
CB. But as the square of the line CD is to that which is contained under the
lines DC and CB, so (by the assumpt going before) is the line DC to the line
CB. Wherefore the line DC is incommensurable in length unto the line CB.
Wherefore the line CD is rational and incommensurable in length unto the line
CB. If therefore upon a rational line be applied the square of a mediall line,
the other side that makes the breadth thereof shall be rational, and
incommensurable in length to the line whereupon the parallelogramme is applied:
which was required to be proved.

A square is said to be applied upon a line, when it, or a parallelograme
equal unto it, is applied upon the said line. How a square is said to be
applied upon a line.
If upon a rational line given we will apply a rectangle parallelograme equal
to the square of a mediall line given, and so of any line given, we must, by
the 11. of the sixth, find out the third line proportional with the rational
line and the mediall line given: so yet that the rational line be the first,
and the mediall line given, (which contains in power the square to be
applied) be the second. For then the supe^ficies contained under the first and
the third, shall be equal to the square of the middle line, by the 17. of the
sixth.

The 20. Theoreme. The 23. Proposition. A right line commensurable to a mediall
line, is also a mediall line.
SVppose that A be a mediall line. And unto the line A let the line B be
commensurable, either in length, and in power, or in power only. Construction.
Then I say that B also is a mediall line. Let there be put a rational line
CD. And upon the line CD, apply a rectangle parallelograme CE, equal unto the
square of the line A, and making in breadth the line ED. Wherefore (by the
proposition going before) the line ED is rational and incommensurable in
length unto the line CD. Demonstration.
And again upon the line CD apply a rec^angle parallelograme CF equal unto
the square of the line B, and making in breadth the line DF. And forasmuch as
the line A is commensurable unto the line B, therefore the square of the line A
is commensurable to the square of the line B. But the parallelograme EC is
equal to the square of the lin^ A, and the parallelograme CF is equal to the
square of the line B: wherefore the parallelograme EC is co^mensurable unto the
parallelograme CF. But as the parallelograme EC, is to the parallelograme CF,
so is the line ED to the line DF (by the first of the sixth). Wherefore (by the
10. of the tenth) the line ED is commensurable in length unto the line DF. But
the line ED is rational and inco^mensurable in length unto the line DC,
wherefore the line DF is rational and incommensurable in length unto the line
DC (by the 13. of the tenth). Wherefore the lines CD and DF are rational
commensurable in power only. But a rectangle figure comprehended under
rational right lines commensurable in power only, is (by the ^1. of the
tenth) irrational, and the line that contains it in power is irrational,
and is called a mediall line. Wherefore the line that contains in power that
which is comprehended under the lines CD and DF is a mediall line. But the line
B contains in power the parallelograme which is comprehended under the lines
CD and DF Wherefore the line B is a mediall line. A right line therefore
commensurable to a mediall line, is also a mediall line: which was required to
be proved.

Corollary.
Hereby it is manifest that a superficies commensurable unto a mediall
superficies, is also a mediall superficies.

For the lines which contain^ in power those superficieces are commensurable in
power, of which the one is a mediall line (by the definition of a mediall line
in the 21. of this tenth): wherefore the other also is a mediall line by this
23. proposition. And as it was said of rational lines so also is it to be said
o^ mediall lines, namely, that a li^e commensurable to a mediall line, is also
a mediall line, a line I say which is commensurable unto a mediall line,
whether it be commensurable in length, and also in power, or else in power
only. For universally it is true, that lines commensurable in length, are also
commensurable in power. Now if unto a mediall line there be a line
commensurable in power, if it be commensurable in length, the^ are those lines
called mediall lines commensurable in length and in power. But if they be
commensurable in power only, they are called mediall lines commensurable in
power only.

There are also other right lines incommensurable in length to the mediall
line, and commensurable in power only to the same: and these lines are also
called mediall, for that they are commensu^able in power to the mediall line.
And in a^ much as they are mediall lines, they are commensurable in power the
one to the other. But being compared the one to the other, they may be
commensurable either in length, and the^efo^e in power, or else in power only.
And then if they be commensurable in length, they are called also mediall lines
commensu^able in length, and so consequently they are understood to be
commensurable in power. But i^ they be commensurable in power only, yet
notwithstanding they also are called mediall lines commensurable in power only.

Flussates after this proposition teaches how to come to the understanding of
mediall superficieces and lines, by surd numbers, after this manner. Namely to
express the mediall superficieces by the roots of numbers which are not
square numbers: and the lines co^taining in power such medial superficieces, by
the roots of roots of numbers not square. Mediall lines also commensurable,
are expressed by the roots of roots of like s^perficial numbers, but yet not
square, but such as have that proportion that the squares of square numbers
have. For the roots of those numbers and the roots of roots are in
proportion as numbers are, namely, if the squares be proportional the sides
also shall be proportional (by the 22. of the sixth). But mediall lines
incommensurable in power, are the roots of roots of numbers, which have not
that proportion, that square numbers have. For their roots are the powers of
mediall lines, which are incommensurable (by the 9. of the tenth). But mediall
lines commensurable in power only, are the roots of roots of numbers, which
have that proportion that simple square numbers have, and not which the squares
of squares have. For the roots (which are the powers of the mediall lines) are
comme^surable, but the roots of roots (which express the said mediall lines)
are incommensurable.

Wherefore there may be found out infinite mediall lines incommensurable in
power, by comparing infinite unlike plain numbers the one to the other. For
unlike plain numbers, which have not the proportion of square numbers, do
make the roots which express the superficieces of mediall lines
inco^mensurable (by the 9. of the tenth). And therefore the mediall lines
containing in power those superficieces are inco^mensurable in length. For
lines incommensurable in power, are always incommensurable in length (by the
corrollary of the 9. of the tenth).

The 21. Theoreme. The 24. Proposition. A rectangle parallelogramme
comprehended under mediall lines co^mensurable in length, is a mediall
rectangle parallelogramme.
SVppose that the rectangle parallelogramme AG, be comprehended under these
mediall right lines AB and BC, which let be commensurable in length.
Construction.
Then I say, that AC is a mediall rectangle parallelogramme. Describe (by the
46. of the first) upon the line AB a square AD. Demonstration.
Wherefore the square AD is a mediall superficies. And ^orasmuch as the line AB
is commensurabl^ in length unto the line BC, and the line AB is equal unto the
line BD, therefore the line BD is commensurable in length unto the line BC. But
(...) the line DB is to the line BC, so is the square DA to the parallelogramme
AC (by the first of the sixth). Wherefore (by the 10. of the tenth) the square DA
is commensurable unto the parallelogramme AC. But the square DA is mediall, for
that it is described upon a mediall line. Wherefore AC also is a mediall
parallelogra^me (by the former Corollary). A rectangle^ etc: which was required
to be proved.

The 22^ Theoreme. The 25. Proposition. A rectangle parallelogramme
comprehended under mediall right lines commensurable in power only, is either
rational, or mediall.
A Mediall line being given, there may be found an other line commensurable
unto it, in power only (by the 11. of this book) as was taught there touching
rational lines. Now then suppose that the rectangle parallelogramme AC be
comprehended under these mediall right lines AB and BC. Then I say, that the
parallelogramme AC is either rational, or mediall. Construction.
Describe (by the 46. of the first) upon the lines AB and BC, their squares AD
and BE. Wherefore either of these squares AD and BE is mediall (by the 21. of
the tenth). Demonstration.
Let there be put a rational line FG. And upon the line FG, let there be
applied a rectangle parallelogramme GH equal to the square AD, and making the
breadth the line FH. (How to do this was taught in the 22. of this book). And
upon the line HM, apply a rectangle parallelogramme MK, equal to the
parallelogramme AC, and making in breadth the line HK: (to do this ye must take
a fourth line proportional with the lines HM, AB and BC (by the 12. of the
sixth) which fourth line let be HK: wherefore (by the 26. of the sixth) that
which is contained under the extremes HM and HK, is equal to the
parallelogramme contained under the means AB and BC). And moreover upon the
line KN apply a rectangle parallelogramme NL equal to the squar^ BE, and
making in breadth the line KL. Wherefore the lines FH, HK and K, are in one and
the self same right line. (For those parallelogrammes so applied upon the
lines FG, HM, and KN, are rectangle, and the angles EHM and KHM are equal to
two right angles, for they are right angles: wherefore the lines FH and HK are
in one right line, by the 14. of the first: So also may be said of the angles
HKN and LKN). And forasmuch as either of these squares AD and BE is mediall,
and the square AD is equal to the parallelogramme GH, and the square BE to the
parallelogramme NL: wherefore either of these parallelogrammes GH and NL is
mediall. And they are applied upon a rational line, namely, FG. Wherefore (by
the 22. of the tenth) either of these right lines F^H and KL is a rational
line, and in^o^mensurable in length unto the line FG. And forasmuch as the
square AD is commensurable to the square BE (for the lines AB and BC are
supposed to be commensurable in power) therefore the parallelogramme GH is
commensurable to the parallelogramme NL (for they are equal unto the said
squares). But as the parallelogramme GH is to the parallelogramme NL, so (by
the first of the sixth) is the line FH to the line KL. Wherefore (by the 10. of
the tenth) the line FH is commensurable in length to the line KL. Wherefore
these right lines FH and KL, are rational commensurable in length the one to
the other (commensurable in length, I say, the one to the other, for unto the
line FG, by reason of which they are rational, they are inco^mensurable in
length as it has been proved). Wherefore the parallelogramme contained under
the lines FH and KL, is rational (by the 19. of the tenth).

In these few words consists the full demonstration of the corollary
fol^owing.
And forasmuch as the line DB is equal to the line BA, and the line XB to the
line BC: therefor as the line DB is to the line BC, so is the line AB to the
line BX. But as the line DB is to the line BC, so (by the first of the sixth) is
the square DA to the parallelogra^me AC. And as the line AB is to the line BX,
so is the parallelogramme AC to the square CX. Wherefore as the square DA is to
the parallelogramme AC, so is the parallelogramme AC to the square CX. But the
square AD is equal to the parallelogramme GH, and to the parallelogramme AC is
the parallelogramme MK also equal, and to the parallelogramme NL is equal the
square BE: Wherefore as the parallelogramme GH is to the parallelogramme MK, so
is the parallelogramme MK to the parallelogramme NL. Wherefore (by the first of
the sixth) as the line FH is to the line HK, so is the line HK to the line KL.
Wherefore (by the 17. of the sixth) the parallelogra^me contained under the
lines FH and KL, is equal to the square of the line HK. But the
parallelogra^me contained under the lines FH and KL, is rational, as has
before been proved. Wherefore the square of the line HK is also rational.
Wherefore also the line HK is rational.

And now if the line HK be commensurable in length unto the line HM, that is,
unto the line FG, Note.
which is equal to the line HM, then (by the 19. of the tenth) the
parallelogramme NH is rational. But if it be incommensurable in length unto
the line FG, then the lines HK and HM are rational commensurable in power
only. And so shall the parallelogra^me HN be mediall. Wherefore the
parallelogramme HN is either rational, or mediall. But the parallelogramme HN
is equal to the parallelogramme AG. Wherefore the parallelogramme AC is either
rational, or mediall. A rectangle parallelogramme therefore comprehended under
mediall right lines commensurable in power only, is either rational, or
mediall: which was required to be demonstrated.

How to find mediall lines commensurable in power only containing a rational
parallelogramme, and also other mediall lines commensurable in power containing
a mediall parallelogramme, shall afterward be taught in the 27. and 28.
Propositions of this book.

A Corollary.
Hereby it is manifest, that a rectangle parallelogramme contained under two
right lines, is the mean proportional between the squares of the said lines.
A Corollary.
As it was manifest (by the first of the sixth) that that which is contained
under the lines AB and BC, is the mean proportional between the squares AD
and CX. This Corollary is put after the 53. Proposition of this book as an
Assumpt, and there demonstrated, which there in his place you shall find. But
because it follows of this Proposition so evidently and briefly without
farther demonstration, I thought it not amiss here by the way to note it.

The 23. Theoreme. The 26. Proposition. A mediall superficies excedeth not a
mediall superficies, by a rational superficies.
FOr if it be possible, let AB being a mediall superficies, exceed AC being
also a mediall superficies, by DB being a rational superficies. And let there
be put a rational right line OF. Construction.
And upon the line OF apply a rectangle parallelogramme FH, equal unto the
mediall superficies AB, whose other side let be EH: and from the
parallelogramme FH take away the parallelogramme FG, equal unto the mediall
superficies AC. Demonstration leading to an absurdity.
Wherefore (by the third common sentence) the residue BD is equal to the
residue KH. But (by supposition) the superficies DB is rational. Wherefore the
superficies KH is also rational. And forasmuch as either of these
superficieces AB and AC is mediall, and AB is equal unto FH, and AC unto FG:
therefore either of these superficieces FH and FG is mediall: and they are
applied upon the rational line OF. Wherefore (by the 22. of the tenth) either
of these lines HE and EG is rational and incommensurable in length unto the
line OF. And forasmuch as the superficies DB is rational, and the superficies
KH is equal unto it: therefore KH is also rational: and it is applied upon
the rational line OF (for it is applied upon the line GK, which is equal to
the line OF). Wherefore (by the 20. of the tenth) the line GH is rational and
commensurable in length unto the line GK. But the line GK is equal to the line
OF. Wherefore the line GH is rational and commensurable in length unto the line
OF. But the line EG is rational and incommensurable in length to the line OF.
Wherefore (by the 13. of the tenth) the line EG is incommensurable in length
unto the line GH. And as the line EG is to the line GH, so is the square of the
line EG to the parallelogramme contained under the lines EG and GH (by the
Assumpt put before the 21. of the tenth). Wherefore (by the 10. of the tenth)
the square of the line EG is incommensurable unto the parallelogramme contained
under the lines EG and GH. But unto the square of the line EG are commensurable
the squares of the lines EG and GH, for either of them is rational, as has
before been proved. Wherefore the squares of the lines EG and GH are
incommensurable unto the parallelogramme contained under the lines EG and GH.
But unto the parallelogramme contained under the lines EG and GH, is
commensurable that which is contained under the lines FG and GH twice (for they
are in proportion the one to the other as number is to number, namely, as
unity is to the number 2, or as 2. is to 4: and therefore (by the 6. of this
book) they are commensurable). Wherefore (by the 13. of the tenth) the squares
of the lines EG and GH are incommensurable unto that which is contained under
the lines EG and GH twice. (This is more brie^ly concluded by the corollary of
the 13. of the tenth). But the squares of the lines EG and GH together with
that which is contained under the lines EG and GH twice are equal to the
square of the line EH (by the 4. of the second). Wherefore the square of the
line EH is inco^mensurable to the squares of the lines EG and GH (by the 16. of
the tenth). But the squares of the lines FG and GH are rational. Wherefore the
square of the line EH is irrational. Wherefore the line also EH is
irrational. But it has before been proved to be rational: which is
impossible. Wherefore a mediall superficies exceeds not a mediall superficies
by a rational superficies: which was required to be proved.

The 4. Problem. The 27. Proposition. To find out mediall lines commensurable
in power only, containing a rational parallelogramme.
LEt there be put two rational lines commensurable in power only, namely, A
and B. Construction.
And (by the 13. of the six) take the mean proportional between the lines A
and B, and let the same line be C. And as the line A is to the line B, so (by
the 12. of the sixth) let the line C be to the line D. Demonst^ation.
And forasmuch as A and B are rational lines commensurable in power only,
therefore (by the 21. of the tenth) that which is contained under the lines A
and B, that is, the square of the line C. For the square of the line C is
equal to the parallelogramme contained under the lines A an^ B (by the 17. of
the sixth) is mediall, ^herfore C also is a mediall line. And for that as the
line A is to the line B, so is the line C to the line D, therefore as the square
of the line A is to the square of the line B, so is the square of the line C to
the square of the line D (by the 22. of the sixth). But the squares of the
lines A and B are commensurable, for the li^^s A and B a^e supposed to be
rational comme^surable in power only. Wherefore also the squares of the lines
C and D are commensurable (by the 10. of the tenth) wherefore the lines C and D
are commensurable in power only. And C is a mediall line. Wherefore (by the 23.
of the tenth) D also is a mediall line. Wherefore C and D are mediall lines
commensurable in power only. Now also I say that they contain a rational
parallelogramme. For for that as the line A is to the line B, so is the line C
to the line D: therefore alternately also (by the 16. of the fifth) as the line A
is to the line C, so is the line B to the line D. But as the line A is to the
line C, so is the line C to the line B: wherefore as the line C is to the line
B, so is the line B to the line D. Wherefore the parallelogra^me contained under
the lines C and D is equal to the square of the line B. But the square of the
line B is rational. Wherefore the parallelograme which is contained under the
lines C and D is also rational. Wherefore there are found out mediall lines
commensurabl^ in power only containing a rational parallelogramme^ which
(...) required to be done.

The 5. Problem. The 28. Proposition. To find out mediall right lines
commensurable in power only, containing a mediall parallelogramme.
LEt there be put three rational right lines commensurable in power only,
namely, A, B, and C, Construction.
and (by the 13. of the sixth) take the mean proportional between the lines A
and B, and let the same be D. And as the line B is to the line C, so (by the
12. of the sixth) let the line D be to the line E. And forasmuch as the lines A
and B are rational commensurable in power only, Demonstration.
therefore (by the 21. of the tenth) that which is contained under the lines A
and B, that is the square of the line D, is mediall. Wherefore D is a mediall
line. And forasmuch as the lines B and C are commensurable in power only; and
as the line B is to the line C, so is the line D to the line E: wherefore the
lines D and E are commensurable in power only (by the corollary of the tenth
of this book) but D is a mediall line. Wherefore E also is a mediall line (by
the 23. of this book.) Wherefore D and E are mediall lines commensurable in
power only. I say also that they contain a mediall parallelograme. For for
that as the line B is to the line C, so is the line D to the line E: therefore
alternately (by the 16 of the fifth) as the line B is to the line D, so is the
line C to ye line E. But as the line B is to the line D, so is the line D to
the line A^ by converse proportion (which is proved by the corollary of the
fourth of the fifth) Wherefore as the line D is to the line A, so is the line C
to the line E. Wherefore that which is contained under the lines A and C, is (by
the 16. of the six^) equal to that which is contained under the lines D and E.
But that which is contained under the lines A and C is medial (by the 21. of
the tenth.) Wherefore that which is contained under the lines D and E is
mediall. Wherefore there are found out mediall lines commensurable in power
only, containing a mediall superficies: which was required to be done.

An Assumpt.
To find out two square numbers, which added together make a square number.

Let there be put two like superficial numbers AB and BC (which how to find
out, has been taught after the 9. proposition of this book) And let them both
be either even numbers or odd. And let the greater number be AB. And forasmuch
as if from any even number be taken away an even number, or from an odd number
be taken away an odd number, the residue shall be even (by the 24. and 26 of
the ninth). If therefore from AB being an even number be taken away BC an even
number, or from AB being an odd number be taken away BC being also odd: the
residue AC shall be even. Divide the number AC into two equal parts in D:
wherefore the number which is produced of AB into BC together with the square
number of CD, is (by the sixth of the second, as Barlaam demonstrateth it in
numbers) equal to the square number of BD. But that which is produced of AB
into BC is a square number. For it was proved (by the first of the ninth) that
if two like plain numbers multiplieng the one the other, produce any number,
the number produced shall be a square number. Wherefore there are found out two
square numbers, the one being the square number which is produced of AB into
BC, and the other the square number produced of CD, which added together make a
square number, namely, the square number produced of BD multiplied into
himself, forasmuch as they were demo^strated equal to it.

A Corollary.
A Corollary.
To find out two square n^mbers exceeding the one the other by a square ^umber.
And hereby it is manifest, that there are found out two square numbers, namely,
the (...) the square number of BD, and the other the square number of CD, so
that that numb^r wherein the one excedeth the other, the number (I say) which is
produced of AB into BC, is also a square number: namely, when A^ and BC are
like plain numbers. But when they are not like plain numbers, then are there
found out two square numbers, the square number of BD, and the square number of
DC, whose excess, that is, the number whereby the greater excedeth the less,
namely, that which is produced of AB into BC, is not a square number.

An Assumpt.
To find out two square numbers which added together make not a square number.

An Assumpt.
Let AB and BC be like plain numbers, so that (by the first of the ninth) that
which is produced of AB into BC is a square number, and let AC be an even
number. And divide C^ into two equal par^es in D. Now by that which has
before been said in the former assumpt, it is manifest that the square number
produced of AB into BC, together with the square number of CD, is equal to the
square number of BD. Take away from CD unity DE. Wherefore that which is
produced of AB into BC together with the square of CE is less then the square
number of BD. Now then I say that the square num^er produced of AB into BC
added to the square number of CE, make not a square number. For if they do make
a square number, then that square number which they make, is either greater
the^ the square number of BE, or equal unto it, or less then it. First,
greater it cannot be, for it is already proved that the square number produced
of AB into BC, together with the square number of CE, is less then the square
number of BD. But between the square number of BD, and the square number of BE,
there is no mean square number. For the number BD excedeth the number BE only
by unity: which unity can by no means be divided into numbers. Or if the
number produced of AB into BC together with the square of the number CE, should
be greater then the square of the number BE, then should the self same number
produced of AB into BC together with the square of the number CE, be equal to
the square of the number BD, the contrary whereof is already proved. Wherefore if
it be possible, let that which is produced of AB into BC together with the
square number of the number CE be equal to the square number of BE. And let GA
be double to unity DE, that is, let it be the number two. Now forasmuch as the
whole number AC is by supposition double to the whole number CD, of which the
number AG is double to unity DE, therefore (by the 7. of the seventh) the
residue, namely, the number GC is double to the residue, namely, to the number
EC. Wherefore the number GC is divided into two equal parts in E. Wherefore
that which is produced of GB into BC together with the square number of CE is
equal to the square number of BE. But that which is produced of AB into BC,
together with the square number of CE, is supposed to be equal to the square
number of BE wherefore that which is produced of GB into BC together with the
square number of CE is equal to that which is produced of AB into BC, together
with the square number of CE. Wherefore taking away the square number of CE,
which is common to them both, the number AB shall be equal to the number GB,
namely, the greater to the less, which is impossible. Wherefore that which is
produced of AB into BC together with the square number of CE, is not equal to
the square number of BE, I say also that that which is produced of AB into BC
together with the square number of CE is not less then the square number of
BE. For if it be possible, the^ shall it be equ^l to some square number less
then the square number of BE. Wherefore let the number produced of AB into BC
together with the square of the number CE be equal to the square number of BF.
And let the number HA be double to the number DF. The^ also it follows that
the number HC is double to the number CF, so that HC also is divided into two
equal parts in F, and therefore also the number which is produced of HD into
BC, together with the square number of FC, is equal to the square number of
the number BF. But by supposition, the number which is produced of AB into BC
together with the square number of CE is equal to the square number of BF.
Wherefore it follows that the number produced of AB into BC together with the
square number of CE, is equal to that which is produced of HB into BC together
with the square number CF, which is impossible. For if it should be equal,
then forasmuch as the square of CF is less then the square of CE, the number
produced of HB into BC should be greater then the number produced of AB into
BC. And so also should the number HB be greater then the number AB, when yet it
is less then it. Wherefore the number produced of AB into BC together with the
square number of CE, is not less then the square number of ^ E. And it is also
proved that it cannot be equal to the square number of BE, neither greater
then it. Wherefore that which is produced of AB into BC added to the square
number of CE, makes not a square number. And although it be possible to
demonstrate this many other ways, yet this seems to us suffici^n^, least the
matter being over long, should seem to much tedious.

The 6. Problem. The 29. Proposition. To find out two such rational right
lines commensurable in power only, that the greater shall be in power more then
the less, by the square of a right line commensurable in length unto the
greater.
LEt there be put a rational line AB, and take also two such square numbers CD
and DE, Construction.
that their excess CE be not a square number (by the corolary of the first
assumpt of the 28. of the tenth) And upon the line AB describe a semicircle
AFB. And by the corollary of the 6. of the tenth, as the number DC is to the
number CE, so let the square of the line BA be to the square of the line AF.
Demonstration.
And draw a line from F to B. Now for that as the square of the line BA is to
the square of the line AF, so is the number CD to the number CE, therefore the
square of the line BA has to the square of the line AF, that proportion that
the number CD has to the number CE. Wherefore the square of the line BA is
co^me^surable to the square of the line AF (by the 6. of the tenth). But the
square of the line AB is rational. Wherefore also the square of the line AF is
rational. Wherefore also the line AF is rational. And forasmuch as the number
CD has not unto the number CE that proportion that a square number has to a
square number, therefore neither also has the square of the line AB to the
square of the line AF that proportion that a square number has to a square
number. Wherefore (by the 9. of the tenth) the line AB is unto the line AF
incommensurable in length. Wherefore the lines AF and AB are rational
commensurable in power only. And for that as the number DC is to the number
CE, so is the square of the line AB to the square of the line AF: therefore by
conversion or euerse proportion which is demonstrated (by the corollary of the
19. of the fifth) as the number CD is to the number DE, so is the square of the
line AB to the square of the line BF, which is the excess of the square of the
line AB above the square of the line AF (by the assumpt put before the 14. of
this book). But the number CD has to the number DE that proportion that a
square number has to a square number: wherefore the square of the line AB has
to the square of the line BF, that proportion that a square num^er has to a
square number. Wherefore (by the 9. of the tenth) the line AB is commensurable
in length unto the line BF. And (by the 47. of the first) the square of the
line AB is equal to the squares of the lines AF and FB. Wherefore the line AB
is in power more then the line AF by the square of the line BF which is
commensurable in length unto the line AB. Wherefore there are found out two
such rational lines commensurable in power only, namely, AB and AF, so that
the greater line AB is in power more then the less line AF, by the square of
the line FB, which is commensurable in length unto the line AB: which was
required to be done.

The 7. Theoreme. The 30. Proposition. To find out two such rational lines
commensurable in power only, Montaureus makes this an Assumpt: as the Grecke
text seems to do likewise but without a cause.
that the greater shall be in power more then the less by the square of a right
line incommensurable in length to the greater.
LEt there be put a rational line AB, and take also (by the 2. assumpt of the
28. of the tenth) two square numbers CE and ED, which being added together make
not a square number, and let the numbers CE and ED added together make the
number CD. Construction.
And upon the line AB describe a sencircle AFB. And (by the corollary of the 6.
of the tenth) as the number DC is to the number CE, so let the square of the
line AB be to the square of the line AF, and draw a line from F to B. And we
may in like sort, Demonstration.
as we did in the former proposition, prove that the lines BA and AF are
rational commensurable in power only. And for that as the number DC is to the
number CE, so is the square of the line AB to the square of the line AF:
therefore by conversion (by the corollary of the 19. of the fifte) as the
number CD is to the number DE, so is the square of the line AB to the square to
the line FB. But the number C D has not to the number DE that proportion that
a squar^ n^mbe^ h^th to a square number. Wherefore neither also the square of
the line AB has to the square of the line BF that proportion that a square
number has to a square number. Wherefore the line AB is (by the 9 of the
tenth) incommensurable in length to the line BF. And the line AB is in power
more then the line AF by the square of the right line BF, which is
incommensurable in length unto the line AB. Wherefore the lines AB and AF are
rational commensurable in power only. And the line AB is in power more then
the line AF by the square of the line FB which is commensurable in length unto
the line AB^ which was required to be done.

An Assumpt.
If there be two right lines having between them selves any proportion: as the
one right line is to the other, so is the parallelograme contained under both
the right lines to the square of the less of those two lines.

Suppose that these two right AB and BC be in some certain proportion. This
Assumpt sets fo^th nothing ^ls but that which the first o^ the s^^t ^etteth
^orth, and therefore in some examplars it is not found.
Then I say that as the line AB is to the line BC, so is the parallelograme
contained under AB and BC to the square of BC. Describe the square of the line
BC and let the same be CD, and make perfect the parallelograme AD now it is
manifest that as the line AB is to the line BC, so is the parallelograme AD to
the parallelograme or square BE (by the first of the sixth). But the
parallelograme AD is that which is bontained under the lines AB and BC, for the
line BC is equal to the line BD and the parallelograme BE is the square of the
line BC. Wherefore as the line AB is to the line BC so is the parallelograme
coutained under the lines AB and BC to the square of the line BC, which was
required to be proved.

The 8. Problem. The 31. Proposition. To find out two mediall lines
commensurable in power only, comprehending a rational superficies, so that
the greater shall be in power more then the less by the square of a line
commensurable in length unto the greater.
LEt there be taken (by the 29. of the tenth) two rational lines commensurable
in power only A and B, Construction.
so that let the line A being the greater be in power more then the line B,
being the less by the square of a line commensurable in length unto the line
A^ And let the square of the line C be equal to the parallelograme contained
under the lines A and B which is done by finding out the mean proportional
line, namely the line C between the lines A and B (by the 13. of the sixth). Now
the parallelograme contained under the lines A and B is mediall (by the 21. of
this book). Wherefore (by the corollary of the 23. of the tenth) the square
also of the line C is mediall. Whe^fore the line C also is mediall: Unto the
square of the line B let the parallelograme contained under the lines C and D
be equal (by finding out a third line proportional) namely the line D to the
two lines C and B (by the 11. of the sixth). But the square of the line B is
rational. Demonstration.
Wherefore the parallelograme contained under the line C and D is rational. And
for that as the line A is to the line B, so is the parallelograme contained
under the lines A and B to the square of the line B (by the assumpt going
before). But unto the parallelograme contained under the lines A and B is
equal the square of the line C, and unto the square of the line B is equal the
parallelograme contained under the lines C and D, as it has now been proved:
therefore as the line A is to the line B, so is the square of the line C to the
parallelograme contained under the lines C, D. But as the square of the line C
is to that which is contained under the lines C and D, so is the line C to the
line D. Wherefore as the line A is to the line B, so is the line C to the line
D. But (by supposition) the line A is commensurable unto the line B in power
only. Wherefore (by the 11. of the tenth) the line C also is unto the line D
commensurable in power only. But the line C is mediall. Wherefore by the 23^
of the tenth) the line D also is mediall. And for that as the line A is to the
line B, so is the line C to the line D: but the line A is in power more then
the line B, by the square of a line commensurable in length unto the line A (by
supposition). Wherefore the line C also is in power more then the line D by the
square of a line commens^rable in length unto the line C. Wherefore there are
found out two mediall lines C and D commensurable in power only comprehending
a rational superfi^ies, and the line C is in power more then the line D, by
the square of a line commensurable in length unto the line C. And in like sort
may be found out two mediall lines commensurable in power only containing a
rational superficies, so that the greater shall be in power more the^ the less
by the square of a line inco^mensurable in length to the greater, namely, when
the line A is in power more the^ the line B by the square of a line
inco^mensura^le in length unto the line A, which to do is taught by the 30. of
this book.

The self same construction remaining, that part of this proposition from
these words. And for that as the line A is to the line B, to these words, But
(by supposition) the line A is commensurable unto the line B, may more easily
be demonstrated after this manner. The lines C, B, D, are in continual
proportion by the second part of the 17. of the sixth. But the lines A, C, D are
also in continual proportion by the same. Wherefore by the 11. of the fifth,
as the line A is to the line C, so is the line B to the line D. Wherefore
alternately as the line A is to the line B so is the line C to the line D. etc.
which was required to be done.

An assumpt.
If there be three right lines having between them selves any proportion: as
the first is to the third, so is the parallelograme contained under the first
and the second, to the parallelograme contained under the second and the third.

Suppose that these three lines AB, B C, and CD be in some certain proportion.
Then I say that as the line AB is to the line CD, so is the parallelograme
contained under the lines AB and BC to the parallelograme contained under the
lines BC and CD. Construction.
From the point A raise up unto the line AB a perpendicular line AE, and let AE
be equal to the line BC: and by the point E draw unto the line AD a parallel
line EK: and by every one of the points B, C, and D draw unto the line AE
parallel lines BF, CH, and DK. And for that as the line AB is to the line BC so
is the parallelograme AF to the parallelograme BH (by the first of the sixth):
Demonstration.
and as the line BC is to the lin^ CD, so is the parallelograme BH to the
parallelograme CK. Wherefore of equality as the line AB is to the line CD, so
is the parallelograme AF to the parallelograme CK. But the parallelograme AF is
that which is contained under the lines AB and BC, for the line AE is put
equal to the line BC. And the parallelograme CK is that which is contained
under the lines BC and CD, for the line BC is equal to the line CH, for that
the line CH is equal to the line AE (by the 34. of the first). If therefore
there be three right lines having between them selves any proportion: as the
first is to the third, so is the parallelograme contained under the first and
the second, to the parallelogramme contained under the second and the third:
which was required to be demonstrated.

The 9. Problem. The 32. Proposition. To find out two mediall lines
commensurable in power only, comprehending a mediall super^icies, so that the
greater shall be in power more then the less, by the square of a line
commensurable in length unto the greater.
LEt there be taken three rational lines co^mensurable in power only, A, B,
C, so, that (by the 29. of the tenth) let the line A be in power more then the
line C, by the square of a line commensurable in length unto the line A.
Construction.
And unto the parallelogramme contained under the lines A and B, let the square
of the line D be equal. But that which is contained under the lines A and B is
mediall. Wherefore (by the Corollary of the 23. of the tenth) the square of the
line D also is mediall. Wherefore the line D also is mediall. And unto that
which is contained under the lines B and C, let be equal that which is
contained under the lines D and E (which is done by ^inding out a fourth line
proportional unto the lines D, B, C, which let be the line E). Demonstration.
And for that (by the Assumpt going before) as that which is contained under
the lines A and B is to that which is contained under the lines B and C, so is
the line A to the line C. But unto that which is contained under the lines A
and B, is equal the square of the line D, and unto that which is contained
under the lines B and C, is equal that which is contained under the lines D
and E. Wherefore as the line A is to the line C, so i^ the square of the line
D, to that which is contained under the lines D and E. But as the square of the
line D is to that which is contained under the lines D and E, so is the line D
to the line E (by the Assumpt put before the 22. of the tenth). Wherefore as
the line A is to the line C, so is the line D to the line E. But the line A is
unto the line C commensurable in power only. Wherefore the line D is unto the
line E commensurable in power only. But D is a mediall line. Wherefore (by the
23. of the tenth) E also is a mediall line. And for that as the line A is to
the line C, so is the line D to the line E, and the line A is in power more
then the line C, by the square of a line commensurable in length unto the line
A. Wherefore (by the 14. of the tenth) D is in power more then E, by the square
of a line commensurable in length unto the line D. I say moreover that that
which is contained under the lines D and E is mediall. For forasmuch as that
which is contained under the lines B and C, is equal to that which is
contained under the lines D and E: but that which is contained under the lines
B and C is mediall. Wherefore that which is contained under the lines D and E
is also mediall. Wherefore there are found out two mediall lines D and E,
co^mensurable in power only, comprehending a mediall superficies, so that the
greater is in power more then the less, by the square of a line commensurable
in length to the greater: which was required to be done. And thus i^ i^
eu^de^t, how in like sort may be found out two mediall lines comm^^surable in
power. only, A Corollary.
containing a mediall superfic^es, so that the greater shall be in power more
the^ the less, by the square of a line incommensurable in length unto the
greater. When the line A is in power more then the line C, by the square of a
line inco^mensurable in length unto the line A: as the thirteth teaches us.

1. An Assumpt.
Suppose that there be a rectangle triangle ABC, having the angle BAC a right
angle. And (^y the 12. of the first) from the point A to the right line BC, a
perpendicular line being drawn AD: then I say first, that the parallelogramme
contained under the lines

As tou^hing ^he first, that the parallelogramme contained under the lines CB
and BD, is equal to the square of the line AB, is thus proved. For foras^uch
as in the rectangle triangle BAC, ^^om the right angle unto the base is drawn
a perpendicular l^ne AD, ^he^^ore (by the 8. of the sixth) the triangles ABD and
ADC, are like to the whole ^ria^gle ABC, and are also like the one to ^he
other. And for that the triangle ABC is like to the triangle ADE, therefore
both the triangles are equiangle by the d^finitio^ of like figures. Wherefore
(by the 4. of the sixth) as the line CB is to the line BA, so is the line AB to
the line BD. A Corollary added by I. Dee.
Wherefore (by the 17. of the sixth) the parallelogramme contained under the
lines BC and BD, is equal to the, square of the line AB. Therefore if you
divide the square of the side AB by the side BC: the quotient will be BD. Which
makes DC also known: by either of which (by the 47. of the first) the
perpendicular AD is known: which consideration in practice, is very
profitable, where the three sides AB, AC, and BC, are known or given.


As touching the second, that the parellelogramme contained under the lines B^
and CD, is equal to the square of the line AC is by the self same reason
proved. For the triangle ABC is like to the triangle ADC. Wherefore as the line
BC is to the line AC, I. Dee
so is the line, AC to the line DC. The second Corollary.
Wherefore the parallelogramme contained under the lines BC and CD, is equal
to the square of the line AC. Therefore if you divide the square of the side
AC, by the side BC, the portion DC, will be the product. etc. as in the former
Coroll^ry.
As touching the third, that the parallelogramme contained under the lines BD
and DC, is equal to the square of the line DA, is thus proved. For, forasmuch
as if in a rectangle triangle be drawn from the right angle to the base a
perpendicular line, the perpendicular so drawn is the mean proportional
between the segme^ts of the base (by the corollary of the 8. of the sixth):
ther^ore as the line BD is to the line DA, so is the line AD to the line DC.
Wherefore (by the 1^. of the sixth) the parallelogramme contained under the
lines BD and DC, is equal to the square of the line DA. As touching the
fourth, that the parallelogramme contained under the lines BC and AD, is equal
to the parallelogramme contained under the lines BA and AC, is thus proved. For
forasmuch as (as we have already declared) the triangle ABC is like, and
therefore equiangle, to the triangle ABD, therefore as the line BC is to the
line AC, I. D^e
so is the line BA to the line AD (by the 4. of the sixth). The third Corollary.
But if there be four right lines proportional, that which is contained under
the first and the last, is equal to that which is contained under the two
means (by the 16. of the sixth). Wherefore that which is contained under the
lines BC and AD, is equal to that which is contained under the lines BA and
AC. Therefore if the parallelogramme of BA, and AC, be divided by BC, the
product will give the p^^p^ndicular D A. These three Corollaryes in practice
Logisticall and Geometrical are profitable.


I say moreover, that if there be made a parallelogramme complete, An other
demonstration of this fourth part of the determination.
contained under the lines BC and AD, which let be EC: and if likewise be made
complete the parallelogramme contained under the lines BA and AC, which let be
AF, it may by an other way be proved that the parallelogramme EC is equal to
the parallelogramme AF. For, forasmuch as either of them is double to the
triangle ACB (by the 41. of the first): and things which are double to one and
the self same thing, are equal the one to the other. Wherefore that which is
contained under the lines BC and AD, is equal to that which is contained under
the lines BA and AC.

2. An Assumpt.
If a right line be divided into two unequal parts: as the greater part is to
the less, An Assumpt.
so is the parallelogramme contained under the whole line and the greater part,
to the parallelogramme contained under the whole line and the less part.

Divide the right line AB into two unequal parts in the point E: And let AE
be the greater part. Then I say, that as the line AE is to the line EB, so is
the parallelogramme contained under the lines BA and AE to the parallelogramme
contained under the lines BA and BE. Describe the square of the line AB, and
let the same be ACDB. And from the point E draw unto either of these lines AC
and DE a parallel line OF. Now it is manifest, that as the line AE is to the
line EB, so is the parallelogramme AF to the parallelogramme BF (by the first
of the sixth). But the parallelogramme AF is contained under the lines BA and AE
(for the line AC is equal to the line AB) and the parallelogramme BF is
contained under the lines AB and BE (for the line DB is equal to the line AB).
Wherefore as the line AE is to the line EB, so is the parallelogramme contained
under the lines BA and AE, to the parallelogramme contained under the lines AB
and BE: which was required to be demonstrated.

This Assumpt differs little from the first Proposition of the sixth book.

3. An Assumpt.
If there be two unequal right lines, and if the less be divided into two
equal parts: the parallelogramme contained under the two unequal lines, is
double to the parallelogramme contained under the greater line and half of the
less line.

Suppose that there be two unequal right lines AB and BC, of which le^ AB be
the greater, and divide the line BC into two equal parts in the point D. Th^n
I say, that the parallelogramme contained under the lines AB and BC, is double
to the parallelogramme contained under the lines AB and BD. From the point B
raise up upon the right line BC, a perpendicular line BE, and let BE be equal
to the line BA. And drawing from the point C and D, the lines CG and DF
parallels and equal to BE: and then drawing the right line GFE, the figure is
complete. N^^ for that a^ ^he line DB is to the line DC, so is the
parallelogramme BF to the parallelogramme DG (by the 1. of the sixth): ther^ore
by composition of proportion, as the whole line BC is to the line DC, so is the
parallelogramme BG to the parallelogramme DG (by the 18. of the fifth). But the
line BC is double to the line DC. Wherefore the parallelogramme BG is double to
the parallelogramme DG. But the parall^logramme BG is contained under the lines
AB and BC) for the line AB is equal to the line BE (and the parallelogramme DG
is contained under the lines AB and BD) for the line BD is equal to the line
DC, and the line AB to the line DF: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 10. Problem. The 33. Proposition. To ^inde out two right lines
incommensurable in power, whose squares added together make a rational
superficies, and the parallelogramme contained under them make a mediall
superficies.
TAke by the 30. of the tenth, two rational right lines commensurable in power
only, namely, AB and BC, so that let the line AB, being the greater, be in
power more then the line BC being the less, Construction.
by the square of a line incommensurable in length unto the line AB. And by the
10. of the first, divide the line BC into two equal parts in the point D. And
upon the line AB apply a parallelogramme equal to the square either of the
line BD or of the line DC, and wanting in figure by a square, by the 28. of the
sixth, and let that parallelogramme be that which is contained under the lines
AE and EB. And upon the line AB describe a semicircle AFB. And by the 11. of
the first, from the point E, raise up unto the line AB, a perpendiculer line
OF, cutting the circumference in the point F. And draw lines from A to F,
De^onstration.
and from F to B. And forasmuch as there are two unequal right lines AB and
BC, and the line AB is in power more then the line BC, by the square of a line
incommensurable in l^ngth unto AB, and upon the line AB is applied a
parallelograme equal to the fourth part o^ the square of the line BC, that is,
to the square of the half of the line BC, and wanting in ^igure by a square,
and the said parallelogramme is that which is contained under the lines AE and
EB. wherefore by the 2. part of the 18. of the tenth, the line AE is
incomme^surable in length unto the line EB. But as the line AE is to the line
EB, so is the parallelogramme contained under the lines BA and AE, to the
parallelogramme contained under the lines AB and BE by the second assumpt
before put. And that which is contained under the line BA and AE is equal to
the square of the line AF, by the second part of the first assumpt before put.
And that which is contained under the lines AB and BE is by the first part of
the same assumpt, equal to the square of the line BF. Wherefore the square of
the line AF is incomm^nsurable to the square of the line BF. Wherefore the lines
AF and BF are incommensurable in power. And forasmuch as AB is a rational line
(by supposition) therefore (by the 7 definition of the tenth) the square of the
line AB is rational. The first part of the d^termination concluded.
Wherefore also the squares of the lines AF and FB added together make a
rational superficies. For (by the 47. of the first) they are equal to the
square of the line AB. Again forasmuch as (by the third part of the first
assumpt going before) that which is contained under the lines AE and EB, is
equal to the square of the line OF. But by supposition that which is contained
under the lines AE and EB is equal to the square of the line BD. Wherefore the
line FE is equal to the line BD. Wherefore the lin^ BG is double to the line ^
E. Wherefore (by the third assumpt going before) that which is contained under
the lines AB and BC, is double to that which is contained under the lines AB
and OF. But that which is contained under the lines AB and BC, is by
supposition mediall. Wherefore (by the corollary of the 23. of the tenth) that
which is contained under the lines AB and OF is also mediall, but that which
is contained under the lines AB and OF, The second part concluded.
is (by the last part of the first assumpt going before) equal to that which
is contained under the lines AF and FB. Wherefore that which is contained under
the lines AF and FB is a mediall superficies. And it is proved, that that which
is composed of the squares of the lines AF and FB added together is rational.
The total conclusion.
Wherefore there are found out two right lines AF and FB incommensurable in
power, whose squares added together, make a rational superficies, and the
parallelogramme contained under them, is a mediall superfici^s^ which was
required to be done.

The 11. Problem. The 34. Proposition. To find out two right lines
inc^^mensurable in power, whose squares added together make a mediall
superficies, and the parallelogramme contained under them, make a rational
superficies.
TAke (by the 31. of the tenth) two mediall lines AB and BC, commensurable in
power only, comprehending a rational superficies, Construction.
so that let the line AB be in power more then the line BC by the square of a
line incommensurable in length unto the line AB. And describe upon the line AB
a semicircle ADB. And by the 10. of the first, divide the line BC unto two
equal parts in the point E. And (by the 28. of the sixth) upon the line AB
apply a parallelogramme equal to the square of the line BE, and wantyng in
figure by a square, and let that parallelogramme be that which is contained
under the lines AF and FB. Wherefore the line AF is incommensurable in length
unto the line FB (by the 2. part of the 18. of the tenth.) And from the point F
unto the right line AB, raise up (by the 11. of the first) a perpendiculer line
FD, and draw lines from A to D, and from D to B. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the line AF is incommensurable unto the line FB: but (by the
second assumpt going before the 33. of the tenth) as the line AF is to the line
FB, so is the parallelogramme contained under the lines BA and AF, to the
parallelogramme contained under the lines BA and BF, wherefore (by the tenth of
the tenth) that which is contained under the lines BA and AF is incommensurable
to that which is contained under the lines AB and BF: but that which is
contained under the lines BA and AF is equal to the square of the line AD, and
that which is contained under the lines AB and BF is also equal to the square
of the line DB (by the second part of the first assumpt going before the 33. of
the tenth) wherefore the square of the line AD is inco^mensurable to the square
of the line DB. Wherefore the lines AD and DB are incommensurable in power. And
forasmuch as the square of the line AB is mediall, therefore also the
superficies made of the squares of the lines AD and DB added together is
mediall. The first part of the determination concluded.
For the squares of the lines AD and DB are (by the 47. of the first) equal to
the square of the line AB. And forasmuch as the line BC is double to the line
FD (as it was proved in the proposition going before) therefore the
parallelogramme contained under the lines AB and and BC is double to the
parallelogramme contained under the lines AB and FD (by the third assumpt going
before the 33. proposition) wherefore it is also commensurable unto it (by the
sixth of the tenth) But that which is contained under the lines AB and BC is
supposed to be rational. Wherefore that which is contained under the lines AB
and FD is also rational. But that which is contained under the lines AB and
FD, is equal to that which is contained under the lines AD and DB (by the last
part of the first assumpt going before the 33. of the tenth) Wherefore that
which is contained under the lines AD and DB is also rational. The second part
concluded.

The total conclusion.


Wherefore there are ^ound out two right lines AD and DB incommensurable in
power, whose squares added together, make a mediall superficies, and the
parallelogramme contained under them, make a rational superficies: which was
required to be done.

The 12. Problem. The 35. Proposition. To find out two right lines
incommensurable in power, whose squares added together, make a mediall
superficies, and the parallelogramme contained under them, make also a mediall
superficies, which parallelogramme moreover, shall be incommensurable to the
superficies made of the squares of those lines added together.
TAke (by the 32. of the tenth) two mediall lines AB and BC commensurable in
power only, Construction.
comprehending a mediall superficies, so that let the line AB be in power more
then the line BC by the square of a line incommensurable in length unto the
line AB. And upon the line AB describe a semicircle ADB, and let the rest of
the construction be as it was in the two former propositions. And forasmuch as
(by the 2 part of the 18. of the tenth) the line AF is incommensurable in
length unto the line FB, Demonstration.
therefore the line AD is incommensurable in power unto the line DB (by that
which was demonstrated in the proposition going before). And forasmuch as the
square of the line AB is mediall, therefore that also which is composed of the
squares of the lines AD and DB (which squares are equal to the square of the
line AB by the 47. of the first) is mediall. The first part concluded.
And forasmuch as that which is contained under the lines AF and FB, is equal
to either of the squares of the lines EB and FD, for by supposition the
parallelogramme contained under the lines AF and FB is equal to the square of
the line EB, and the same parallelogramme is equal to the square of the line
DF (by the third part of the first assumpt going before the 33. of the tenth).
Wherefore the line BE is equal to the line DF. Wherefore the line BC is double
to the line FD. Wherefore that which is contained under the lines AB and BC is
double to that which is contained under the lines AB and FD. Wherefore they are
commensurable by the sixth of this book: but that which is contained under the
lines AB and BC is mediall by supposition. Wherefore also that which is
contained under the lines AB and FD is mediall (by the corollary of the 23, of
the tenth) but that which is contained under the lines AB and FD, is (by the
fourth part of the first assumpt going before the 33. of the tenth) equal to
that which is contained under the lines AD and DB: The second part concluded.
wherefore that which is contained under the lines AD and DB is also mediall.
And forasmuch as the line AB is incommensurable in length unto the line BC. But
the line BC is commensurable in length unto the line BE. Wherefore (by the 13^
of the tenth) the line AB is incommensurable in length unto the line BE.
Wherefore the square of the line AB is incommensurable to that which is
contained under the lines AB and BE (by the first of the sixth and 10. of this
book) But unto the square of the line AB are equal the squares of the lines
AD and DB added together (by the 47. of the first): and unto that which is
contained under the lines AB and BE, is equal that which is contained under
the lines AB and FD, that is, which is contained under AD and DB. For the
parallelogramme contained under the lines AB and FD is equal to the
parallelogramme contained under the lines AD and DB (by the last part of the
first assumpt going before the 33. of this tenth book). The third part
concluded.
Wherefore that which is composed of the squares of the lines AD and DB is
incommensurable to that which is contained under the lines AB and DB. Wherefore
there are found out two right lines AD and DB incommensurable in power, whose
squares added together, make a mediall superficies, The total conclusion.
and the parallelogramme contained under them, make also a mediall superficies,
which parallelogramme moreover is incommensurable to the superficies composed
of the squares of those lines added together, which was required to be done.

The beginning of the Senaries by Composition. The 2^. Theoreme. The 36.
Proposition. If two rational lines commensurable in power only be added
together: The first Senary by composition.
the whole line is irrational, and is called a binomium, or a binomiall line.
(...) B and BC is incommensurable to the square of the line BC. But unto the
parallelograme contained under the lines AB and BC is commensurable the
parallelograme contained under AB and BC twice (by the 6. of the tenth):
wherefore that which is contained under AB and BC twice is incommensurable to
the square of the line BC (by the 13 of the tenth). But unto the square of the
line BC is commensurable that which is composed of the squares of the lines AB
and BC (by the 15. of the tenth), for by supposition the lines AB and BC are
commensurable in power only. Wherefore (by the 13. of the tenth) that which is
composed of the squares of the lines AB and BC added together is
incommensurable to that which is contained under the lines AB and BC twice.
Wherefore (by the 16. of the tenth) that which is contained under AB and BC
twice together with the squares of the lines AB and BC, which (by the 4. of the
second) is equal to the square of the whole line AC, is incommensurable to
that which is composed of the squares of AB and BC added together. But that
which is composed of the squares of AB and BC added together is rational, for
it is commensurable to either of the squares of the lines AB and BG of which
either of them is rational by supposition: wherefore the square of the line AC
is (by the 10. definition of the tenth) irrational. Wherefore the line AC also
is irrational, and is called a binomiall line.

Diffinition of a binomiall line.
This proposition shows the generation and production of the second kind of
irrational lines which is called a binomium, or a binomial line. The
definition whereof is fully gathered out of this proposition, and that thus.

A binomium or a binomiall line, is an irrational line composed of two
rational lines commensurable the one to the other in power only. And it is
called a binomium, that is, having two names, because it is made of two such
lines as of his parts which are only commensurable in power and not in
length: and therefore each part or line, or at the least the one of them, as
touching length, is uncertain and unknown. Wherefore being joined together
their quantity cannot be expressed by any one number or name, but each part
remains to be severally named in such sort as it may. And of these binomiall
lines there are six several kinds, Six kinds of binomiall lines.
the first binomiall, the second, the third, the fourth, the fifth, and the
sixth, of what nature and condition each of these is shall be known by their
definitious which are afterward set in their due place.

The 25. Theoreme. The 37. Proposition. If two mediall lines commensurable in
power only containing a rational superficies, be added together: the whole
line is irrational, and is called a first bimediall line.
LEt these two mediall lines AB and BC being commensurable in power only, and
containing a rational superficies (the 27. of the tenth teaches to find out
two such lines) be composed. Then I say that the whole line AC is irrational.
For as (...) said in the proposition next going before that which is composed
of the squares of the (...) AB and BC is incomme^surable to that which is
contained under the lines AB and BC twis^ wherefore (by the 16. of the tenth)
that which is composed of the squares of the lines AB and BC together with that
which is contained under the lines AB and BC twice, Demonstration.
that is, the square of the line AC is incommensurable to that which is
contained under the lines AB and BC twice. But that which is contained under
the lines AB and BC twice i^ commensurable to that which is contained under the
lines AB and BC once (by the 6. of the tenth) wherefore the square of the whole
line AC, is (by the 13^ of the tenth) inc^mmensurable ^o that which is
contained under the lines AB and BC once. But by supposition the lines AB and
BC comprehend a rational super^icies. Wherefore the square of the whole line
AC is irrational: wherefore also the line AC is irrational. And it is called
a first bimediall line.

The third irrational line which is called a first bimediall line, is showed by
this proposition, and the definition thereof is by it made manifest,
Diffinition of a first bimediall line.
which is this. A first bimediall line, is an irrational line, which is
composed of two mediall lines commensurable in power only containing a
rational parallelograme. It is called a first bimediall line, by cause the two
mediall lines or parts whereof it is composed contain a rational
superficies, which is preferred before an irrational.

The 26. Theoreme. The 38. Proposition. If two mediall lines commensurable in
power only containing a mediall superficies, be added together: the whole line
is irrational, and is called a second bimediall line.
LEt these two medial lines AB and BC being commensurable in power only, and
containing a mediall superficies (the 28. of the tenth teaches to find^ out
two such lines) be added together. Construction.
Then I say that the whole line AC is irrational. Take a rational line DE. And
(by the 44. of the first) upon the line DE apply the parallelograme DF, equal
to the square of the line AC. whose other side let be the line DG. And
forasmuch as the square of the line AC is (by the 4. of the second) equal to
that which is composed of the squares of the lines AB and BC, Demonstration.
together with that which is contained under the lines AB and BC twice: but the
square of the line AC is equal to the parallelograme DF. Wherefore the
parallelograme DF is equal to that which is composed of the squares of the
lines AB and BC together with that which is contained under the lines AB and BC
twice. Now then again (by the 44, of the first) upon the line DE apply the
parallelograme EH equal to the squares of the lines AB and BC. Wherefore the
parallelograme remaining, namely, HF, is equal to that which is contained
under the lines AB and BC twice. And forasmuch as either of these lines AB and
BC is mediall, therefore the squares of the lines AB and BC are also mediall.
And that which is contained under the lines AB and BC twice is (by the
corollary of the ^4. of the tenth) mediall. For by the 6. of this book it is
comme^surable ^^ that (...) is contained under the lines AB and BC once, which
is by supposition medial. (...) squares of the lines. AB and BC is equal the
parallelograme EH, and unto that (...) contained under the lines AB and BC
twice is equal the parallelograme HE (...) either of these parallelogrames HE
and AF is mediall: and they are applied upon the rational line ED. Wherefore
(by the 22. of the tenth) either of these lines DH and HG is a rational line,
and inc^mmensurable in length unto the line DE. And forasmuch as (by
supposition) the line AB is incommensurable in length unto the line BC. But as
the line AB is to the line BC^ so is the square of the line AB to the
parallelograme which is contained under the lines AB and BC (by the first of
the sixth). Wherefore (by the 10 of this book^) the square of the line AB is
incommensurable to the parallelograme contained under the lines AB and BC. But
to the square of the line AB is commens^able that which is composed of the
squares of the lines AB and BC (by the 15. of the tenth). For the squares of
the lines AB and BC are commensurable (when as the lines AB and BC are put to
be commensurable in power only). And to that which is contained under the
lines AB and BC is commensurable that which is contained under the lines AB and
BC twice (by the 6 of the tenth) wherefore that which is composed of the
squares of the lines AB and BC is incommensurable to that which is contained
under the lines AB and BC twice. But to the squares of the lines AB and BC is
equal the parallelograme EH. And to that which is contained under the lines AB
and BC twice is equal the parallelograme FH. Wherefore the parallelograme FH is
incommensurable to the parallelograme HE. Wherefore the line DH is
incommensurable in length to the line HG (by the 1 of the sixth and 10 of this
book). And it is proved that they are rational lines. Wherefore the lines DH
and HG are rational commensurable in power only. Wherefore (by the 36. of the
tenth) the whole line DG is irrationall^ And the line DE is rational. But a
rectangle super^icies comprehended under a rational line and an irrational
line is (by the corollary added after the 21 of the tenth) irrational.
Wherefore the super^icies DF is irrational. And the line also which contains
it in power is irrational. But the line AC contains in power the superficies
DF. Wherefore the line AC is irrational. And it is called a second bimediall
line.

This Proposition shows the generation of the fourth irrational line, called
a second bimediall line. Diffinition of a second bimediall line.
The definition whereof is evident by this Proposition, which is thus. A second
bimediall line is an irrational line, which is made of two mediall lines
commensurable in power only joined together, which comprehend a mediall
superficies. And it is called a second bimediall, because the two mediall lines
of which it is composed, co^taine a mediall superficies, and not a rational.
Now a mediall is by nature and in knowledge after a rational.

The 27. Theoreme. The 39. Proposition. If two right lines inco^mensurable in
power be added together, having that which is composed of the squares of them
rational, and the parallelogra^me contained under them mediall: the whole
right line is irrational, and is called a greater line.
LEt t^ese two right lines AB and BC being incommensurable in power only, and
making that which is required in the Proposition (The 33. of the tenth teaches
to find out two such lines) be added together. Then I say, that the whole line
AC is irrational. Demonstration.
For forasmuch as (by supposition) the parallelogramme contained under the
lines AB and BC is mediall, therefore the parallelogramme contained twice under
the lines AB and BC is mediall. (For that which is contained under AB and BC
twice, is commensurable to that which is contained under AB and BC once (by the
6. of the tenth). Wherefore (by the Corollary of the 23. of the tenth) that
which is contained under AB and BC twice, is mediall). But by supposition that
which i^ composed of the squares of the lines AB and BC, is rational.
Wherefore that which is contained under the lines AB and BC twice is
incommensurable to that which is composed of the squares of the lines AB and
BC. Wherefore (by the 16. of the tenth) that which is composed of the squares of
the lines AB and BC together with that which is contained under the lines AB
and BC twice, which is (by the 4. of the second) equal to the square of the
line AC, is incommensurable to that which is composed of the squares of the
lines AB and BC. But that which is composed of the squares of the lines AB and
BC, is rational. Wherefore the square of the whole line AC, is irrational.
Wherefore the line AC also is irrational. And is called a greater line. And it
is called a greater line for that that which is composed of the squares of the
lines AB and BC which are rational, is greater then that which is contained
under the lines AB and BC twice, which are mediall. Now it is meet that the
name should be given according to the property of the rational.

An Assumpt.
And that the superficies composed of the squares of the lines AB and BC, An
Assumpt.
is greater then that which is contained under the lines AB and BC twice, may
thus be proved. First it is manifest, that the lines AB and BC are unequal:
for if they were equal, then the squares of the lines AB and BC should be
equal to that which is contained under the lines AB and BC twice, so that that
which is contained under AB and BC, should also be rational: which is contrary
to the supposition. Wherefore the lines AB and BC are unequal. Suppose then
that the line AB be the greater, and let the line BD be equal to the line BC.
Wherefore (by the 7. of the second) the squares of the lines AB and BD, are
equal to that which is contained under the lines AB and BC twice and to the
square of the line AD. But the line DB is equal to the line BC. Wherefore the
squares of the lines AB and BC, are equal to that which is contained under the
lines AB and BC twice and to the square of the line AD. Wherefore the squares
of the lines AB and BC are greater then that which is contained under the lines
AB and BC twice, by the square of the line AD: which was required to be proved.

This Proposition teaches the production of the fifth irrational line, which
is called a greater line: which is by the sense of this Proposition thus
defined.

A greater line is an irrational line, which is composed of two right lines
which are incommensurable in power, Diffinition of a greater line.
the squares of which added together, make a rational superficies, and the
parallelogramme which they contain, is mediall. It is therefore called a
greater line, as Theon says, because the squares of the two lines of which it
is composed, added together being rational, are greater then the mediall
superficies contained under them twice. And it is convenient that the
denomination be taken of the propriety of the rational part, rather then of
the mediall part.

The 28. Theoreme. The 40. Proposition. If two right lines inco^mensurable in
power be added together, having that which is made of the squares of them added
together mediall, and the parallelogramme contained under them rational: the
whole right line is irrational, and is called a line containing in power a
rational and a mediall superficies.
LEt these two right lines AB and BC being incommensurable in power, and making
that which is required in the Proposition be added together. (The 34. of the
tenth teaches to ^inde out two such lines). Then I say, that the whole line AC
is irrational. Demonstration.
For forasmuch as that which is composed of the squares of the lines AB and BC
is mediall, but that which is contained under the lines AB and BC twice is
rational, therefore that which is composed of the squares of the lines AB and
BC, is incommensurable to that which is contained under the lines AB and BC
twice. Wherefore (by the 16. of the tenth) that which is composed of the
squares of the lines AB and BC together with that which is contained under the
lines AB and BC twice, which (by the 4. of the second) is the square of the
whole line AG, is incommensurable to that which is contained under the lines AB
and BC twice. But that which is contained under the lines AB and BC twice, is
rational, for that which is contained under the lines AB and BC once is put to
be rational. Wherefore the square of the whole line AC is irrational.
Wherefore the line AC also is irrational. And it is therefore called a line
containing in power a rational and a mediall superficies, because the power
thereof contains two superficieces, whereof the one is rational, namely,
that which is contained under the two parts, and the other mediall, namely,
that which is made of the squares of the parts added together. And by reason
that the rational is in order of nature and of knowledge before the mediall,
therefore the first part of the denomination is taken of it, and the second part
is taken of the mediall which was required to be proved.

In this Proposition is taught the generation of the sixth irrational line,
which is called a line whose power is rational and mediall. The definition of
which is gathered of this Proposition after this manner.

A line whose power is rational and mediall, is an irrational line which is
made of two right lines incommensurable in power added together, Diffinition of
a line whose power is rational and mediall.
whose squares added together make a mediall superficies, but that supersicies
which they contain is rational. The reason of the name is before set forth in
the Proposition.

The 29. Theoreme. The 41. Proposition. If two right lines incommensurable in
power be added together, having that which is composed of the squares of them
added together mediall, and the parallelogramme contained under them mediall,
and also incommensurable to that which is composed of the squares of them added
together^ the whole right line is irrational, and is called a line containing
in power two medials.
LEt these two right lines AB and BC being incommensurable in power, and having
that which is composed of the squares of the lines AB and BC mediall, and the
parallelogramme which is contained under the lines AB and BC mediall, and also
incommensurable to that which is composed of the squares of the lines AB and BC
added together, Construction.
be added together (the 35. of the tenth teaches to find out two such lines)
Then I say that the whole line AC is irrational. Take a rational line DE, and
(by ^he 44. of the first) upon the line DE apply the parallelogramme DF equal
to the squares of the lines AB and BC. And upon the line GF, which is equal to
the line DE, apply the parallelogra^me GH equal to that which is contained
under the lines AB and BC tw^se. Wherefore the whole parallelogramme DH is
equal to the square of the line AC (by the 4. of the second. Demonstration.
) And forasmuch as that which is composed of the squares of the lines AB and BC
is mediall and is equal to the parrllelogramme DF: therefore DF also is mediall
(by that which was said in the 38. proposition of this book). And it is
applied upon the rational line DE. Wherefore the line DG is rational and
incommensurable in length unto ye line DE (by the 22. of the tenth). And by the
same reason the line GK is rational and inco^mesurable in length unto the line
GF, that is, unto the line DE. And forasmuch as that which is composed of ye
squares of the lines AB and BC added together, is by supposition
inco^mensurable to that which is contained under the lines AB and BC twice,
therefore also the parallelogramme DF is incommensurable unto the
parallelogramme GH. Wherefore also the line DG is incommensurable unto the line
GK (by the first of the sixth) and by the tenth of the tenth. But it is now
proved that they are rational. Wherefore the lines DG and GK are rational
commensurable in power only. Wherefore (by the 36. of the tenth) the whole line
DK is rational, and is called a binomiall line, but the line DE is
irrational. Wherefore the parallelogramme DH is irrational (by the corollary
added after the 22. proposition of the tenth). Wherefore also the line which
contains it in power is irrational: but the line AC contains it in power.
Wherefore the line AC is irrational, and is called a line containing in power
two medials. It is called a line containing in power two medials, for that it
contains in power two mediall supersicieces; one of which is composed of the
squares of the lines AB and BC added together; and the other is that which is
contained under the lines AB and BC twice: which was required to be
demonstrated.

In this proposition is taught the nature of the 7. kind of irrational lines
which is called a line whose power is two medials. The definition whereof is
taken of this proposition after this manner.

A line whose power is two medials, is an irrational line which is composed of
two right lines incommensurable in power, Diffinition of a li^e containing in
power two medials.
the squares of which added together, make a mediall superficies, and that
which is contained under them is also mediall, and moreover it is
incommensurable to that which is composed of the two squares added together.

The reason why this line is called a line whose power is two medials, was
before in the end of the demonstration declared.

And that the said irrational lines are divided one way only, that is, in one
point only, into the right lines of which they are composed, and which make
every one of the kinds of those irrational lines, shall straight way be
demonstrated: but first will we demonstrate two assumptes here following.

An Assumpt.
Take a right line and let the same be AB, and divide it into two unequal
parts in the point C, An Assumpt.
and again divide the same line AB into two other unequal parts, in an other
point namely, in D, and let the line AC (by supposition) be greater then the
line DB. Then I say that the squares of the lines AC and BC added together, are
greater then the squares of the lines AD and DB added together. Divide the line
AB (by the 10. of the first) into two equal parts in the point E. And
forasmuch as the line AC is greater then the line DB, take away the line DC
which is common to them both: wherefore the residue AD is greater then the
residue CB, but the line AE is equal to the line EB. Wherefore the line DE is
less then the line EC. Wherefore the points C and D are not equally distant
from the point E, which is the point of the section into two equal parts. And
forasmuch as (by the 5. of the second) that which is contained under the lines
AC and CB together with the square of the line EC is equal to the square of
the line EB. And by the same reason that which is contained under the lines AD
and DB together with the square of the line DE, is also equal to the self same
square of the line EB: wherefore that which is contained under the lines AC and
CB together with the square of the line EC is equal to that which is contained
under the lines AD and DB together with the square of the line DE: of which the
square of the line DE is less then the square of the line EC (for it was
proved that the line DE is less then the line EC). Wherefore the
parallelogramme remaining, contained under the lines AC and CB is less the^
the parallelogramme remaining contained under the lines AD and DB. Wherefore
also that which is contained under the lines AC and CB twice is less then that
which is contained under the lines AD and DB twice. But (by the fourth of the
second) the square of the whole line AB is equal to that which is composed of
the squares of the lines AC and CB together with that which is contained under
the lines AC and CB twice, and by the same reason the square of the whole line
AB is equal to that which is composed of the squares of the lines AD and DB
together with that which is contained under the lines AD and DB twice: wherefore
that which is composed of the squares of the lines AC and CB together with that
which is contained under the lines AC and CB twice, is equal to that which is
composed of the squares of the lines AD and DB, together with that which is
contained under the lines AD and DB twice. But it is already proved that that
which is contained under the lines AC and CB twice, is less then that which is
contained under the lines AD and DB twice. Wherefore the residue, namely, that
which is composed of the squares of the lines AC and CB is greater then the
residue, namely, then that which is composed of the squares of the lines AD and
DB: which was required to be demonstrated.

An Assumpt.
A rational superficies exceeds a rational superficies, by a rational
superficies.

Let AD be a rational superficies, and let it exceed AF being also a
rational superficies by the superficies ED. Then I say that the superficies ED
is also rational. For the parallelogramme AD is commensurable to the
parallelogramme AF, for that either of them is rational. Wherefore (by the
second part of the 15. of the tenth) the parallelogramme AF is commensurable to
the parallelogramme ED. But the the parallelogramme AF is rational. Wherefore
also the parallelogramme ED is rational.

The 30. Theoreme. The 42. Proposition. A binomiall line is in one point only
divided into his names. The second Senary by composition.

SVppose that AB be a binomiall line, and in the point G let it be divided into
his names, that is, into the lines whereof the whole line AB is composed.
Wherefore these lines AC and CB are rational commensurable in power only. Now
I say that the line AB cannot in any other point besides C be divided into two
rational lines commensurable in power only. Demonstration leading to an
impossibility.
For if it be possible, let it be divided in the point D, so that let the lines
AD and DE b^ rational commensurable in power only. First this manifest, that
neith^^ of these poin^es C and D deuideth the right line AB into two equal
parts. Otherwise the lines AC and CB should be rational commensurable in
length and so likewise should the lines AD and DB be. For every line measures
it self, and any other line equal to it self. Moreover the line DB is either
one and the same with the line AC^ that is, is equal to the line AC, o^ else it
is greaterthen the line AC, either else it is less then it. If DB be equal to
the line AC, then putting the line DB upon the line AC each ends of the one,
shall agree with each ends of the other. Wherefore putting the point B upon the
point A, the point D also shall fall upon the point C, and the line AD which is
the rest of the line AC, shall also be equal to the line CB, which is the rest
of the line DB. Wherefore the line AB is divided into his names in the point C.
And so also shall the line AB being divided in the point D be divided in the
self ^ame point that the self same line AB was before divided in the point C,
which is contrary to the suppositio^. For by suppositio^ it was divided in
sundry points, namely, in C and D. But if the line DB be greater^ the the line
AC, let the line AB be de^ided into two equal parts in the point E. Wherefore
the points C and D shall not equally be distant from the point E (Now (by the
first assupt going before this proposition) that which is composed of the
squares of ye lines AD and DB is greater the^ that which is composed of the
squares of the lines AC and CB^ But that which is composed of the squares of
the lines AD and DB together with that which is contained under the lines AD
and DB twice, is equal to that which is composed of the squares of the lines
AC and CB together with that which is contained under the lines AC and CB
twice, for either of them is equal to the square of the whole line AB (by the
4. of the second) wherefore how much that which is composed of the squares of
the lines AD and DB added together is greater then that which is composed of
the squares of the lines AC and CB added together, so much is that which is
contained under the lines AC and CB twice greater then that which is contained
under the lines AD and DB twice. But that which is composed of the squares of
the lines AD and DB excedeth that which is composed of the squares of the lines
AC and CB by a rational superficies (by the 2. assumpt going before this
proposition^) For that which is composed of the squares of the lines AD and DB
is rational, and so also is that which is composed of the squares of the lines
AC and CB: for the lines AD and DB are put to be rational commensurable in
power only, and so likewise are the lines AC and CB. Wherefore also that which
is contained under the lines AC and CB twice, exceeds that which is contained
under the lines AD and DB twice by a rational superficies, when yet
notwithstanding they are both medial superficieces (by the 21. of the tenth)
which (by the 26. of the same) is impossible. And if the line DB be less then
the line AC, we may by the like demonstration prove the self same
impossibility. Wherefore a binomiall line is in one point only divided into
his names: Which was required to be demonstrated.

(...)ollary added by Flussates.
Two ration (...)surable in power only being added together cannot be equal
to two other rational line (...) in power only added together. A Corollary.
For either of them should make a binomia(...) so should a binomiall line be
divided into his names in more points then on^ ^^ch by this proposition is
proved to be impossible. The like shall follow in the five (...) irrational
lines as touching their two names.

The 31. Problem. The 43. Proposition. A first bimediall line is in one point
only divided into his names.
SVppose that AB be a first bimediall line, and let it be divided into his
parts in the point C, so that let the lines AC and CB be mediall co^mensurable
in power only, and containing a rational superficies. Then I say that the
line AB can not be divided into his names in any other point then in C. For if
it be possible let it be divided into his names in the point D, Demonstration
leading to an impossibil^^e.
so that let AD and DB be mediall lines commensurable in power only,
comprehending a rational superficies. Now forasmuch as how much that which is
contained under the lines AD and DB twice di^ferreth from that which is
contained under the lines AC and CB twice, so much differreth that which is
composed of the squares of the lines AD and DB from that which is composed of
the squares of the lines AC and CB: but that which is contained under the lines
AD and DB twice differreth from that which is contained under the lines AC and
CB twice, by a rational superficies (by the second assumpt going before the
41. of the tenth). For either of those superficieces is rational. Wherefore
that which is composed of the squares of the lines AC and CB differs from
that which is composed of the squares of the lines AD and DB by a rational
superficies, when yet they are both mediall superficieces: which is impossible.
Wherefore a first bimediall line is in one point only divided into his names:
which was required to be proved.

The 32. Theoreme. The 44. Proposition. A second bimediall line is in one point
only divided into his names.
SVppose that the line AB being a second bimediall line, be divided into his
names in the point C: so that let the lines AC and CB be mediall lines
commensurable in power only, comprehending a mediall superficies. It is
manifest that the point C deuideth not the whole line AB into two equal
parts. Demonstration leading to an impossibili^ie.
For the lines AC and CB are not commensurable in length the one to the other.
Now I say that the line AB cannot be divided into his names in any other point
but only in C. For if it be possible, let it be divided into his names in the
point D, so that let not the line AC be one and the same, that is, let it not
be equal, with the line DB. But let it be greater then it. Now it is manifest
(by the first assumpt going before the 42. proposition of this book) that the
squares of the lines AC and CB are greater then the squares of the lines AD and
DB. And also that the lines AD and DB are mediall lines commensurable in power
only, comprehending a mediall supersicies. Take a rational line OF. And (by
the 44. of the first) upon the line OF apply a rectangle parallelograme EK
equal to the square of the line AB. From which parallelograme take away the
parallelograme EG equal to the squares of the lines AC and CB Wherefore the
residue, namely, the parallelograme HK is equal to that which is contained
under the lines AC and CB twice. Again from the the parallelograme EK take
away the parallelograme EL equal to the squares of the lines AD and DB which
are less then the squares of the lines AC and CB. Wherefore the residue,
namely, the parallelograme MK is equal to that which is contained under the
lines AD and DB twice. And forasmuch as the squares of the lines AC and CB are
mediall, therefore the parallelograme EG also is mediall. Demonstration leading
to an imp^ssibilitie.
And it is applied upon the rational line EF^ wherefore the line EH is
rational and incommensurable in length to the line OF. And by the same reason,
the parallelograme HK is mediall (for that which is equal unto it, namely,
that which is contained under the lines AC and CB twice is mediall) therefore
the line HN is also rational and incommensurable in length unto the line OF.
And forasmuch as the lines AC and CB are mediall lines commensurable in power
only, therefore the line AC is incommensurable in length unto the line CB. But
as the line AC is to the line CB, so is the square of the line AC to that which
is contained under the lines AC and CB (by the 1. of the sixth). Wherefore the
square of the line AC is incommensurable to that which is contained under the
lines AC and CB. But (by the 16. of the tenth) unto the square of the line AC
are commensurable the squares of the lines AC and CB added together, for the
lines AC and CB are commensurable in power only. And unto that which is
contained under the lines AC and CB is commensurable that which is contained
under the lines AC and CB twice. Wherefore that which is composed of the
squares of the lines AC and CB, is incommensurable to that which is contained
under the lines AC and CB twice. But to the squares of the lines AC and CB is
equal the parallelograme EG, and to that which is contained under the lines AC
and CB twice is equal the paralelograme HK. Wherefore the parallelograme EG is
incommensurable to the parallelograme HK. Wherefore also the line EH is
incommensurable in length to the line HN. And the lines EH and HN are
rational. Wherefore they are rational commensurable in power only: but if
two rational lines commensurable in power only be added together, the whole
line is irrational, and is called a binomiall line (by the 36. of the tenth).
Wherefore the binomiall line EN is in the point H divided into his names. And
by the same reason also may it be proved that the lines EM and MN are rational
lines commensurable in power only. Wherefore EN being a binomiall line is
divided into his names in sundry points, namely, in H and M, neither is the
line EH one and the same, that is, equal with MN. For the squares of the lines
AC and CB are greater then the squares of the lines BD and AD (by the 1.
assumpt put after the 41. of the tenth). But the squares of the lines AD and DB
are greater then that which is contained under the lines AD and DB twice (by
the assumpt put after the 39. of the tenth). Wherefore the squares of the lines
AC and CB, that is, the parallelograme EG is much greater then that which is
contained under the lines AD and DB twice, that is then the parallelograme MK.
Wherefore (by the first of the sixth) the line EH is greater then the line MN.
Wherefore EH is not one and the same with MN. Wherefore a binomiall line is in
two sundry points divided into his names. Which is impossible. The self same
absurdity also will follow if the line AC be supposed to be less then the
line DB. A second binomiall line therefore is not divided into his names in
sundry points. Wherefore it is divided in one only: which was required to be
demonstrated.

The 33. Theoreme. The 45. Proposition. A greater line is in one point only
divided into his names.
LEt AB being a greater line be divided into his names in the point C, so that
let the lines AC and CB be rational incommensurable in power, having that
which is composed of the squares of the lines AC and CB rational, and that
which is contained under the lines AC and CB mediall. Demonstration leading to
an impossibi^^^e.
Then I say that the line AB can not in any other point then in C be divided
into his names. For if it be possible, let it be divided into his names in the
point D, so that let AD and DB be lines incomme^surable in power, having that
which is composed of the squares of the lines AD and DB rational, and that
which is contained under the lines AD and DB mediall. Now forasmuch as how much
the squares of the lines AC and CB di^^er from the squares of the lines AD and
DB, so much differs that which is contained under the lines AD and DB twice
from that which is contained under the lines AC and CB twice, by those things
which have be^e said in the demonstration of the 42. proposition. But the
squares of the lines AC and CB exceed the squares of the lines AD and DB by a
rational super^icies (for they are either of them rational). Wherefore that
which is containe^ ^^der the lines AD and DB twice exceeds that which is
contained under the lines AC and CB twice by a rational super^icies: when as
either of them is a mediall supers^^^es. Which is impossible (by the 26. of the
tenth). Wherefore a greater line is in one point only divided into his names:
which was required to be proved.

The 34. Theoreme. The 46. Proposition. A line containing in power a rational
and a mediall, is in one point only divided into his names.
LEt AB being a line containing in power a rational and a mediall, be divided
into his names in the point C, so that let the lines AC and CB be
incommensurable in power, having that which is composed of the squares of the
lines AC and CB mediall, and that which is contained under the lines AC and CB
rational. Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
Then I say, that the line AB can not in any other point be divided into his
names but only in the point C. For if it be possible, let it be divided into
his names in the point D, so that let the lines AD and DB be incommensurable in
power, having that which is composed of the squares of the lines AD and DB
mediall, and that which is contained under the lines AD and DB rational. Now
forasmuch as how much that which is contained under the lines AD and DB twice
differs from that which is contained under the lines AC and CB twice, so much
differ the squares of the lines AC and CB added together from the squares of
the lines AD and DB added together. But that which is contained under the lines
AC and CB twice excedeth that which is contained under the lines AD and DB
twice by a rational super^icies (for either of them is rational). Wherefore
also the squares of the lines AC and CB added together, exceed the squares of
the lines AD and DB added together by a rational superficies, when yet each of
them is a mediall superficies: which is impossible. Wherefore a line containing
in power a rational and a mediall, is in one point only divided into his
names: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 35. Theoreme. The 47. Proposition. A line containing in power two medials,
is in one point only divided into his names.
SVppose that AB being a line containing in power two medialls, be divided into
his names in the point C, so that let the lines AC and CB be incommensurable in
power, having that which is composed of the squares of the lines AC and CB
mediall, and that also which is contained under the lines AC and CB mediall,
and moreover incommensurable ^o that which is composed of the squares of the
lines AC and CB. Then I say, Construction.
that the line AB can in no other point be divided into his names but only in
the point C. For if it be possible, let it be divided into his names in the
point D, so that let not the line AC be one and the same, that is, equal with
the line DB: but by supposition let the line AC be the greater. And take a
rational line OF. And (by the 43. of the first) upon the line OF apply a
rectangle parallelogra^me EG equal to that which is composed of the squares of
the lines AC and CB: and likewise upon the line HC, which is equal to the line
OF, apply the parallelogramme HK equal to that which is contained under the
lines AC and CB twice. Wherefore the whole parallelogramme EK is equal to the
square of the line AB. Demonstration leading to an absurdity.
Again upon the same line OF describe the parallelogramme EL equal to the
squares of the lines AD and DB. Wherefore the residue, namely, that which is
contained under the lines AD and DB twice, is equal to the parallelogramme
remaining, namely, to MK. And forasmuch as that which is composed of the
squares of the lines AC and CB, is (by supposition) mediall, therefore the
parallelogra^me EG which is equal unto it, is also mediall: and it is applied
upon the rational line OF. Wherefore (by the 22. of the tenth) the line HE is
rational and incommensurable in length unto the line OF. And by the same
reason also the line HN is rational and incommensurable in length to the same
line OF. And forasmuch as that which is composed of the squares of the lines AC
and CB is incommensurable to that which is contained under the lines AC and CB
twice (for it is supposed to be incommensurable to that which is contained
under the lines AC and CB once): therefore the parallelogramme EG is
incommensurable to the parallelogramme H ^. Wherefore the line EH also is
incommensurable in length to the line HN, and they are rational lines:
wherefore the lines EH and HN are rational commensurable in power only.
Wherefore the whole line EN is a binomiall line, and is divided into his names
in the point H. And in like sort may we prove, that the same binomiall line EN
is divided into his names in the point M, and that the line EH is not one and
the same that is equal with the line MN, as it was proved in the end of the
demonstration of the 44. of this book. Wherefore a binomiall line is divided
into his names in two sundry points: which is impossible (by the 42. of the
tenth). Wherefore a line containing in power two medials, is not in sundry
points divided into his names. Wherefore it is divided in one point only:
which was required to be demonstrated.

Second Definitions.
IT was showed before that of binomiall lines there were six kinds, Six
kinds of binomiall lines.
the definitions of all which are here now set, and are called second
definitio^s. All binomiall lines, as all other kinds of irrational lines, are
conceived, considered, and perfectly understood only in respect of a
rational line (whose parts as before is taught, are certain, and known, and
may be distinctly expressed by number) unto which line they are compared. This
rational^ line must ye ever have before your eyes, in all these definitions, so
shall they all be ^asie enough.

A binomiall line co^^^ste^h of two pa^t^s.
A binomiall line (ye know) is made of two parts or names, whereof the one is
greater then the other. Wherefore the power or square also of the one is greater
then the power or square o^ the other. The three first kinds of binomiall
lines, namely, the first, the secon^, and the third, are produced, when the
square of the greater name or part of a binom^all e^cedeth the square of the
less name or part, by the square of a line which is comm^nsurable in length to
it, namely, to the greater. The three last kinds, namely, the fourth, the
^i^t, and the sixth, are produced, when the square of the greater name or part
^^^^edeth the square of the less name or part, by the square of a line
incommensurable in length unto it, that is, to the greater part.

First d^^^initi^n.
A first binomiall line is, whose square of the greater part exceeds the
square of the less part ^y the square of a line commensurable in length to the
greater part, and the greater part is also commensurable in length to the
rational line first set.
As let the ra^ion^ll line first set be AB: whose parts are distinctly known:
suppose also that the line CE be a binomiall line, whose names or parts let be
CD and DE. And let the square of the line CD the greater part excede the square
of the line DE the less part by the square of the line FG: which line FG, let
b^e commensu^able in length to the line CD, which is the greater part of the
binomiall line. And moreover let the line CD the greater part be commensurble
in length to the rational line first set, namely, to AB. So by this d^^inition
the binomiall line CE is a first binomiall line.

Secon^ diffinition.
A second binomiall line is, when the square of the greater part exceeds the
square of the less part by the square of a line commensurable in length unto
it, and the less part is commensurable in length to the rational line first
set.
As (supposing ever the rational line) let CE be a binomiall line divided in
the point D. The square of whose greater part CD let exceed the square of the
less part DE by the square of the line FG, which line ^G let be co^mensurable
in length unto the line CD the gr^ater p^^^ o^ the binomiall line. And let also
the line DE the less part of the binomiall line be commensu^able in l^ngth to
the rational line first set AB. So by this definition the binomiall line CE is
a second binomiall line.

Third ^^^^^^ition.
A third binomiall line is, when the square of the greater part excedeth the
square of the less part, by the square of a line co^mensurable in length unto
it. And neither part is commensurable in length to the rational line given.
As suppose the line CE to be a binomiall line: whose parts are joined
together in the point D: and let the square of the line CD the greater part
exceed the square of the less part DE by the square of the line FG, and let
the line FG be commensurable in length to the line CD the greater part of the
binomiall. Moreover, let neither the greater part CD, nor the less part DE, be
commensurable in length to the rational line AB, then is the line CE by this
definition a third binomiall line.

A fourth binomiall line is, Fourth diffinition.
when the square of the greater part exceeds the square of the less by the
square of a line incommensurable in length unto the greater part. And the
greater is also commensurable in length to the rational line.
As let the line CE be a binomiall line, whose parts let be CD and DE, and let
the square of the line CD the greater part exceed the square of the line DE
the less, by the square of the line FG. And let the line FG be incommensurable
in length to the line CD the greater. Let also the line CD the greater part be
commensurable in length unto the rat^onall line AB. Then by this definition the
line CE is a fourth binomiall line.

A fifth binomiall line is, Fifth dif^inition.
when the square of the greater part exceeds the square of the less part, by
the square of a line incommensurable unto it in length. And the less part also
is commensurable in length to the rational line given.
As suppose that CE be a binomiall line, whose greater part let be CD, and let
the less part be DE. And let the square of the line CD excede the square of
the line DE by the square of the line FG, which let be inco^mensurable in
length unto the line CD the greater part of the binomiall line. And let the
line DE the second part of the binomiall line be commensurable in length unto
the rational line AB. So is the line CE by this definition a fifth binomiall
line.

A sixth binomiall line is, Sixth diffinition.
when the square of the greater part exceeds the square of the less, by the
square of a line incommensurable in length unto it. And neither part is
commensurable in length to the rational line given.
As let the line CE be a binomiall line, divided into his names in the point D.
The square of whose greater part CD let exceed the square of the less part DE
by the square of the line FG, and let the line FG be incommensurable in length
to the line CD the greater part of the binomiall line. Let also neither CD the
greater part, nor DE the less part be commensurable in length to the rational
line AB. And so by this definition the line CE is a sixth binomiall line. So ye
see that by these definitions, and their examples, and declarations, all the
kinds of binomiall lines are made very plain.

This is to be noted that here is nothing spoken of those lines, both whose
portions a^e com^ensurable in length unto the rational line first set, for
that such lines cannot be binomiall lines. ^or binomiall lines are composed of
two rational lines commensurable in Power only (by the 36. of this book).
But lines both whose portions are comm^nsurable in length to the rational line
first set are not binomiall lines. For that the parts of such lines should by
the 12. of this book be commensurable in length the one to the other. And so
should they not be such lines as are required to the composition of a binomiall
line. Moreover such lines should not be irrational but rational, for that
they are commensurable t^ ^ch of the parts whereof they are composed (by the
15. o^ this book). And therefore they should be rational for that the lines
which compos^ them are rational.

The 13. Problem. The 48. proposition. To find out a first binomiall line.
The third Senary by composition.
TAke two numbers AC and CB, and let them be such, that the number which is made
of them both added together, namely, AB, have unto one of them, (...), unto BC
that proportion that a square number has to a square numb^r. ^ut unto the
other, namely, unto CA let it not have that proportion that a square number
has to a square number (such as is every square number which may be divided
into a square number and into a number not square). Construction.
Take also a certain rational line, and let the same be D. And unto the line
D let the line OF be commensurable in length. Wherefore the line OF is
rational. And as the number AB is to the number AC, so let the square of the
line OF be to the square of an other ^i^e, namely, of FG (by the corollary of
the sixth of ye tenth). Wherefore the square of the line OF has to the square of
the line FG that proportion that number has to number. Wherefore the square of
the line OF is commensurable to the square of the line FG (by the 6. of this
book) And the line OF is rational. Demonstrati^n.
Wherefore the line FG also is rational. And forasmuch as the number AB has
not to the number AC, that proportion that a square number has to a square
number, neither shall the square of the line OF have to the square of the line
FG that proportion that a square number has to a square number. Wherefore the
line OF is incommensurable in length to the line FG (by the 9. of this book).
Wherefore the lines OF and FG are rational commensurable in power only.
Wherefore the whole line EG is a binomiall line (by the 36. of the tenth). I
say also that it is a first binomiall line. For for that as the (...) BA is to
the number AC, so is the square of the line OF to the square of the line ^G:
but the number BA is greater then the number AC: wherefore the square of the
line ^F is also greater then the square o^ the line FG. Unto the square of the
line OF let the squares of the lines FG and H be equal (which how to find out
is taught in the assumpt put ^ft^r the 13. of the t^nth). And f^r that as the
number BA is to the number AC, so is the square of the line OF to the square of
the line FG: therefore (by conversion or e^ersion of proportion (by the
corollary of the 19. of the fifth) as the number AB is to the number BC, so is
the square of the line OF to the square of the line H. But the number AB has
to the number BC that proportion that a square number has to a square number.
Wherefore also the square of the line OF has to the square of the line H that
proportion that a square number has to a square number. Wherefore the line OF
is commensurable in length to the line H (by the 9. of this book. Wherefore
the line OF is in power more then the line FG by the square of a line
commensurable in length to the line OF. And the lines OF and FG are rational
commensurable in power only. And the line OF is commensurable in length to the
rational line D. Wherefore the line EG is a first binomiall line: which was
required to be done.

The 14. Problem. The 49. Proposition. To find out a second binomiall line.
TAke two numbers AC and CB, and let them be such that the number made of them
both added together, namely, Construction.
AB have unto BC that proportion that a square number has to a square number,
and unto the number CA let it not have that proportion that a square number
has to a square number, as it was declared in the former proposition. Take
also a ra^ionall line, and let the same be D, and unto the line D let the line
FG be commensurable in length Wherefore FG is a rational line. And as the
number CA is to the number AB so let the square of the line GF be to the square
of the line FE (by the 6. of the tenth), Wherefore the square of the lin^ GF is
commensurable to the square of the line FE. Wherefore also FE is a rational
line. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the number CA has not unto the number AB that proportion
that a square number has to a square number, therefore neither also the squar^
of the line GF has to the square of the line FE that proportion that a square
number has to a square number. Wherefore the line GF is incommensurable in
length unto the line FE (by the 9. of the tenth): wherefore the lines FG and FE
are rational commensurable in power only. Wherefore the whole line EG is a
binomiall line. I say moreover that the lin^ EG is a second binomiall line. For
for that by contrary proportion as the number BA is to the number AC, so is the
square of the line OF to the square of the line FG. But the number BA is
greater then the number AC, wherefore also the square of the line OF is greater
then the square of the line FG. Unto the square of the line OF, let the squares
of the lin^s GF and H be equal. Now by conversion (by the corollary of the 19.
of of the fifth) as the number AB is to the number BC, so is the square of the
line OF to the square of the line H. But the number AB has to the number BC
that proportion that a square number has to a square number. Wherefore the
square of the line OF has to the square of the line H, that proportion that a
square number has to a square number. Wherefore (by the 9. of the tenth) the
line OF is commensurable in length unto the line H. Wherefore the line OF is in
power more then the line FG by the square of a line commensurable in length
unto the line OF: and the lines OF and FG are rational commensurable in power
only, and FG being the less name ^s commensurable in length unto the
rational line given, namely, to D. Wherefore EG is a second binomiall line:
which was required to be done.

The 15. Problem. The 50. Proposition. To find out a third binomiall line.
Construction.
TAke two numbers AC and CB, and let them be such that the numb^r made of them
both added together, namely, AB, have to the number BC that proportion that a
square number has to a square number. But to the number AC let it not have
that proportion that a square number has to a square number, as it was
declared in the two former. And take also some other number that is not a
square number, and let the same be D, and let not the number D have either to
the number BA, or to the number AC that proportion that a square number has to
a square number. And take a rational line and let the the same be E. And as the
number D is to the number AB, so let the square of the line E be to the square
of the line FG. Wherefore the square of the line E is co^mensurable to the
square of the line FG, but the line E is rational, wherefore the line FG also is
rational. And for that the number D has not to the number AB that proportion
that a square number has to a square number, neither also shall the square of
the line E have to the square of the line FG that proportion that a square
number has to a square number. Wherefore the line E is incommensurable in
length to the line FG (by the 9. of the tenth.) Now again as the number AB is
to the number AC, so let the square of the line FG be to the square of the line
GH. Wherefore the square of the line FG is commensurable to the square of the
line GH. Demonstration.
And the line FG is rational. Wherefore also the line GH is rational. And for
that the number BA has not to the number AC, that proportion that a square
number has to a square number, therefore neither also has the square of the
line FG to the square of the line GH that proportion that a square number has
to a square number. Wherefore the line FG is inco^mensurable in length to the
line GH. Wherefore the lines FG and GH are rational co^mensurable in power only.
Wherefore the whole line FH is a binomial line. I say moreover that it is a
third binomial line. For for that as the number D is to the number AB, so is
the square of the line E to the square of the line FG: but as the number AB is
to the number AC, so is the square of the line FG to the square of the line GH^
therefore o^ equality (by the 22. of the fifth) as the number D is to the number
AC, so is the square of the line E to the square of the line GH. But the number
D has not to the number A. C that proportion that a square number has to a
square number. Wherefore neither also has the square of the line E to the
square of the line GH that proportion tha^ a square number has so a square
number. Wherefore the line E is incommensurable in length to the line GH. And
for that as the number AB is to the number AC, so is the square of the line FG
to the square o^ the line GH, therefore the square of the line FG is greater
then the square of the line GH. Unto the square of the line FG, let the squares
of the lines GH and K be equal. Wherefore (by ^uerse proportion by the corollary
of the 19. of the ^ift) as the number AB is to the number BC, so is the square
of ye line FG to the square of the line K. But the number AB has to the number
BC that proportion that a square number has to a square number. Wherefore also
the square of the line FG has to the square of the line K that proportion that
a square number has to a square number. Wherefore the line FG is commensurable
in length to the line K. Wherefore the line FG is in power more then the line GH
by the square of a line commensurable in length unto it. And the lines FG and
GH are rational commensurable in power only, and neither of them is
commensurable in length unto the rational line E: wherefore the line FH is a
third binomiall line: which was required to be done.

The 16. Problem. The 51. Proposition. To find out a fourth binomiall line.
TAke two numbers AC and CB, Const^uction.
and let the^ be such that the number made of the^ both added together, namely,
AB, have to neither of the numbers AC and CB that proportion that a square
number has to a square number (such as is every square number to two numbers
not square, which are less the^ it and make the said square number). And take
a rational line, and let the same be D. And unto the line D let the line OF be
co^mensurable in length. Demonstration.
Wherefore OF is a rational line, and as the number BA is to the number AC, so
let the square of the line OF be to the square of ye line FG. Wherefore the
square of the line OF is commensurable to the square of the line FG, and the
line BF is a rational line. Wherefore also the line FG is a rational line. And
for that the number BA has not to the number AC that proportion that a square
number has to a square number, neither also shall the square of the line OF
have to the square of the line FG that proportion that a square number has to
a square number. Wherefore the line OF is incommensurable in length to the line
FG. Wherefore the lines OF and FG are rational commensurable in power only.
Wherefore the whole line EG is a binomiall line. I say moreover that it is a
fourth binomiall line. For for that as the number BA is to the number AC, so is
the square of the line OF to the square of the line FG. But the number BA is
greater then the number AC. Wherefore also the square of the line OF is greater
then the square of the line FG. Unto the square of the line OF let the squares
of the lines FG and H be equal. Wherefore by conversion (by the corollary of
the 19. of the fifth) as the number AB is to the number BC, so is the square of
the line OF to the square of the line H. But the number AB has not to the
number BC that proportion that a square number has to a square number:
therefore neither also has the square of the line OF to the square of the line
H that proportion that a square number has to a square number. Wherefore (by
the 9. of the tenth) the line OF is inco^mensurable in length unto the line H.
Wherefore the line OF is in power more the^ the line FG by the square of a line
incommensurable in length unto it. And the lines OF and FG are rational
commensurable in power only, and the line OF is commensurable in length to the
rational line D. Wherefore the line EG is a fourth binomiall line: which was
required to be found out.

The 17. Problem. The 52. Proposition. To find out a fifth binomiall line.
TAke two numbers AC and CB, and let them be such, that the number AB have to
neither of the numbers AC or CB that proportion that a square number has to a
square number, Construction.
as in the former proposition. And take a rational line and let the same be D.
And unto the line D let the line FG be commensurable in length. Wherefore the
line FG is rational. And as the number CA is to the number AB, so let the
square of the line GF be to the square of the line OF. Demonstration.
Wherefore the square of the line GF is commensurable to the square of the line
FE. Wherefore also the line FE is rational. An^ for that the number CA has
not to the number AB that proportion that a square number has to a square
number, ther^ore neither also has the square of the line GF to the square of
the line FE that proportion that a square number has to a square number.
Wherefore (by the 9. of the tenth) the line GF is incommensurable in length to
the line FE. Wherefore the lines OF and FG are rational commensurable in power
only. Wherefore the whole line EG is a binomiall line. I say moreover that it is
a fifth binomiall line. For for that as the number CA is to the number AB, so is
the square of the line GF to the square of the line FE, therefore contrariwise,
as the number BA is to the number AC, so is the square of the line OF to the
square of the line FG. but the number BA is greater then the number AC.
Wherefore also the square of the line OF is greater then the square of the line
FG. Unto the square of the line OF, let the squares of the lines FG and H be
equal. Wherefore by conversion (by the corollary of the 19. of the fifth) as the
number AB is to the number BC^ so is the square of the line OF to the square of
the line H. But the number AB has not to the number BC that proportion that a
square number has to a square number. Wherefore neither also has the square
of the line OF to the square of the line H that proportion that a square number
has to a square number. Wherefore (by the 9. of the tenth) the line OF is
incommensurable in length to the line H. Wherefore the line OF is in power more
then the line FG by the square of a line incommensurable in length unto it. And
the lines OF and FG are rational commensurable in power only. And the line FG
being the less name, is commensurable in length to the rational line given,
namely, to D. Wherefore the whole line EG is a fifth binomiall line: which was
required to be found out.

The 18. Problem. The 53. Proposition. To find out a sixth binomiall line.
TAke two numbers AC and CB, and let the^ be such that the number which is made
of them both added together, Construction.
namely, AB, have to neither of the numbers AC or CB that proportion that a
square number has to a square number. Take also any other number which is not
a square number, and let the same be D. And let not the number D have to any
one of these numbers AB and AC that proportion that a square number has to a
square number. Let there be put moreover a rational line, and let the same be
E. And as the number D is to the number AB, so let the square of the line E be
to the square of FG. Wherefore (by the 6. of the tenth) the line E is
commensurable in power to the line FG, and the line E is rational. Wherefore
also the line FG is rational. And for that the number D has not ^o the number
AB that proportion that a square number has to a square number, therefore
neither also shall the square of the line E have to the square of the line FG
that proportion that a square number has to a square number. Wherefore the
line FG is incommensurable in length to the line E. Again, as the number BA is
to the number AC, so let the square of the line FG be to the square of the line
GH. Demonstration.
Wherefore (by the 6. of the tenth) the square of the line FG is commensurable
to the square of the line GH. And the square of the line FG is rational.
Wherefore the square of the line GH is also rational. Wherefore also the line
GH is rational. And for that the number AB has not to the number AC, that
proportion that a square number has to a square number: therefor neither also
has the square of the line FG to the square of the line GH, that proportion
that a square number has to a square number. Wherefore the line FG is
incommensurable in length to the line GH. Wherefore the lines FG and GH are
rational commensurable in power only. Wherefore the whole line FH is a
binomiall line. I say moreover, that it is a sixth binomiall line. For for that
as the number D is to the number AB, so is the square of the line E to the
square of the line FG. And as the number BA is to the number AC, so is the
square of the line FG to the square of the line GH. Wherefore of equality (by
the 22. of the fifth) as the number D is to the number AC, so is the square of
the line E to the square of the line GH. But the number D has not to the
number AC that proportion that a square number has to a square number.
Wherefore neither also has the square of the line E to the square of the line
GH that proportion that a square number has to a square number. Wherefore the
line E is incommensurable in length to the line GH. And it is already proved,
that the line FG is also incommensurable in length to the line E. Wherefore
either of these lines FG and GH is incommensurable in length to the line E. And
for that as the number ^A is to the number AC; so is the square of the line FG
to the square of the line GH: therefore the square of the line FG is greater
then the square of the line GH. Unto the square of the line FG, let the squares
of the lines GH and K be equal. Wherefore by euersion of proportion, as the
number AB is to the number BC, so is the square of the line FG to the square of
the line K. But the number AB has not to the number BC that proportion that a
square number has to a square number. Wherefore neither also has the square
of the line FG to the square of the line K that proportion that a square number
has to a square number. Wherefore the line FG is incommensurable in length
unto the line K. Wherefore the line FG is in power more then the line GH, by
the square of a line incommensurable in length to it. And the lines FG and GH
are rational commensurable in power only. And neither of the lines FG and GH
is commensurable in length to the rational line given, namely, to E. Wherefore
the line FH is a sixth binomiall line: which was required to be found out.

A Corollary added out of Flussates.
By the 6. form^r Proposi^^^^^ it i^ manifest, ho^ (...) divide any right line
given into the names of every one of the six^ foresaid binomiall lines. A
Corollary added by Flussates.
For if it be required to divide a right line given into a first binomiall
line, then by the 48^ of this book find out a first binomiall line. And this
right line being so found out divided into his names, you may by the 10. of the
sixth, divide the right line given in like sort. And so in the other five
following.

Although I here note unto you this Corollary out of (...), in very conscience
and of grateful ^inde^ I am enforced to certify you, that, i^ any yeare^,
before the travails of Flussas (upon Eu^li^^^ Geometrical Elements) were
published, the order how to divide, not only the 6. Binomiall lines into their
names, but also to add to the 6. Resid^^ls their due parts: and f^rthermore
to divide all the other irrational^ lines (of this tenth book) into the parts
distinct, of which they are composed: with many other strange conclusions
Mathematical, to the better understanding of this tenth book and other
Mathematical books, most necessary, were by M. John Dee invented and
demonstrated: M. Dee his book called Ty^^c^ni^m Mathematicum.
as in his book, whose title is Tyrocinium Mathematicum (dedicated to Petru^
Nonnius, An. 1559.) may at large appear. Where also is one new art, with
sundry particular points, whereby the Mathematical Sciences, greatly may be
enriched. Which his book, I hope, God will one day allow him opportunity to
publishe: with diverse other his Mathematical and Metaphysicall labors and
inventions.

An Assumpt.
Is a right line be divided into two parts how soever: the rectangle
parallelogramme contained under both the parts, is the mean proportional
between the squares of the same parts. And the rectangle parallelogramme
contained under the whole line and one of the parts, is the mean
proportional between the square of the whole line and the square of the said
part.

This Assumpt as was before noted, f^ll^weth most ^ri^fly without farther
demonstration of the 25. of this book.
Suppose that there be two squares AB and BC, and let the lines DB and BE so be
put that they both make one right line. Wherefore (by the 14. of the first) the
lines FB and BG make also both one right line. And make perfect the
parallelogramme AC. Then I say, that the rectangle parallelogramme DG is the
mean proportional between the squares AB and BC: and moreover, that the
parallelogramme DC is the mean proportional between the squares AC and CB.
First the parallelogramme AG is a square. For forasmuch as the line DB is
equal to the line BF, and the line BE unto the line BG, therefore the whole
line DE is equal to the whole line FG. But the line DE is equal to either of
these lines AH and KC, and the line FG is equal to either of these lines AK
and HC (by the 34. of the first). Demonstration.
Wherefore the parallelogra^me AC is equilater, it is also rectangle (by the 29.
of the first). Wherefore (by the 46. of the first) the parallelogra^me AC is a
square. Now for that as the line FB is to the line BG, so is the line DB to the
line BE. But as ye line FB is to the line BG, so (by the 1. of the sixth) is the
parallelogra^me AB, which is the square of the line DB, to the parallelogramme
DG, and as the line DB is to the line BE, so is the same parallelogra^me DG to
the parallelogramme BC, which is the square of the line BE. Wherefore as the
square AB is to the parallelogramme DG, so is the same parallelogramme DG to
the square BC. Wherefore the parallelogramme DG is the mean proportional
between the squares AB and BC. I say moreover, that the parallelogramme DC is
the mean proportional between the squares AC and CB. For for that as the line
AD is to the line DK, so is the line KG to the line GC (for they are each equal
to each). Wherefore by composition (by the 18. of the fifth) as the line AK is
to the line KD, so is the line KC to the line CG. But as the line AK is to the
line KD, so is the square of the line AK, which is the square AC, to the
parallelogramme contained under the lines AK and KD, which is the
parallelogramme CD: and as the line KC is to the line CG, so also is the
parallelogramme DC to the square of the line GC, which is the square BC.
Wherefore as the square AC is to the parallelogramme DC, so is the
parallelogra^me DC to the square BC. Wherefore the parallelogramme DC is the
mean proportional between the squares AC and BC: which was required to be
demonstrated.

An Assumpt.
Magnitudes that are mean proportionalls between the self same or equal
magnitudes, are also equal the one to the other.

Suppose that there be three magnitudes A, B, C. An Assumpt.
And as A is to B, so let B be to C. And likewise as the same magnitude A is to
D, so let D be to the same magnitude C. Then I say that B and D are equal the
one the other. For the proportion of A unto C is double to that proportion
which A has to B (by the 10. definition of the fifth) and likewise the self
same proportion of A to C is (by the same definition) double to that proportion
which A has to D. But magnitudes whose equemultiplices are either equal or
the self same, are also equal. Wherefore as A is to B, so is A to D.
Wherefore (by the 9. of the fifth) B and D are equal the one to the other. So
shall if also be if there be other magnitudes equal to A and C, namely, E and
F, between which let the magnitude D be the mean proportional.

The 36. Theoreme. The 54. Proposition. If a superficies be contained under a
rational line and a first binomiall line: the line which contains in power
that superficies is an irrational line, and a binomiall line. The fourth
Senary by composition.

SVppose that the superficies ABCD, be contained under the rational line AB,
and under a first binomial line AD. Then I say that the line which contains
in power the superficies AC, is an irrational line, and a binomial line.
Construction.
For forasmuch as the line AD is a first binomial line, it is in one only point
divided into his names (by the 42. of this tenth): let it be divided into his
names in the point E. And let AE be the greater name. Now it is manifest that
the lines AE and ED are rational c^mmensurable in power only, and that the
line AE is in power more then the line ED, by the square of a line
commensurable in length to the line AE, and moreover that the line AE is
commensurable in length to the rational line given AB by the definition of a
first Binomiall line set before the 48. proposition of this tenth. Divide (by
the 10. of the first) the line ED into two equal parts in the point F. And
forasmuch as the line AE is in power more then the line ED by the square of a
line commensurable in length unto the line AE, therefore if upon the greater
line, namely, upon the line AE be applied a parallelogramme equal to the
fourth part of the square of the less line, that is, to the square of the line
OF, and wanting in form by a square, it shall divide the greater line, namely,
AE into two parts commensurable in length the one to the other (by the second
part of the 17. of the tenth.) Apply therefore upon the line AE a
parallelogramme equal to the square of the line OF, and wanting in form by a
square by the 28. of the sixth, and let the same be that which is contained
under the lines AG and GE. Wherefore the line AG is commensurable in length to
the line GE. Draw by the points G, E, and F, to either of these lines AB and
DG these parallel lines GH, EK, and FL (by the 31. of the first) And (by the
14. of the second) unto the parallelogramme AH describe an equal square SN.
And unto the parallelogramme GK describe (by the same) an equal square NP. And
let these lines MN and NX be so put, that they both make one right line.
Wherefore (by the 14. of the first) the lines RN and NO make also both one right
line. Demonstration.
Make perfect the parallelogramme SP. Wherefore the parallelogramme SP is a
square by those things which were demonstrated after the determination in the
first assumpt going before. And forasmuch as that which is contained under the
lines AG and GE is equal to the square of the line OF (by construction):
therefore as the line AG is to the OF, so is the line OF to the line EG (by the
14. or 17. of the sixth) Wherefore also (by the 1. of the sixth) as the
parallelogramme AH is to the parallelogramme EL, so is the parallelogramme EL
to the parallelogramme GK. Wherefore the parallelogramme EL is the mean
proportional between the parallelogrammes AH and GK. But the parallelogramme
AH is equal to the square SN, and the parallelogra^me GK is equal to the square
NP by co^struction. Wherefore the parallelogramme EL is the mean proportional
between the squares SN and NP (by the 7. of the fifth) But (by the first
assumpt going before) the parallelogramme MR is the mean proportional between
the squares SN and NP. Wherefore the parallelogramme MR is equal to the
parallelogramme EL (by the last assumpt going before) But the parallelogramme
MR is equal to the parallelogramme OX (by the 43. of the first) and the
parallelogramme EL is equal to the parallelogra^me FC by construction, and by
the first of the sixth. Wherefore the whole parallelogramme EC is equal to the
two parallelogrammes MR and OX. And the parallelogrammes AH and GK are equal
to the squares SN and NP by construction. Wherefore the whole parallelogramme AC
is equal to the whole square SP, that is, to the square of the line MX. The
first part of this demonstration concluded.
Wherefore the line MX contains in power the parallelogramme AC. I say
moreover that the line MX is a binomiall line. For forasmuch as (by the 17. of
the tenth) the line AG is commensurable in length to the line EG. Therefore (by
the 15. of the tenth) the whole line AE is commensurable in length to either of
th^se lines AG and GE. But by supposition the line AE is commensurable in
length to the line AB. Wherefore (by the 12. of the tenth) either of the lines
AG and GE are commensurable in length to the line AB. But the line AB is
rational. Wherefore either of these lines AG and GE is rational. Wherefore (by
the 19. of the tenth) either of these parallelogrammes AH and GK is rational.
Wherefore (by the first of the sixth, and 10. of the tenth) the parallelogramme
AH is commensurable to the parallelogramme GK. But the parallelogramme AH is
equal to the square SN, The second part of the demonstration concluded.
and the parallelogramme GK is equal to the square NP Wherefore the squares SN
and NP, which are the squares of the lines MN and NX are rational and
commensurable. And forasmuch as (by supposition) the line AE is incommensurable
in length to the line ED. But the line AE is commensurable in length to the
line AG. And the line DE is commensurable in length to the line OF, for it is
double to it by construction. Wherefore (by the 13. of the tenth) the line AG is
incommensurable in length to the line OF. Wherefore the parallelogramme AH is
incommensurable to the parallelogramme EL. But the parallelogramme AH is equal
to the square SN, and the parallelogramme EL is equal to the parallelogramme
MR. Wherefore the square SN is incommensurable to the parallelogramme MR. But as
the square SN is to the parallelogramme MR, so is the line ON to the line NR by
the 1. of the sixth. The third part concluded.
Wherefore the line ON is incommensurable to the line NR. But the line ON is
equal to the line MN, and the line NR to the line NX. Wherefore the line MN is
incommensurable to the line NX. And it is already proved that the squares of
the lines MN and NX are rational and commensurable. Wherefore the lines MN and
NX are rational commensurable in power only. The total conclusion.
Wherefore the whole line MX is a binomiall line, and it contains in power the
parallelogramme AC: which was required to be proved.

The 37. Theoreme. The 55. Proposition. If a superficies be comprehended under
a rational line and a second binomiall line: the line that contains in power
that superficies is irrational, and is a first bimediall line.
SVppose that the superficies ABCD be contained under a rational line AB, and
under a second binomiall line AD. Then I say that the line that contains in
power the superficies AC is a first bimediall line. For forasmuch as AD is a
second binomiall line, it can in one only point be divided into his names, by
the 43. of this tenth: let it therefore by supposition be divided into his
names in the point E, so that let AE be the greater name. Wherefore the lines
AE and ED are rational commensurable in power only, and the line AE is in
power more then the line ED by the square of a line commensurable in length to
AE, and the less name, namely, ED is commensurable in length to the line AB by
the definition of a second binomiall line, set before the 48. proposition of
this tenth. Divide the line ED (by the tenth of the first) into two equal
parts in the point F. And (by the 28. of the sixth) upon the line AE apply a
parallelogramme equal to the square of the line OF, and wanting in figure by a
square. And let the same parallelogramme be that which is contained under the
lines AG and GE. Wherefore (by the second part of the 17. of this tenth) the
line AG is commensurable in length to the line GE. And (by the 31. of the
first) by the points G, E, F, draw unto the lines AB and CD these parallel
lines, GH, EK, and FL. And (by the 14. of the second) unto the parallelogra^me
AH describe an equal square SN. And to the parallelogra^me GK describe an
equal square NP, and let the lines MN and NX be so put that they both make one
right line: wherefore (by the 14. of the first) the lines also RN, and NO make
both one right line. Demo^stratio^.
Make perfect the parallelogramme SP. Now it is manifest (by that which has
been demo^strated in the proposition next going before) that the parallelog^ame
MR is the mean proportional between the squares SN and NP, and is equal to
the parallelogramme EL, and that the line MX contains in power the
superficies AC. Now rests to prove that the line MX is a first bimediall
line. Forasmuch as the line AE is incommensurable in length to the line ED, and
the line ED is commensurable in length to the line AB, therefore (by the 13. of
the tenth) the line AE is incommensurable in length to the line AB. And
forasmuch as the line AG is commensurable in length to the line GE therefore
the whole line AE is (by the 15. of the tenth) commensurable in length to
either of these lines AG and GE. But the line AE is rational: wherefore either
of these lines AG and GE is rational. And forasmuch as the line AE is
incommensurable in length to the line AB, but the line AE is commensurable in
length to either of these lines AG and GE: wherefore either of the lines AG and
GE are incommensurable in length to the line AB (by the 13. of the tenth).
Wherefore the lines AB, AG, and GE are rational commensurable in power only.
Wherefore (by the 21. of the tenth) either of these parallelogra^mes AH and GK
is a mediall super^icies. Wherefore also either of these squares SN and NP is a
mediall super^icies by the corollary of the 23. of ye tenth. Wherefore the lines
MN and NX are mediall lines by the 21. of this tenth. The first part of this
demonstration concluded.
And forasmuch as the line AG is co^mensurable in length to the line GE,
therefore (by the 1. of the sixth and 11. of the tenth) the parallelogra^me AH
is co^mensurable to the parallelogramme GK that is, the square SN to the square
NP, that is, the square of the line MN to the square of the line NX. Wherefore
the lines MN and NX are medialls commensurable in power. The third part
concluded.
And forasmuch as the line AE is incommensurable in length to the line ED, but
the line AE is commensurable in length to the line AG, and the line ED is
commensurable in length to the line E^, therefore (by the 13. of the tenth) the
line AG is incommensurable in length to the line E^. Where^ore (by the ^. of
the sixth and 11. of the tenth) the parallelograme AH is inco^mensurable to the
parallelogramme EL, that is, the square SN to the parallelogramme MR, that is,
the line ON is incommensurable to the line NR, that is the line MN to the line
NX. And it is proved that the lines MN and NX are mediall lines commensurabl^
in power. The fourth part co^clude^.
Wherefore the lines MN and NX are mediall lines commensurable in power only.
Now I say moreover that they comprehend a rational superficies. For forasmuch
as by supposition the line DE is comme^surable in length to either of these
lines AB and OF, therefore the line FE is commensurable in length to the line
EK which is equal to the line AB (by the 12. of the tenth). And either of
these lines OF and EK is a rational line. Wherefore the parallelogra^me EL,
that is the parallelogra^me MR, is a rational superficies (by the 19. of the
tenth). The fifth part concluded.
But the parallelogramme MR is that which is contained under the lines MN and
NX. But if two mediall lines commensurable in power only and comprehending a
rational super^icies be added together, the whole line is irrational and is
called a first bimediall (by the 37. of the tenth). The total^ conclusion.
Wherefore the line MX is a first bimediall line: which was required to be
demonstrated.

The 38. Theoreme. The 56. Proposition. If a superficies be contained under a
rational line and a third binomiall line: the line that contains in power
that superficies is irrational, and is a second bimediall line.
SVppose that the superficies ABCD be comprehended under the rational line AB
and a third binomiall line AD, and let the line AD be supposed to be divided
into his names in the point E, of which let AE be the greater name. Then I say,
that the line that contains in power the superficies AC is irrational, and
is a second bimediall line. Let the same construction of the figures be in
this, that was in the two Propositions nex^ going before. And now forasmuch as
the line AD is a third binomiall line, therefore these lines AE and ED are
rational commensurable in power only. Demonstration.
And the line AE is in power more the^ the line ED by the square of a line
co^mensurable in length to the line AE, and neither of the lines AE nor ED is
commensurable in length to the line AB by the definition of a third binomiall
line set before the 48. Proposition. As in the former Propositions it was
demonstrated, so also may it in this Proposition be proved, that the line MX
contains in power the superficies AC, and that the lines MN and NX are
mediall lines commensurable in power only. Wherefore the line MX is a
bimediall line. Now rests to prove that it is a second bimediall line.
Forasmuch as the line DE is (by supposition) incommensurable in length to the
line AB, that is, to the line EK. But the line ED is commensurable in length to
the line OF. Wherefore (by the 13. of the tenth) the line OF is incommensurable
in length to the line EK. And the lines FE and EK are rational. For by
sup^osition the line ED is rational, unto which the line FE is commensurable.
Wherefore the lines FE and EK are rational lines commensurable in power only.
Wherefore (by the 21. of the tenth) the parallelogramme EL, that is, the
parallelogramme MR which is contained under the lines MN and NX is a mediall
superficies. Wherefore that which is contained under the lines MN and NX is a
mediall superficies. Wherefore the line MX is a second bimediall line (by the
38. Proposition and definition annexed thereto): which was required to be
proved.

The 39. Theoreme. The 57. Proposition. If a superficies be contained under a
rational line, and a fourth binomiall line: the line which contains in power
that superficies is irrational, and is a greater line.
SVppose that the superficies AC be comprehended under a rational line AB and
a fourth binomiall line AD, and let the binomiall line AD be supposed to be
divided into his names in the point E, so that let the line AE be the greater
name. Then I say, that the line which contains in power the superficies AC is
irrational, and is a greater line. Construction.
For, forasmuch as the line AD is a fourth binomiall line, therefore the lines
AE and ED are rational commensurable in power only. And the line AE is in
power more then the line ED by the square of a line incommensurable in length
to AE. And the line AE is commensurable in length to the line AB. Divide (by
the 10. of the first) the line DE into two equal parts in the point F. And
upon the line AE apply a parallelogramme equal to the square of OF and wanting
in figure by a square: and let the same parallelogramme be that which is
contained under the lines AG and GE. Wherefore (by the second part of the 18.
of the tenth) the line AG is incommensurable in length to the line EG. Draw
unto the line AB, by the points G, E, F, parallel lines GH, EK, and PL, and
let the rest of the construction be as it was in the three former Propositions.
Demonstration.
Now it is manifest, that the line MX contains in power the superficies AC.
Now rests to prove that the line MX is an irrational line, and a greater
line. Forasmuch as the line AG is incommensurable in length to the line EG,
therefore (by the 1. of the sixth, and 11. of the tenth) the parallelogramme AK
is rational. And it is equal to the squares of the lines MN and NX. Wherefore
that which is composed of the squares of the lines MN and NX added together is
rational. And forasmuch as the line ED is incommensurable in length to the
line AB, that is, to the line EK, but the line ED is commensurable in length to
the line OF, therefore the

The 40. Theoreme. The 58. Proposition. If a superficies be contained under a
rational line and a fifth binomiall line: the line which contains in power
that superficies is irrational, and is a line containing in power a rational
and a mediall superficies.
SVppose that the superficies AG be contained under the rational line A^, and
under a fifth binomiall line AD^ and let the same lin^ AD be supposed to be
divided into his names in the point E, so that let the line AE be the greater
name. Then I say, that the line which contains in power the superficies AC is
irrational, and is a line containing in power a rational and a mediall
superficies. Demonstration.
Let the self same constructions be in this, that were in the four
Proposition next going before. And it is manifest, that the line MX contains
in power the superfici^^ AG. Now testeth to prove that the line MX is a line
containing in power a rational and a mediall superficies. Forasmuch as the
line AG is incommensurable in length to the line GE, therefore (by the 1. of
the sixth, and 10. of the tenth) the parallelogramme AH is incommensurable to
the parallelogramme in length to the line AB. But the line AE is
incommensurable in length to the line ED. Wherefore (by the 13. of the tenth)
the line AB is incommensurable in length to the line AE. Wherefore the lines AB
and AE are rational commensurable in power only. Wherefore (by the 21. of the
tenth) the parallelogramme AK is mediall, that is, that which is composed of
the squares of the lines MN and NX added together. And forasmuch

The 41. Theoreme. The 59. Proposition. If a superficies be contained under a
rational line, and a sixth binomiall line, the line which contains in power
that superficies, is irrational, and is called a line containing in power two
medials.
SVppose that the superficies ABCD be contained under the rational line AB,
and under a sixth binomiall line AD, and let the line AD be supposed to be
divided ^^to his names in the point E, so that let the line AE be the greater
name. Then I say that the line that contains in power the superficies AC is
irrational, and is a line containing in power two medials. Demonstration.
Let the self same constructio^s be in this, that were in the former
propositions. Now it is manifest that the line MX contains in power the
superficies AC, rational commensurable in power only. Wherefore (by the (...)
of the tenth) the parallelogra^m^ AK that is, that which is composed of the
squares of the lines MN and NX added together And forasmuch as the line AE is
incommensurable in length to the line OF, therefore

An A^^umpt.
If a right line be divided into two unequal parts, the squares which are
made of the unequal parts, are greater then the rectangle parallelogramme
c^^tayned under the unequal parts, twice.

Suppose that AB be a right line, and let it be (...) point C. And let the line
AC be the greater part. (...) and ^B, are greater the^ that which is contained
under the lines A^ and CB twice. D^^id^ (by the 10. of the first) the line AB
into two equal parts, in the point D. Now forasmuch as the right line AB is
divided into two equal parte^ in the point D, and into two unequal parte^ in
the point C, therefore (by the 5. of the second) that which is contained under
the lines (...) line CD, is equal to the square of the line AD. (...) the
lines AC and CB, (omitting the square of the line CD) is less then the square
of the AD (by the 9. common sentence, and the seventh of the fifth:) Wherefore
that which is contained under the lines AC and CB, twice, is less then the
double of the square of the line AD (that is, the^ twice the square of the line
AD) by Look after the Assumpt concluded at this mark: for plainer opening of
this place.
alternate proportion, and the 14. of the fifth. But the squares of the lines AC
and CB are double to the squares of the lines AD and DC (by the 9. of the
second). Therefore the squares of AC and CB are more then double to the square
of AD alone, (leaving out the square of DC) by the 8. of the fifth. But the
parallelogramme contained under the lines AC and ^B twice, is proved less the^
the double of the square of the line AD. Therefore the same parallelogramme
contained under the lines AC and CB twice, is much less then the squares of
the lines AC and CB. If a right line therefore be divided into two unequal
parts, the squares which are made of the unequal parts, are greater the^ the
rectangle parallelogramme contained under the unequal parts, twice: which was
required to be demonstrated.

In numbers I need not to have so alleged, for the 17. of the seventh had
confirmed the doubles to be one to the other, as their singles were, but in our
magnitudes, it likewise is true and evident by alternate proportion, thus. As
the parallelogramme of the lines AC and CB is to his double, so is the square
of the line AD to his double (each being half). Wherefore, alternately, as the
parallelogramme is to the square, so is the parallelograme his double to the
double of the square. But the parallelograme was proved less then the square:
wherefore his double is less then the square his double, by the 14. of the
fifth.

This Assumpt is in some books not read, for that in manner it seems to be all
one with that which was put after the 39. of this book: but for the diners
manner of demonstrating, it is necessary. The use of this Assumpt is in the next
proposition, and other following.
For the fear of invention is thereby furthered. And though Zambert did in the
demonstration hereof, omit that which P. Montaureus could not supply^ but
plainly doubted of the sufficiency of this proof, yet M. Dee, by only
allegation of the due places of credit, whose pithe and force^ Theon his
words do contain, has restored to the demonstration sufficiently, both light
and authority, as you may perceive, and chiefly such may judge, who can
compare this demonstration here (thus furnished) with the Greek of Theon, or
latin translation of Zambert.

The 42. Theoreme. The 60. Proposition. The fifth Senary by composition.
The square of a binomiall line applied unto a rational line, makes the
breadth or other side a first binomiall line.
SVppose that the line AB be a binomiall line, and let it be supposed to be
divided into his names in the point C, so that let AC be the greater name.
Construction.
And take a rational line DE^ And (by the ^4. of the first) unto the line DE
apply a rectangle parallelograme DEFG equal to the square of the^line AB and
making in breadth the line DG. Then I say that the line DG is a first binomiall
line. Unto the line DE apply the parallelograme DH equal to the square of the
line AC, and unto the line KH which is equal to the line DE apply the
parallelogra^me KL equal to the squar^ of the line BC. Wherefore the residue
namely, that which is contained under the lines AC and CB twice is equal to
the residue, namely, to the parallelograme MF, by (...) 4^ of the second Divide
(by the 1^. of the first) the line MG into two equal parts in the point N.
Demonstration.
And (by the 31. of the first) draw the line NX parallel to either of these
lines ML and GF. Wherefore either of these parallelogrammes MX and NF is equal
to that which is contained under the lines AC and CB once, by the 15. of the
fifth. And forasmuch as the line AB is a binomiall line, and is divided into
his names in the point C therefore the ^ines AC and CB are rational
commensurable in power only. Wherefore the squares of the lines AC and CB are
rational, and therefore commensurable the one to the other. Wherefore (by the
15. of the tenth) that which is made of the squares of the lines AC and CB
added together is commensurable to either of the squares of the lines AC or CB:
wherefore that which is made of the squares of the line^ AC and CB added
together is rational. And it is equal to the parallelograme DL by
construction. Wherefore the parallelograme DL is rational. And it is applied
unto the rational line DE: wherefore (by the 20. of the tenth) the line DM is
rational, and commensurable in length to the line DE. Again forasmuch as the
lines AC and CB are rational commensurable in power only, therefore that
which is contained under the lines AC and CB MF is mediall by the 21 of the
tenth, and it is applied unto the rational line ML. Wherefore the line MG is
rational and incommensurable in length to the line ML (by the 22. of this
tenth) that is, to the line DE. But the line MD is proved rational and
commensurable in length to the line DE. Wherefore (by the 13. of the tenth) the
DM is incommensurable in length to the line MG. Wherefore the lines DM and M^
are rational commensurable in power only. Concluded that DG is a binomiall
line.
Wherefore (by the 36. of the tenth) the whole line DG is a binomiall line. Now
rests to prove that it is a first binomiall line. Forasmuch as (by the the
assumpt going before the 54. of the tenth) that which is contained under the
lines AC and CB is the mean proportional between the squares of the lines AC
and CB, therefore the parallelograme MX is the mean proportional between the
parallelogrammes DH and KL. Wherefore as the parallelogame DH^ is to the
parallelograme MX, so is the parallelograme MX to the parallelograme KL, that
is, as the line DK is to the line MN, so is the line MN to the line MK.
Wherefore that which is contained under the lines DK and KM is equal to the
square of the line MN. And forasmuch as the square of the line AC is
commensurable to the square of the line CB, the parallelograme DH is
commensurable to the prarallelograme KL. Wherefore (by the 1. of the sixth and
10. of the tenth) the line DE is co^me^s^rable in length to the line KM. And
forasmuch as the squares of the lines AC and CB are greater then that which is
contained under the lines AC and CB twice by the assumpt going before this
proposition, or by the assumpt after this 39. of the tenth, therefore the
parallelograme DL is greater then the parallelograme MF. Wherefore (by the
first of the sixth) the line DM is greater then the line MG. And that which is
contained under the lines DK and KM is equal to the square of the line MN,
that is to the fourth part of the square MG. But (by the 17. of the tenth), if
there be two unequal right lines, and if upon the greater be applied a
parallelograme equal to the fourth part of the square made of the less line
and wanting in figure by a square, if also the parallelograme thus applied
de^ide the line whereupon it is applied into parts commensurable in length,
then shall the greater line be in power more then the less by the square of a
line commensurable in length to the greater. Wherefore the line DM is in power
more then the line MG by the square of a line commensurable in length unto the
line DM. And the lines DM and MG are proved rational DM is proved the greater
name and commensurable in length to the rational line given DE. Wherefore by
the definition of a first binomiall line se^ before the 48. proposition of this
book, the line DG is a first binomiall line: which was required to be proved.

This proposition and the five following are the conuerses of the six former
propositions.

The 43. Theoreme. The 61. Proposition. The square of a first bimediall line
applied to a rational line, makes the breadth or other side a second
binomiall line.
SVppose that the line AB be a first bimediall line, and let it be supposed to
be divided into his parts in the point C, of which let AC be the greater part.
Take also a rational line DE, and (by the 44. of the first) apply to the line
DE the parallelogra^me DF equal to the square of the line AB, and making in
breadth the line DG. Construction.
Then I say, that the line DG is a second binomiall line. Let the same
constructions be in this, that were in the Proposition going before. And
forasmuch as the line AB is a first bimediall line, Demonstrati^n.
and is divided into his parts in the point C, therefore (by the 37. of the
tenth) the lines AC and CB are mediall commensurable in power only,
co^prehending a rational superficies. Wherefore also the squares of the lines
AC and CB are mediall. Wherefore the parallelogramme DL is mediall (by the
Corollary of the 23. of the tenth) and it is applied upon the rational line
DE. Wherefore (by the 22. of the tenth) the line MD is rational and
incommensurable in length to the line DE. Again forasmuch as that Concluded
that DG is a binomiall line.
Now rests to prove that it is a second binomiall line. Forasmuch as the
squares of the lines AC and CB are greater then that which is contained under
the lines AC and CB twice (by the Assumpt before the 60. of this book):
therefore the parallelogramme DL is greater then the parallelogrrmme MF.
Wherefore also (by the first of the sixth) the line DM is greater then the line
MG. And forasmuch as the square of

The 44. Theoreme. The 62. Proposition. The square of a second bimediall line,
applied unto a rational line: makes the breadth or other side thereof, a third
binomiall line.
SVppose that AB be a second bimediall line, and let AB be supposed to be
divided into his parts in the point C, so that let AC be the greater part. And
take a rational line DE. And (by the 44. of the first) unto the line DE apply
the parallelogramme DF equal to the square of the line AB, and making in
breadth the line DG. Then I say that the line DG is a third binomiall line. Let
the self same constructions be in this that were in the propositions next
going before. And forasmuch as the line AB is a second bimediall line,
Construction.
and is divided into his parts in the point C, Demonstration.
therefore (by the 38. of the tenth) the lines AC and CB are medials
commensurable in power only, comprehe^ding a mediall superficies. Wherefore
that which is made of the squares of the lines AC and CB added together, is
mediall, and it is equal to the parallelogramme DL by construction. Wherefore
the parallelogramme DL is mediall, and is applied unto the rational line DE,
wherefore (by the 22. of the tenth) the line MD is rational and incommensurable
in length to the line DE. And by the like reason also *
the line MG is rational and incommensurable in length to the line ML, that
is, to the line DE. Wherefore either of these lines DM and MG is rational, and
incommensurable in length to the line DE. And forasmuch as the line AC is
incommensurable in length to the line CB, but as the line AC is to the line CB,
so (by the assumpt going before the 22. of the tenth) is the square of the line
AC to that which is contained under the lines AC and CB. Wherefore the square of
the line AC is inc^mmmensurable to that which is contained under the lines AC
and CB. Wherefore that
that which is made of the squares of the lines AC and CB added together, is
incommensurable to that which is contained under the lines AC and CB twice,
that is, the parallelogramme DL to the parallelogramme MF. Wherefore (by the
first of the sixth, and 10. of the tenth) the line DM is incommensurable in
length to the line MG. And they are proved both rational, DG, concluded a
binomiall line.
wherefore the whole line DG is a binomiall line by the definition in the 36. of
the tenth. Now rests to prove that it is a third binomiall line. As in the
former propositions, so also in this may we conclude that the line DM is
greater then the line MG, and that the line DK is commensurable in length to
the line KM. And that that which is contained under the lines DK and KM is
equal to the square of the line MN. Wherefore the line DM is in power more then
the line MG by the square of a line commensurable in length unto the line DM,
and neither of the lines DM nor MG is commensurable in length to the rational
line DE. Wherefore (by the definition of a third binomi^ll line) the line DG is
a third binomiall line: which was required to be proved.

Here follow certain annotations by M. Dee, made upon three places in the
demonstration, which were not very evident to young beginners.
(The squares of the lines AC and C^ are medials ((...) i^ taught after the 21^
of this tenth) and ther^ore forasmuch as they are (by supposition)
comme^surable the one to the other: (by the 15. of the tenth) the compound of
them both is commensurable to each part. But the parts are medials, therefore
(by the co^ollary of the 23. of the tenth) the compound shall be mediall.

^ For that MX is equal (by construction) to that which is contained under the
lines AC and CB, which is proved mediall: therefore (by the corollary of the 23.
of this tenth) MX is mediall, and therefore (by the same corollary) his double
MF is mediall. And it is applied to a rational line, ML (being equal to D^)
therefore by the 22. of the tenth, the line MG is rational and incommensurable
in length to ML, that is, to DE.

Because the compound of the two squares (of the lines AC and C^) being
commensurable one to the other, is also to either square (by the 15.)
commensurable, therefore to the square of AC: But the square of AC is proved
incommensurable to that which is contained under AC and CB once. Wherefore (by
the 13. of the tenth) the compound of the two squares (of the lines AC and CB)
is incommensurable, to that which is contained under the lines AC and C^ once.
But to that which is twice contained under the same lines AC and CB, the
paralleloga^rme once contained, is commensurable (for it is as 1. is to 2.)
therefore that which is made of the squares of the lines AC and CB is
incommensurable to the parallelogramme contained under AC and CB twice, by the
said 13. of this tenth.

A Corollary.
A Corollary added by M. Dee.
Hereby it is evident, that the squares made of the two parts of a second
bimediall line, composed, is a compound mediall, and that the same compound is
incommensurable to the parallelogramme contained under the two parts of the
second bimediall line.

The proof hereof, is in the first and third annotations here before annexed.

The 45. Theoreme. The 63. Proposition. The square of a greater line applied
unto a rational line, makes the breadth or other side a fourth binomiall line.
SVppose that the line AB be a greater line, and let it be supposed to be
divided into his parts in the point C, so that let AC be the greater part. And
take a rational line DE. And (by the 44. of the first) unto the line DE, apply
the parallelogramme DF equal to the square of the line AB, and making in
breadth the line DG. Then I say, that the line DG is a fourth binomiall line.
Let the self same construction be in this, that was in the former
Propositions. Construction.
And forasmuch as the line AB is a greater line, and is divided into his parts
in the point C: Demonstration.
therefore the lines AC and CB are incommensurable in power, having that which
is made of the squares of them added together rational, and the
parallelogramme which is contained under them, mediall. Now forasmuch as that
which is made of the squares of the lines AC and CB added together is
rational, therefore the parallelogramme DL is rational. Wherefore also the
line MD is rational and commensurable MF, and it is applied unto the rational
line ML, therefore (by the ^2. of the tenth) the

The 46. Theoreme. The 64. Proposition. The square of a line containing in
power a rational and a mediall superficies applied to a rational line, makes
the breadth or other side a fifth binomiall line.
SVppose that the line AB be a line containing in power a rational and a
mediall superficies, and let it be supposed to be divided into his parts in
the point C, so that let AC be the greater part, and take a rational line DE.
And (by the 44. of the first) unto the line DE apply the parallelogramme DF
equal to the square of the line AB, and making in breadth the line DG. Then I
say, that the line DG is a fifth binomiall line. Construction.
Let the self same co^struction be in this, that was in the former. And
forasmuch as AB is a line containing in power a rational and a mediall
superficies, Demonstration.
and is divided into his parts in the point C, therefore the lines AC and CB
are inco^mensurable in power, having that which is made of the squares of the^
added together mediall, and that which is contained under then rational. Now
forasmuch as that which is made of the squares of the lines AC and CB added
together is mediall, therefore also the parallelogramme DL is mediall.
Wherefore (by the 22. of the tenth) the line DM is rational and
incommensurable in length to the line DE. Again forasmuch as to the line DE.
Wherefore (by the 13. of the tenth) the line DM is incommensurable in in this
may it be proved, that that which is contained under the lines DK and KM is
equal to the square of MN the half of the less: and that the line DK is
incommensurable in length to the line KM. Wherefore (by the 18. of the tenth)
the line DM is in power more the^ the line MG by the square of a line
incommensurable in length to the line DM. And the lines DM and MG are rational
commensurable in power only, and the less line, namely, MG is commensurable
in length to the rational line given DE. Wherefore the line DG is a fifth
binomiall line: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 47. Theoreme. The 65. Proposition. The square of a line containing in
power two medialls applied unto a rational line, makes the breadth or other
side a sixth binomiall line.
SVppose that the line AB be a line containing in power two medialls, and let
it be supposed to be divided into his parts in the point C. And take a
rational line DE. And (by the 44. of the first) unto the rational line DE
apply the parallelogra^me DF equal to the square of the line AB and making in
breadth the line DG. Then I say that the line DG is a sixth binomiall line.
Construction.
Let the self same construction be in this that was in the former. And
forasmuch as the line AB is a line containing in power two medialls,
Demonstration.
and is divided into his parts in the point C, therefore the lines AC and CB
are incommensurable in power having that which is made of the squares of them
added together mediall, and that which is contained under them, mediall, and
moreover incommensurable to that which is made of the squares of them added
together. Wherefore by those things which have been before proved, either of
these parallelogra^mes DL and MF is mediall, and either of them is applied upon
the rational line DE. Wherefore (by the 22. of the tenth) either of these
lines DM and MG is rational DE. And forasmuch as that which is mad^ of the
squares of the lines AC and CB, added together is incommensurable to that which
is contained under the lines AC and CB twice, therefore the parallelogra^me DL
is incommensurable to the parallelogra^me MF. Wherefore (by the 1. of the sixth
and 10. of the tenth) the line DM is incommensurable in length to the line MG.
Wherefore the lines DM and MG are rational commensurable in power only.
Wherefore the whole line DG is a binomiall line. I say also that is a sixth
binomiall line. For even as in the other proposition^ it has been proved so
also in this may it be proved, that that which is contained under the lines DK
and KM, is equal to the square of the line MN, and that the line DK is
incommensurable in length to the line KM, and therefore (by the 18. of the
tenth) the line DM is in power more then the line MG by the square of a line
incommensurable in length to the line DM. And neither of these lines DM nor MG
is commensurable in length to there an^nall line given DE. Wherefore the line DG
is a sixth ^^nomiall line: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 48. Theoreme. The 66. Proposition. A line commensurable in length to a
binomiall line, is also a binomiall line of the self same order.
SVppose that the line AB be a binomiall line, The sixth Senary.
and unto the line AB let the line CD be commensurable in length. Then I say
that the line CD is a binomiall line and of the self same order that the line
AB is. For forasmuch as AB is ^ binomiall line let it be divided into his names
in the point E, Construction.
and let AE be the greater name. Wherefore the lines AE and EB are rational
commensurable in power only. And as the line AB is to the line CD, (so by the
12. of the sixth) let the line AE be to the line CF. Demonstration.
Wherefore (by the 19. of the fifth) the residue, namely, the line EB is to the
residue, namely, to the line FD, as the line AB is to the line CD. But (by
supposition) the line AB is commensurable in length to the line CD. Wherefore
(by the 10. of the tenth) the line AE is commensurable in length to the line
CF, and the line EB to the line FD. And the lines AE and EB are rational.
Wherefore the lines CF and FD are also rational. And for that as the line AE
is to the line CF, so is the line EB. to the line FD, therefore alternately (by
the 16. of the fifth) as the line A^E is to the line EB, so is the line CF to
the line FD. But the lines AE and EB are commensurable in power only,
wherefore the lines CF and FD are also commensurable in power only, and they
are rational. Wherefore the whole line CD is a binomiall line. I say also that
it is of the self same order of binomiall lines that the line AB is. For the
line AE is in power more then the line EB either by the square of a line
commensurable in length to the line AE, or by the square of a line
incommensurable in length to the line AE. If the line AE be in power more then
the line EB by the square of a line commensurable in length to the line AE, the
line also CF, by the 14. of the tenth) shall be in power more then the line FD by
the square of a line commensurable in length to CF. And if the line^ AE be
commensurable in length to a rational line given, the line CF also shall be
commensurable in length to the same (by the 12. of the tenth). And so either of
these lines AB and CD is a first binomiall line, that EB be commensurable in
length to the rational line put, the line FD also shall be commensurable in
length to the same. And by that means again the lines AB and CD are both of
one and the self same order^ for either of them is a second binomiall line.
But if neither of the lines AE nor E^ be commensurable CF nor FD shall be
commensurable in length to the same. And so neither of the lines AB and CD is a
third binomiall AE be in power more then the line EB by the square of a line
incommensurable in length to the line AE, the line also CF shall be in power more
then the line FD by the square of a line incommensurable in length to the line
CF, (by the 14. of the tenth). And then if the line AE be commensurable in
length to the rational line put the line CF also shall be commensurable in
length to the same, and so either of the lines AB, CD shall be a fourth binomiall
line. And if the line EB be commensurable in length to the rational line
given, the line FD also shall be commensurable in length to the same. And AB and
CD shall be a fifth binomiall line. But if neither of the lines AE nor EB be
commensurable in length to the rational line given, neither also of the lines
CF nor FD shall be commensurable in length to the same, and so either of the
lines AB and CD shall be a sixth binomiall line. A line, therefore commensurable
in length to a binomiall line, is also a binomiall line of the self same
order: which was required to be proved.

The 49. Theoreme. The 67. Proposition. A line commensurable in length to a
bimediall line, is also a bimediall line and of the self same order.
SVppose that the line AB be a bimediall line, And unto the line AB, let the
line CD be commensurable in length. Then I say that the line CD is a bimediall
line, and of the self order that the line AB is. Divide the line AB into his
parts in the point E. Construction.
And forasmuch as the line AB is a bimediall line, and is divided into his
parts in the point E, therefore (by the 37. and 38. of the tenth) the lines AE
and EB are medials commensurable in power only, And (by the 12. of the sixth)
as the line AB is to the line CD, so let the line AE be to the line CF.
Wherefore (by the 19. of the fifth) the residue, Demonstration.
namely, the line EB is to the residue, namely, to the line FD, as the line AB
is to the line CD. But the line AB is commensurable in length to the line CD.
Wherefore the line AE is commensurable in length to the line CF, and the line EB
to the line FD. Now the lines AE and EB are mediall, wherefore (by the 23. of
the tenth) the lines CF and FD are also mediall. And for that as the line AE is
to the line EB, so is the line CF to the line FD. But the lines AE and EB are
commensurable in power only, wherefore the lines CF and FD are also
commensurable in power only. And it is proved that they are mediall. Wherefore
the line CD is a bimediall AB be a first bimediall line, that also which is
contained under the lines CF and FD is rational. Wherefore also the line CD is
a first bimediall line. But if that which is contained under

A Corollary added by Flussates: but first noted by P. Monta^reus.
A line commensurable in power only to a bimediall line, is also a bimediall
line, and of the self same order.

Suppose that AB be a bimediall line, either a first or a second, whereunto let
the line GD be co^mensurable in power only. A Coroll^ry add^d by Flussetes.
Take also a rational line EZ, upon which (by the 45. of the first) apply a
rectangle parallelogramme equal to the square of the line AB, which let be
EZFC, and let the rectangle parallelogramme CFIH be equal to the square of the
line GD. And forasmuch as upon the rational line EZ is applied a rectangle
parallelogramme OF equal to the square of a first bimediall line, therefore
the other side thereof, namely, EC, is a second binomiall line, by the 61. of
this book. And forasmuch as by supposition the squares of the lines AB and GD
are commensurable, therefore the parallelogrammes OF and CI (which are equal
unto them) are also commensurable. And therefore by the 1. of the sixth, the
lines EC and CH are commensurable in length. But the line EC is a second
binomiall line. Wherefore the line CH is also a second binomiall line, by the
66. of this book. And forasmuch as the superficies CI is contained under a
rational line EZ or CF, and a second binomiall line CH, therefore the line
which contains it in power, namely, the line GD is a first bimediall line, by
the 55. of this book. And so is the line GD in the self same order of
bimediall lines that the line AB is. The like demonstration also will serve if
the line AB be supposed to b^ a second bimediall line. For so shall it make the
breadth EC a third binomiall line whereunto the line CH shall be commensurable
in length, and therefore CH also shall be a third binomiall line, by means
whereof the line which contains in power the superficies CI, namely, the line
GD shall also be a second bimediall line. Wherefore a line commensurable either
in length, or in power only to a bimediall line, is also a bimediall line of
the self same order.

But so is it not of necessity in binomiall lines, for if their powers only
be commensurable, it follows not of necessity that they are binomialls of
one and the self same order, Note.
but they are each binomialls either of the three first kinds, or of the three
last. As for example. Suppose that AB be a first binomiall line, whose greater
name let be AG, and unto AB let the DZ be co^me^surable in power only. Then I
say, that the line DZ is not of the self same order that the line AB is. For
if it be possible, let the line DZ be of the self same order that the line AB
is. Whe^efore the line DZ may in like sort be divided as the line AB is, by
that which has been demonstrated in the 66. Proposition of this booke^ let it
be so divided in the point E. Wherefore it can not be so divided in any other
point, by the 42^ of this book. And for that the line AB ^^ to the line DZ, as
the line AG is to the line DE, but the lines AG and DE, namely, the greater
names, are commensurable in length the one to the other (by the 10. of this
book) for that they are commensurable in length to (...) and the self same
rational line, by the first definition of binomiall lines. Wherefore the lines
AB and DZ are commensurable in length, by the 13. of this book. But by
supposition they are commensurable in power only: which is impossible.

The self same demonstration also will serve, if we suppose the line AB to be
a second binomial line: for the less names GB and EZ being commensurable in
length to one and the self same rational line, shall also be commensurable in
length the one to the other. And therefore the lines AB and DZ which are in the
self same proportion with them, shall also be commensurable in length the one
to the other: which is contrary to the supposition. Farther, if the squares of
the lines AB and DZ be applied unto the rational line CF, namely, the
parallelogrammes CT and HL, they shall make the breadthes CH and HK first
binomiall lines, of what order soever the lines AB and DZ (whose squares were
applied unto the rational line) are, (by the 60. of this book). Wherefore it
is manifest, that under a rational line and a first binomiall line, are
confusedly contained all the powers of binomiall lines (by the 54. of this
book). Wherefore the only commensuration of the powers does not of necessity
bring forth one and the self same order of binomiall lines. The self same
thing also may be proved, if the lines AB and DZ be supposed to be a fourth or
fifth binomiall line, whose powers only are conmmensurable, namely, that they
shall as the first bring forth binomiall lines of diverse orders. Now forasmuch
as the powers of the lines AG and GB, and DE and EZ are commensurable and
proportional, it is manifest, that if the line AG be in power more then the
line GB by the square of a line commensurable in length unto AG, the line DE
also shall be in power more then the line EZ by the square of a line
commensurable in length unto the line DE (by the 16. of this book). And so
shall the two lines AB and DZ be each, of the three first binomiall lines. But
if the line AG be in power more then the line GB by the square of a line
incommensurable in length unto the line AG, the line DE shall also be in power
(...) then the line EZ by the square of a line incomensurable in length unto
the line DE, by the self same P^oposition. And so shall each of the lines AB
and DZ be of the three last binomiall lines. But why it is not so in the third
and sixth binomiall lines, the reason is: For that in them neither of the name^
is commensurable in length to the rational line put FC.

The 50. Theoreme. The 68. Proposition. A line commensurable to a greater line,
is also a greater line.
SVppose that the line AB be a greater line. And unto the line AB let the line
CD be commensurable. Construction.
Then I say that the line CD also is a greater line. Divide the line AB into
his parts in the point E. Wherefore (by the 39. of the tenth) the lines AE and
EB are incommensurable in power, having that which is made of the squares of
them added together rational, and that which is contained under the^ mediall.
And let the rest of the construction be in this, as it was in the former. And
for that as the line AB is to the line CD, Demonstration.
so is the line AE to the line CF, and the line EB to the line FD, but the line
AB is commensurable to the line CD by suppositio^. Wherefore the line AE is
commensurable to the line CF, and the line EB to the line FD. And for that as
the line AE is to the line CF, so is the line EB to the line FD. Therefore
alternately (by the 16. of the fifth) as the line AE is to the line EB, so is
the line CF to the line FD. Wherefore by composition also (by the 18. of the
fifth) as the line AB is to the line EB, so is the line CD to the line FD.
Wherefore (by the 22. of the sixth) as the square of the line AB is to the
square of the line EB, so is the square of the line CD to the square of the
line FD. And in like sort may we prove that as the square of the line AB is to
the square of the line AE, so is the square of the line CD, to the square of
the line CF. Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as the square of the line AB is
to the squares of the lines AE and EB, so is the square of the line CD to the
squares of the lines CF and FD. Wherefore alternately (by the 16. of the fifth)
as the square of the line AB is to the square of the line CD, so are the
squares of the lines AE and EB to the squares of the lines CF and FD. But the
square of the line AB is commensurable to the square of the line CD (for the
line AB is commensurable to the line CD by suppositio^). Wherefore also the
squares of the lines AE and EB are commensurable to the squares of the lines CF
and FD. But the squares of the lines AE and EB are incommensurable, and being
added together are rational. Wherefore the squares of the lines CF and FD are
incommensurable, and being added together, are also rational. And in like sort
may we prove that that which is contained under the lines AE and EB twice is
commensurable to that which is contained under the lines CF and FD twice. But
that which is contained under the lines AE and EB twice, is mediall, wherefore
also that which is contained under the lines CF and FD twice is medial.
Wherefore the lines CF and FD are incommensurable in power, having that which is
made of the squares of them added together rational, and that which is
contained under the^ mediall. Wherefore (by the 39. of the tenth) the whole line
CD is irrational, and is called a greater line. A line therefore commensurable
to a greater line, is also a greater line.

An other demonstration of Peter Montaureus to prove the same.
Suppose that the line AB be a greater line, and unto it let the line CD be
commensurable any way, that is, either both in length and in power, or else in
power only. An other demonstration after P. Montaureus.
Then I say that the line CD also is a greater line. Divide the line AB into
his parts in the point E. and let the rest of the construction be in this as
it was in the former. And for that as the line AB is to the line CD, so is the
line AE to the line CF, and the line EB to the line FD, therefore as the line AE
is to the line CF, so is the line EB to the line FD, but the line AB is
commensurable to the line CD. Wherefore also the line AE is commensurable to the
line CF, and likewise the line EB to the line FD. And for th^^ as the line AE
is to the line CF, so is the line EB to the line FD, therefore alternately as
the line AE is to the line EB, so is the line CF to the line FD. Wherefore (by
the 22. of the sixth) as the square of the line AE is to the square of the line
EB, so is the square of the line CF to the square of the line FD. Wherefore by
composition (by the 18. of the fifth) as that which is made of the squares of
the lines A^ and E^ added together is to the square of the line EB, so is that
which is made of the square^ of the lyne^ C^ and FD added together to the
square of the line FD. Wherefore by contrary proportion as the square of the
line EB is to that which is made of the squares of the lines AE and E^ added
together, so is the square of the line FD to that which is made of the squares
of the lines CF and FD added together. Wherefore alternately as the square of
the line EB is to the square of the line FD, so is that which is made of the
squares (...) the l^nes AE and EB added together to that which is made of the
squares of the lines CF and FD added together. But the square of the line EB is
co^mensurable to the square of the line FD, for it has already been proved
that the lines EB and FD are co^me^surable. Wherefore that which is made of the
squares of the lines AE and EB added together is comme^surable to that which is
made of the squares of C^ and FD added together. But that which is made of the
squares of the lines AE and EB added together is rational by suppositio^.
Wherefore that which is made of the squares of the lines CF and FD added
together is also rational. And as the line AE is to the line EB, so is the
line CF to the line FD: But as the line AE is to the line EB, so is the square
of the line A (...) contained under the lines AE and EB: therefore at the line
CF is to the line FD, so is the square of the line AE to the parallelogramme
contained under the lines AE and EB and as the line CF is to the line FD, so is
the square of the line CF to the parallelogra^me contained under the lines ^F
and FD. Wherefore as the square of the line AE is to the parallelogra^me
con^^^^ed under the lines AE and EB, so is the square of the line CF to the
parallelogramme contained under the lines CF and FD. Wher^or^ (...) ^s the
square of the line AE is to the square of the line CF, so is the
parallelogramme contained under the lines AE and EB to the parallelogramme
(...) vnde^ the lines ^^ and ^^. But the square of the line AE is commensurable
to the square of the line CF, for it is already pr^^^d that the lines AE and CF
are comme^surable. Wherefore the parallelogramme contained under the lines AE
and EB is commensurable to the parallelogramme contained under the lines CF and
FD. But the parallelogramme contained under the lines AE and EB is mediall by
suppo^ition. Wherefore the parallelogramme contained under the lines CF and ^D
also is mediall. And (as it has already been proved) as the line AE is to the
line EB, so is the line CF to the line FD. But the line AE was by supposition
incommensurable in power to the line EB. Wherefore (by the 10. of the tenth) the
line CF is incommensurable in power to the line FD. Wherefore the lines CF and
FD are incommensurable in power, having that which is made of the squares of
them added together rational, and that which is contained under them mediall.
Wherefore the whole line CD is (by the 39. of the tenth) a greater line.
Wherefore a line commensurable to a greater line is also a greater line: which
was required to be demonstrated.

An other more brief demonstration of the same after Campane.
Suppose that A be a greater line, unto which let the line B be comme^surable,
either in length and power, or in power only. An other demonstration after
Campane.
And take a rational line CD. And upon it apply the superficies C^ equal to
the square of the line A: and also upon the line FE (which is equal to the
rational line CD) apply the parallelogramme FG equal to the square of the
line B. And forasmuch as the squares of the two lines A and ^ are commensurable
by supposition, the superficies C^, shall be commensurable unto the superficies
FG: and therefore by the first of the sixth and tenth of this book, the line DE
is commensurable in length to the line GB. And forasmuch as (by the ^3. of this
book) the line DE is a fourth binomiall line, therefore by the ^6. of this
book the line GE is also a fourth binomiall line: wherefore by the 57. of this
book the line B which contains in power the superficies FG is a greater line.

The 51. Theoreme. The 69. Proposition. A line commensurable to a line
containing in power a rational and a mediall: is also a line containing in
power a rational and a mediall.
SVppose that AB be a line containing in power a rational and a mediall. And
unto the line AB let the line CD be commensurable, whether in length and power,
or in power only. The^ I say that the line CD is a line co^tayning in power a
rational and a mediall. Duide the line AB into his parts in the point E.
Construction.
Wherefore (by the 40. of the tenth) the lines AE and EB are incommensurable in
power, having that which is made of the squares of them added together medial,
and that which is contained under the^ national. Let the same construction be
in this that was in the former. Demonstration.
And in like sort we may prove that the lines CF and FD are incommensurable in
power, and that that which is made of the square of the lines AE and EB is
commensurable to that which is made of the squares of the lines CF and FD, and
that that also which is contained under the lines AE and EB is comme^surable to
that which is contained under the lines CF and FD. Wherefore that which is made
of the squares of the lines CF and FD is mediall, and that which is contained
under the lines CF and FD is rational. Wherefore the whole line CD is a line
containing in power a rational and a mediall: which was required to be
demonstrated.

An other demonstration of the same after Campane.
Supose that AB be a line containing in power a rational and a mediall: An
other demonstration af^^r Campane.
whereunto let the line GD be commensurable either in length and power, or in
power only. Then I say that the line GD is a line containing in power a
rational and a mediall. Take a rational line EZ, upon which by the 45. of the
first apply a rectangle parallelogra^me EZFC equal to the square of the line
AB: and upon the line CF (which is equal to the line EZ) apply the
parallelogramme FCHI equal to the square of the line GD^ and let the breadths
of the said parallelogrammes be the lines EG and CHAPTER And forasmuch as the line
AB is commensurable to the line GD at the least in power only, therefore the
parallelogrammes OF and FH (which are equal to their squares) shall be
commensurable. Wherefore by the 1. of the sixth the right lines EC and CH are
co^me^surable in length. And forasmuch as the parallelogramme OF (which is
equal to the square of the line A^ which contains in power ^ rational and a
mediall) is applied upon the rational EZ, making in breadth the line EC,
therefore the line EC is a fifth binomiall line (by the 64. of this book) unto
which line EC the line CH is co^me^surable in length, wherefore by the 66. of
this book the line CH is also a fifth binomiall line. And forasmuch as the
superficies CI is contained under the rational line EZ (that is CF) and a
fifth binomall line CH, therefore the line which contains in power the
superficies CI, which by supposition is the line GD is a line containing in
power a rational and a mediall by the 58. of this book. A line therefore
commensurable to a line containing in power a rational and a mediall. etc.

The 52. Theoreme. The 70. Proposition. A line commensurable to a line
containing in power two medialls, is also a line containing in power two
medialls.
SVppose that AB be a line containing in power two medialls. And unto the line
AB let the line CD be commensurable, whether in length and power, or in power
only. Then I say, that the line CD is a line containing in power two medialls.
Forasmuch as the line AB is a line containing in power two medialls,
Construction.
let it be divided into his parts in the point E. Wherefore (by the 41. of the
tenth) the lines AE and EB are incommensurable in power, having that which is
made of the squares of them added together mediall, and that also which is
contained under them mediall, and that which is made of the squares of the
lines AE and EB is incommensurable to that which is contained under the lines
AE and EB. Let the self same construction be in this, that was in the former.
Demonstration.
And in like sort may we prove, that the lines CF and FD are incommensurable in
power, and that that which is made of the squares of the lines AE and EB added
together, is commensurable to that which is made of the squares of the lines CF
and FD added together, and that that also which is contained under the lines AE
and EB is commensurable to that which is contained under the lines CF and FD.
Wherefore that which is made of the squares of the lines CF and FD is mediall
(by the Corollary of the 23. of the tenth): and that which is contained under
the lines CF and FD is mediall (by the same Corollary)^ and moreover, that
which is made of the squares of the lines CF and FD is incommensurable to that
which is contained under the lines CF and FD. Wherefore the line CD is a line
containing in power two medialls: which was required to be proved.

An Assumpt added by Montaureus.
An Assumpt.
That that which is made of the squares of the lines CF and FD added together,
is incommensurable to that which is contained under the lines CF and FD is thus
proved. For, because as that which is made of the squares of the lines AE and
EB added together is to the square of the line AE, so is that which is made of
the squares of the lines CF and FD added together, to the square of the line
CF, as it was proved in the Propositions going before: therefore alternately,
as that which is made of the squares of AE and EB added together is to that
which is made of the squares of CF and FD added together, so is the square of
the line AE to the square of the line CF. But before, namely, in the 68.
Proposition, it was proved, that as the square of the line AE is to the square
of the line CF, so is the parallelogra^me contained under the lines AE and EB
to the parallelogramme contained under the lines CF and FD. Wherefore as that
which is made of the squares of the lines AE and EB is to that which is made of
the squares of the lines CF and FD, so is the parallelogramme contained under
the lines AE and EB to the parallelogramme contained under the lines CF and FD.
Wherefore alternately, as that which is made of the squares of the lines AE and
EB is to the parallelogramme contained under the lines AE and EB, so is that
which is made of the squares of the lines CF and FD to the parallelogramme
contained under the lines CF and FD. But by supposition that which is made of
the squares of the lines AE and EB, is incomm^nsurable to the parallelogramme
contained under the lines AE and EB. Wherefore that which is made of the
squares of the lines CF and FD added together, is incommens^rable to the
parallelogramme contained under the lines CF and FD: which was required to be
proved.

An other demonstration after Campane.
Suppose that AB be a line containing in power two medialls: whereunto let the
line GD be commensurable either in length, and in power, or in power only. An
other demonstration after Campan^.
Then I say, that the line GD is a line co^tayning in power two medialls. Let
the same construction be in this, that was in the former. And forasmuch as the
parallelogramme OF is equal to the square of the line AB, and is applied upon
a rational line EZ, it makes the breadth EC a sixth binomiall line, by the 65.
of this book. And forasmuch as the parallelogrammes OF and CI (which are
equal unto the squares of the lines AB and GD, which are supposed to be
commensurable) are commensurable, therefore the lines EC and CH are
commensurable in length, by the first of the sixth. But EC is a sixth binomiall
line: Wherefore CH also is a sixth binomiall line, by the 66. of this book. And
forasmuch as the superficies CI is contained under the rational line CF and a
sixth binomiall line CH, therefore the line which co^tayneth in power the
superficies CI, namely, the line GD is a line containing in power two medialls,
by the 59. of this book. Wherefore a line commensurable to a line containing
in power two medialls. etc.

An Annotation.
If other to has been spoken of six Senarys, of which the first Senary
contains the pr^duction of irrational lines by composition: the second, the
division of them, namely, that those lines are in one poin^ only deuide^ the
third, the finding out of binomiall lines, of the first, I say, the second, the
third, the fourth, the fifth, and the sixth: after that begins the ^ourth
Senary, containing the difference of irrational lines between them selves. For
by the nature of every one of the binomiall lines are demonstrated the
differences of irrational lines. The fiueth entre^teth of the applications of
the squares of every irrational line, namely, what irrational lines are the
breadthes of every superficies so applied. In the sixth Senary is proved, that
any line commensurable to any irrational line, is also an irrational line of
the same nature. And now shall be spoken of the seventh Senary, wherein again
are plainly set forth the rest of the differences of the said lines between
them selves.

And the^e is even in those irrational lines an arithmeticall
proportionalitie. Note.
And that line which is the arithmeticall mean proportional between the
parts of any irrational line, is also an irrational line of the self same
kind. First it is certain that there is an arithmeticall proportion between
those parts. For suppose that the line AB be any of the foresaid irrational
lines, as for example, let it be a binomiall line, and let it be divided into
his names in the point C. And let AC be the greater name, from which take away
the line AD equal to the less name, namely, to CB. And divide the line CD
into two equal parts in the point E. It is manifest that the line AE is
equal to the line EB. Let the line FG be equal to either of them. It is
plain that how much the line AC differs from the line FG, so much the same
line FG di^^ereth from the line CB: for in each is the difference of the line
DE or EC, which is the property of arithmeticall proportionalitie. And it is
manifest, that the line FG is commensurable in length to the line AB, for it is
the half thereof. Wherefore (by the 66. of the tenth) the line FG is a
binomiall line. And after the self same manner may it be proved touching the
rest of the irrational lines.

The 53. Theoreme. The 71. Proposition. If two superficieces, namely, a
rational and a mediall superficies be composed together, the line which
contains in power the whole superficies, is one of these four irrational
lines, either a binomial line, or a first bimediall line, or a greater line, or
a line containing in power a rational and a mediall superficies.
SVppose that there be two superficieces AB and CD, The seuent^ Senary.
of which let the superficies AB be rational, and the superficies CD mediall.
The^ I say that the line containing in power y^ whole superficies AD, is either
a binomial line, or a first bimediall line, or a greater line, Construction.
or a line co^tayning in power a rational and a mediall superficies. For the
superficies AB is either greater or less the^ the superficies CD for they ca^
by no means be equal, when as the one is rational, and the other medial).
First let it be greater, Two cases in this proposition, of which each also has
his two cases.

First case.


and take a rational line OF. And (by the 44. of the first) unto the line OF
apply the parallelogramme EG equal to the superficies AB, and making in breadth
the line EH, and to the same line OF, that is, to the line HG apply the
parallelogramme HI equal to the superficies DC, and making in breadth the line
HK. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the superficies AB is rational, and is equal to the
parallelogramme EG, therefore the parallelogramme EG is also rational, and it is
applied unto the rational line OF, making in breadth the line EH. Wherefore the
line EH is rational and commensurable in length to the line OF (by the 20. of
the tenth). Again forasmuch as the superficies CD is mediall, and is equal to
the parallelogra^me HI, therefore the parallelogra^me HI is also mediall, and is
applied unto the rational line OF, that is, unto the line HG making in breadth
the line HK. Wherefore the line HK is rational and incommensurable in length to
the line OF (by the 2^ of the tenth.) And forasmuch as the superficies CD is
mediall, and the superficies AB is rational, therefore the superficies AB is
incommensurable to the superficies CD. Wherefore also the parallelogramme EG is
incommensurable to the parallelogramme HI. But as the parallelogramme GE is to
the parallelogramme HI, so (by the 1. of the sixth) is the line EH to the line
HK. Wherefore (by the 10. of the tenth) the line EH is incommensurable in length
to the line HK, and they are both rational. Wherefore the lines EH and HK are
rational commensurable in power only. Wherefore the whole line EK is a
binomiall line, and is divided into his names in the point H. And forasmuch as
the super^icies AB is greater then the superficies CD, but the superficies AB
is equal to the parallelogramme EG, and the superficies CD to the
parallelogramme HI. Wherefore the parallelogramme EG is greater then the
parallelogramme HI. Wherefore the line EH is greater then the line HK. Wherefore
the line EH is in power more then the line HK either by the square of a line
commensurable in length to the line EH, or by the square of a line
incommensurable in length to the line EH. First part of the first case.
First let it be in power more by the square of a line co^me^surable in length
unto the line EH. Now the greater name, namely, EH is commensurable in length
to the rational line given OF, as it has already been proved. Wherefore the
whole line EK is a first binomiall line. And the line OF is a rational line.
But if a superficies be contained under a rational line, and a first binomiall
line, the line that contains in power the same superficies, is (by the 54. of
the tenth) a binomiall line. Wherefore the line containing in power the
parallelogramme EI is a binomiall line. Wherefore also the line containing in
power the superficies AD is a binomiall line.

But now let the line EH be in power more then the line HK by the square of a
line incommensurable in length to the line EH: Second part of the first case.
now the greater name that is, EH is commensurable in length to the rational
line given OF. Wherefore the line EK is afourth binomiall line. And the line OF
is rational. But if a superficies be contained under a rational line and
afourth binomiall line, the line that contains in power the same superficies
is (by the 57. of the tenth) irrational, and is a greater line. Wherefore the
line which contains in power the parallelogramme EI is a greater line.
Wherefore also the line containing in power the superficies AD is a greater
line.

The second case.
But now suppose that the superficies AB which is rational, be less then the
superficies CD which is mediall. Wherefore also the parallelogramme EG is less
then the parallelogra^me HI. Wherefore also the line EH is less then the line
HK. Now the line HK is in power more then the line EH either by the square of a
line co^mensurable in length to the line HK, or by the square of a line
incommensurable in length unto the line HK. First let it be in power more by
the square of a line commensurable in length unto HK: First part of the second
case.
now the less name, that is EH is commensurable in length to the rational
line given OF, as it was before proved. Wherefore the whole line EK is a second
binomiall line. And the line OF is a rational line. But if a superficies be
contained under a rational line and a second binomiall line, the line that
contains in power the same superficies, is (by the 55. of the tenth) a first
bimediall line. Wherefore the line which contains in power the parallelograme
EI is a first bimediall line. Wherefore also the line that contains in power
the superficies AD is a first bimediall line.

Second part of the second case.
But now let the line HK be in power more then the line EH, by the square of a
line inco^mensurable in length to the line HK, now the less name, that is, EH
is co^mensurable in length to the rational line given OF. Wherefore the whole
line EK is a fifth binomiall line. And the line OF is rational. But if a
superficies be contained under a rational line, and a fifth binomiall line, the
line that contains in power the same superficies, is (by the 58. of the
tenth) a line containing in power a rational and a mediall. Wherefore the line
that contains in power the parallelogramme EI is a line containing in power a
rational and a mediall. Wherefore also the line that contains in power the
superficies AD is a line containing in power a rational and a mediall. If
therefore a rational and a mediall superficies be added together, the line
which contains in power the whole superficies, is one of these four
irrational lines, namely, either a binomiall line, or a first bimediall line,
or a greater line, or a line containing in power a rational and a mediall:
which was required to be demonstrated.

The 54. Theoreme. The 72. Proposition. If two mediall superficieces
incommensurable the one to the other be composed together: the line containing
in power the whole superficies is one of the two irrational lines remaining,
namely, either a second bimediall line, or a line containing in power two
medialls.
LEt these two mediall superficieces AB and CD being incommensurable the one to
the other be added together. Then I say, that the line which contains in
power the superficies AD is either a second bimediall line, or a line
containing in power two medialls. Construction.
For the superficies AB is either greater or less then the superficies CD (for
they can by no means be equal, when as they are incommensurable). Two cases
in this Proposition.

The first case.


First let the superficies AB be greater then the superficies CD. And take a
rational line OF. And (by the 44. of the first) unto the line OF apply the
parallelogramme EG equal to the superficies AB, and making in breadth the line
EH: and unto the same line OF, that is, to the line HG, apply the
parallelogramme HI equal to the superficies CD, and making in breadth the line
HK. And forasmuch as either of these superficieces AB and CD is mediall,
therefore also either of these parallelogrammes EG and HI is mediall. And they
are each applied to the rational line OF, making in breadth the lines EH and
HK. Wherefore (by the 22. of the tenth) either of these lines EH and HK is
rational and incommensurable in length to the line OF. And forasmuch as the
superficies AB is incommensurable to the superficies CD, and the superficies AB
is equal to the parallelogramme E^, and the superficies CD to the
parallelogramme HI: therefore the parallelogramme EG is incommensurable to the
parallelogramme HI. But (by the 1. of the sixth) as the parallelogramme EG is to
the parallelogramme HI, so is the line EH^ to the line HK. Wherefore (by the
10. of the tenth) the line EH i^ ^spans^ HK^ Wherefore the ^^nes EH and HK are
rational commensurable in power only. Wherefore the whole line EK is a
binomiall line. And as in the former Proposition so als^ in this may it be
proved, that the line EH is greater then the line HK. Wherefore the line EH is
in power more then the line HK, either by the square of a line commensurable in
length to the line EH, or by the square of a line incommensurable in length to
the line EH. First let it be greater by the square of a line commensurable in
length unto the line EH. The first part of the first case.
Now neither of these lines EH and HK is commensurable in length to the
rational line given OF. Wherefore the whole line EK is a third binomiall line.
And the line OF is a rational line. But if a superficies be contained under a
rational line and a third binomiall line, the line that contains in power
the same superficies, is (by the 56. of the tenth) a second bimediall line.
Wherefore the line that contains in power the superficies EI, that is, the
superficies AD, is a second bimediall line.

(...) second (...) of the (...) case.
But now suppose that the line EH be in power more then the line HK by the
square of a line incommensurable in length to the line EH. And forasmuch as
either of these lines EH and HK is incommensurable in length to the rational
line given OF, therefore the line EK is a sixth binomiall line. But if a
superficies be contained under a rational line and a sixth binomiall line, the
line that contains in power the same superficies, is (by the 59. of the
tenth) a line containing in power two medialls. Wherefore the line that
contains in power the superficies AD, is a line containing in power two
medialls. The second case.
And after the self same manner, if the superficies AB be less then the
superficies CD, may we prove, that the line that contains in power the
superficies AD, is either a second bimediall line, or a line containing in
power two medialls. If therefore two mediall superficieces incommensurable the
one to the other be added together, the line containing in power the whole
superficies is one of the two irrational lines remaining, namely, either a
second bimediall line, or a line co^taining in power two medialls: which was
required to be proved.

A Corollary following of the former Propositions.
A binomiall line and the other irrational lines following it, are neither
mediall lines, nor one and the same between them selves. For the square of a
mediall line applied to a rational line, A Corollary
makes the breadth rational and incommensurale in length to the rational
line, whereunto it is applied (by the 22. of the tenth). The square of a
binomiall line applied to ^ rational line, makes the breadth a first
binomiall line (by the 60. of the tenth). The square of a first bimediall line
applied unto a rational line, makes the breadth a second binomiall line (by
the 61. of the tenth). The square of a second bimediall line applied unto a
rational line, makes the breadth a third binomiall line (by the 62. of the
tenth). The square of a greater line applied to a rational line, makes the
breadth a fourth binomiall line (by the 63. of the tenth). The square of a line
containing in power a rational and a mediall superficies, makes the breadth a
fifth binomiall line (by the 64. of the tenth). And the square of a line
containing in power two medialls, applied unto a rational line, makes the
breadth a sixth binomiall line (by the 65. of the tenth). Seeing therefore that
these foresaid breadthes differ both from the first breadth, for that it is
rational, and differ also the one from the other, for that they are binomials
of diverse orders: it is manifest that those irrational lines differ also the
one from the other.

Here begins the Senaries by substraction. The 55. Theoreme. The 73.
Proposition. If from a rational line be taken away a rational line
commensurable in power only to the whole line: the residue is an irrational
line, and is called a residuall line.
SVppose that AB be a rational line, and from AB take away a rational line BC
commensurable in power only to the whole line AB. The first Senary by
substraction.
Then I say that the line remaining, namely AC is irrational and is called a
residuall line. For forasmuch as the line AB is incommensurable in length unto
the line BC, and (by the assumpt going before the 22. of the tenth) as the line
AB is to the line BC, Demonstration.
so i^ the square of the line AB to that which is contained under the lines AB
and BC: wherefore (by the 10. of the tenth) the square of the line AB is
incommensurable to that which is contained under the lines AB and BC. But unto
the square of the line AB are commensurable the squares of the lines AB and BC
(by the 15. of the tenth). Wherefore the squares of the lines AB and BC are
incommensurable to that which is contained under the lines AB and BC. But unto
that which is contained under the lines AB and BC is commensurable that which
is contained under the lines AB and BC twice. Wherefore the squares of the
lines AB and BC are inco^me^surable to that which is contained under the lines
AB and BC twice. But the squares of the lines AB and BC are equal to that
which is contained under the lines AB and BC twice, and to the square of the
line AC (by the 7. of the second). Wherefore that which is contained under the
lines AB and BC twice together with the square of the line AC is
incommensurable to that which is contained under the lines AB and BC twice.
Wherefore (by the 2 part of the 16. of the tenth) that which is contained under
the lines AB and BC twice, is inco^me^surable to the square of the line AC.
Wherefore (by the first part of the same) that which is contained under the
lines AB and BC twice together with the square of the line AC, that is, the
squares of the lines AB and BC are incommensurable to the square of the line
AC. But the squares of the lines AB and BC are rational, for the lines AB and
BC are put to be rational: wherefore the line AC is irrational and is called a
residuall line: which was required to be proved.

An other demonstration after Campane.
Campane demonstrateth this Proposition by a figure more briefly after this
m^ner. An other demonstration after Campane.
Let the superficies EG be equal to the squares of the lines AB and BC added
together: which shall be rational (for that the lines AB and BC are supposed
to be rational co^mensurable in power only). From which superficies take away
the superficies DF equal to that which is con^^ya^d under the lines AB and DC
twice, which shall be mediall (by the 21. of this book). Now by the 7. of the
second, the superficies FG is equal to the square of the line AC. And
forasmuch as the superficies EG is incommensurable to the superficies DF (for
that the one is rational and the other mediall): therefore (by the 16. of this
book) the (...) superficies EG is incommensurable to the superficies FG.
Wherefore the superficies FG is irrational. And therefore the line AC which
contains it in power is irrational: which was required to be proved.

An annotation of P. Monta^re^s.
This Theoreme teaches nothing else but that that portion of the greater name
of a binomiall line which remains after the taking away of the less name
from the greater name is irrational, which is called a residuall line, that is
to say, if from the greater name of a binomiall line, which greater name is a
rational line co^mensurable in power only to the less name, be taken away
the less name, which self less name is also commensurable in power only to
the greater name (which greater name this Theoreme calls the whole line) the
rest of the line which remains is irrational, which he calls a residuall
line. Wherefore all the lines which are entreated in this Theoreme, and in the
five other which follow are the portions remaining of the greater parts of the
whole lines which were entreated of in the 36.37.38.39.40.41. propositio^s,
after the taking away the less part from the greater.

In this proposition is set forth the nature of the eight kind of irrational
lines which is called a residuall line, the definition whereof by this
proposition is thus.

Diffinition of the eight irrational line.
A residuall line is an irrational line which remains, when from a rational
line given, is taken away a rational line commensurable to the whole line in
power only.

The 56. Theoreme. The 74. Proposition. If from a mediall line be taken away a
mediall line commensurable in power only to the whole line, and comprehending
together with the whole line a rational superficies: the residue is an
irrational line, and is called a first mediall residuall line.
SVppose that AB be a mediall line. And from the line AB take away a mediall
line BC commensurable in power only to the whole line AB and comprehending
together with the line AB a rational superficies, that is, let that which is
comprehended under the lines AB and BC be rational. Then I say that the line
remaining, namely, AC is irrational and is called a first mediall residuall
line. ^^monstra^ion.
For forasmuch as the lines AB and BC are mediall, therefore also the squares
of the lines AB and BC are mediall. But that which is contained under the lines
AB and BC twice is rational. Wherefore that which is composed of the squares
of the lines AB and BC, that is, that which is contained under AB and BC twice
together with the square of the line AC is incommensurable to that which is
contained under the lines AB and BC twice. Wherefore (by the second part the
16. of the tenth) that which is contained under the lines AB and BC twice is
incommensurable to the square of the line AC. But that which is contained under
the lines AB and BC twice it rational, wherefore the square of the line AC is
irrational. Wherefore also the line AC is irrationall^ and is called a first
mediall residuall line. This first mediall residuall line is also that part of
the greater part of a first bimediall line, which remains after the taking
away of the less part from the greater, whereof it has also his name, and is
called a first mediall residuall lines which was required to be proved.

Out of this proposition is taken the definition of the ninth kind of
irrational lines, which is called a first residuall mediall line the
difinition whereof is thus.

Diffinition of (...) ^inth irrational line.
A first residuall mediall line is an irrational line which remains, when
from a mediall line is taken away a mediall line commensurable to the whole in
power only, and the part taken away and the whole line contain a mediall
superficies.

An other demonstration after Campane.
Let the line DE be rational, upon which apply the superficies DF equal to
that which is cont^ined under the lines AB and BC twice, and let the
superficies GE be equal to that which is composed of the squares of the lines
AB and BC: An other demonstration after Campane.
wherefore by the 7. of the second, the superficies FG is equal to the square of
the line AC. And forasmuch as (by supposition) the superficies EG is mediall,
therefore (by the 22. of the tenth) the line DG is rational co^mensurable in
power only to the rational line DE. And forasmuch as by supposition the
superficies EH is rational, therefore by the 20. of the tenth, the line DH is
rational commensurable in length unto the rational line DE. Wherefore the lines
DG and DH are rational commensurable in power only (by the assumpt put before
the 13. of this book). Wherefore by the 73 of this book, the line GH is a
residuall line, and is therefore irrational. Wherefore (by the corollary of the
21. of this book) the superficies FG is irrational. And therefore the line AC
which co^tayneth it in power is irrational, and is called a first medial
residuall line.

The 57. Theoreme. The 75. Proposition. If from a mediall line be taken away a
mediall line commensurable in power only to the whole line, and comprehending
together with the whole line a mediall superficies, the residue is an
irrational line, and is called a second mediall residuall line.
SVppose that AB be a mediall line, and from AB take away a mediall line CB
commensurable in power only to the whole line AB, and comprehending together
with the whole line AB a mediall superficies, namely, the parallelogramme
contained under the lines AB and BC. Construction.
Then I say that the residue, namely; the line AC is irrational, and is called
a second mediall residuall line. Take a rational line DI, and (by the 44. of
the first) unto the line DI apply the parallelogramme DE equal to the squares
of the lines AB and BC, and making in breadth the line DG. Demonstration.
And unto the same line DI apply the parallelogramme DH equal to that which is
contained under the lines AB and BC twice, and making in breadth the line DF.
Now the parallelogramme DH is less then the parallelogramme DE, for that also
the square of the lines AB and BC are greater then that which is contained
under the lines AB and BC twice, by the square of the line AC by the 7. of the
second. Wherefore the parallelogramme remaining, namely, FE, is equal to the
square of the line AC. And forasmuch as the squares of the lines AB and BC are
mediall, therefore also the parallelogramme DE is mediall, and is applied to the
rational line DI, making in breadth the line DG. Wherefore (by the 22. of the
tenth) the line DG is rational and incommensurable in length to the line DI.
Again forasmuch as that which is contained under the lines AB and BC is
mediall, therefore also that which is contained under the lines AB and BC twice
is mediall, but that which is contained under the lines AB and BC twice is
equal to the parallelogramme DH. Wherefore the parallelogramme DH is mediall
and is applied to the rational line DI making in breadth the line DF. Wherefore
the line DF is rational and incommensurable in length to the line DI. And
forasmuch as the lines AB and BC are co^mensurable in power only, therefore the
line AB is incomme^surable in length to the line BC. Wherefore (by the assumpt
going before the 22. of the tenth, and by the 10. of the tenth) the square of
the line AB is incommensurable to that which is contained under the lines AB
and BC. But unto the square of the line AB are commensurable the squares of AB
and BC (by the 15. of the tenth) And unto that which is contained under the
lines AB and BC is comme^surable to that which is contained under the lines AB
and BC twice. Wherefore the squares of the lines AB and BC are incommensurable
to that which is contained under the lines AB and BC twice. But unto the
squares of the lines AB and BC is equal the parallelogra^me DE, and to that
which is contained under the lines AB and BC twice, is equal the
parallelogramme DH. Wherefore the parallelogra^me DE is inco^me^surable to the
parallelogramme DH. But as the parallelogramme DE is to the parallelogramme DH,
so i^ the line GD to the line DF. Wherefore the line GD is incommensurable in
length to the line DF. And either of the^ is rational. Wherefore the lines GD
and DF are rational commensurable in power only. Wherefore the line FG is a
residuall line (by the 73. proposition of the tenth) And the line DE is a
rational line. but a supe^ficies comprehended under a rational line, and an
irrational line is irrational (by the 21 of the te^^^^ and the line which
contains in power the same super^icies is irrational (by the assumpt going
before the same) Wherefore the parallelograme FE is irrational. But the line AC
contains in power the parallelogramme FE. Wherefore the line AC is an
irrational line and is called a second mediall residuall line. And this second
mediall residuall line is that part of the greater part of a bimediall line
which remains after the taking away of the less part from the greater: which
was required to be proved.

An other demonstrtion more brief after Campane.
An other demon^^ra^ion after Campane.
Suppose that AB be a mediall line, from which take away the mediall line GB
commensurable unto the whole line AB in power only and containing with it ^
mediall superficies, namely, that which is contained under the lines AB and BG.
Then I say that the residue AG is an i^rationall line, and is called a second
mediall residua^l line. Take a rational line DC, upon which apply a
parallelogramme equal to that which is composed of the squares of the lines AB
and BG, which by the 45. of the first let be DCEI. Again let the
parallelogramme ZFEI be equal to that which is contained under the line^ AB
and BG twice. Wherefore the superficies remaining DF is equal to the square of
the line AG by the 7. of the second. (For that which is contained under the
lines AB and BG twice together with the square of the line A^ is equal to that
which is composed of the squares of the lines AB and B G). And forasmuch as the
squares of the lines AB and BG are mediall, for that they are described of
medial lines: the parllelogra^me DE which is equal unto the^, shall also be
mediall. And foras^uch as that which is contained under the lines AB and BG is
by supposition mediall, therefore the superficie^ Z^ which is double unto it is
also mediall. But the mediall superficies DE excedeth not the mediall
supe^ficies ZE by a rational superficies (by the 26. of this book). Wherefore
the excess, namely, the super^icies D^ is irrational, unto which the square
of the line A^ is equal: wherefore the square of the line A^ is ir^ationall,
and therefore the line AG which contains it in power is irrational by the
assumpt put before the 21. of this book, and is called a second mediall
residuall line.

This proposition sets forth the nature of the tenth kind of irrational
lines, which is called a second residuall mediall line, which is thus defined.

Diffinition of the tenth ir^ationall line.
A second residual^ mediall line is an irrational line which remains, when
from a medial line is taken away a mediall line commensurable to the whole in
power only, and the part taken away and the whole line contain a mediall
superficies.

The 58. Theoreme. The 76. Proposition. I^ from a right line be taken away a
right line incommensurable in power to the whole, and if that which is made of
the squares of the whole line and of the line taken away added together be
rational, and the parallelogra^me contained under the same lines mediall: the
line remaining is irrational, and is called a less line.
SVppose that AB be a right line, and from the right line AB take away a right
line BC incommensurable in power to the whole line, namely, to AB, and let that
which is composed of the squares of the lines AB and BC be rational, and let
the parallelogramme contained under the same lines AB and BC be mediall. Then I
say, that the line remaining, namely, the line AC is irrational, and is called
a less line. For forasmuch as that which is composed of the squares of the
lines AB and BC is rational, Demonstration.
and that which is contained under the lines AB and BC twice is mediall,
therefore that which is composed of the squares of the lines AB and BC is
incommensurable to that which is contained under the lines AB and BC twice.
Wherefore the squares of the lines AB and BC, are inco^mensurable to the square
of AC, as it was said in the 73. Proposition. But that which is made of the
squares of the lines AB and BC is rational. Wherefore the square of the line
AC is irrational: wherefore also the line AC is irrational: and is called a
less line. And is therefore so called, for that it is that portion of the
greater part of a greater line, which remains after the taking away of the
less part from the greater: which was required to be proved.

In this Proposition is contained the definition of the eleventh kind of
irrational lines, which is called a less line, whose definition is thus.

A less line is an irrational line which remains, Diffinition of the
eleue^th irrational line.
when from a right line is taken away a right line incommensurable in power to
the whole, and the square of the whole line, and the square of the part taken
away added together, make a rational superficies, and the parallelogramme
contained of them is mediall.

This Proposition may after Campanes way be demonstrated, if you remember well
the order and positions which he in the three former Propositions used.

The 19. Theoreme. The 77. Proposition. If from a right line be taken away a
right line incommensurable in power to the whole line, and if that which is
made of the squares of the whole line and of the line taken away added together
be mediall, and the parallelogramme contained under the same lines rational:
the line remaining is irrational, and is called a line making with a rational
superficies the whole superficies mediall.
SVppose that AB be a right line, and from the right line AB take away a right
line BC incommensurable in power to the whole line AB, and let that which is
made of the squares of the lines AB and BC added together, be mediall, and the
parallelogramme contained under the same lines rational. Then I say, that the
line remaining, namely, the line AC, is irrational, and is called a line
making with a rational superficies the whole superficies mediall.
Demonstration.
For for^smuch as that which is made of the squares of the lines AB and BC
added together is mediall, and that which is contained under the lines AB and
BC twice is rational, therefore that which is made of the squares of the lines
AB and BC added together, is incommensurable to that which is contained under
the lines AB and BC twice. Wherefore (by the 16. of the tenth) the residue,
namely, the square of the line AC is incommensurable to that which is contained
under the lines AB and BC twice. But that which is contained under the lines AB
and BC twice is rational. Wherefore the square of the line AC is irrational.
Wherefore also the line AC is irrational: and is called a line making with a
rational super^icies the whole superficies mediall: and is therefore so called
for that that which is made of the squares of the lines AB and BC added
together is mediall, and is a certain whole superficies, part whereof is that
which is contained under the lines AB and BC, which is a rational superficies.
For the squares of the lines AB and BC, are equal to that which is contained
under the lines AB and BC twice, and to the square of the line AC (by the 7. of
the second). Or it is therefore so called for that the square thereof added to
a rational super^icies, makes the whole superficies mediall, as shall be
proved by the 109. Proposition of this book: which was required to be proved.

In this Proposition is declared the nature of the twelueth kind of irrational
lines, which is called a line making with a rational superficies the whole
superficies mediall, whose definition is thus.

^^^^i^ition of the twelueth irra^ionall line.
A line making with a rational superficies the whole superficies mediall, is an
irrational line which remains, when from a right line is taken away a right
line inco^mensurable in power to the whole line, and the square of the whole
line and the square of the part taken away added together make a mediall
superficies, and the parallelogramme contained of them is rational.

This Proposition also may after Campanes way be demonstrated, observing the
former caution.

The 60. Theoreme. The 78. Proposition. If from a right line be taken away a
right line incommensurable in power to the whole line, and if that which is
made of the squares of the whole line and of the line taken away added together
be medial, and the parallelogramme contained under the same lines be also
mediall, and incommensurable to that which is made of the squares of the said
lines added together: the line remaining is irrational, and is called a line
making with a mediall superficies the whole superficies mediall.
SVppose that AB be a right line, and from AB take away a right line BC
incommensurable in power to the whole line AB. And let that which is made of
the squares of the lines AB and BC added together be mediall, and let the
parallelograme contained under the lines AB and BC be also medial, and let that
which is made of the squares of the lines AB and BC added together be
incommensurable to that which is contained under the lines AB and BC. The^ I
say that the line remaining, namely, the line AC i^ irrational and is called a
line making with a mediall superficies the whole superficies medial. Take a
rational line DI. And (by the 44. of the first) unto the line DI apply the
parallelogramme DE equal to that which is made of the squares of the lines AB
and BC added together, Construction.
and making in breadth the line DG. And unto the same line DI apply the
parallelogramme DH equal to that which is contained under the lines AB and BC
twice and making in breadth the line DF. Wherefore the parallelogramme
remaining, namely the parallelogramme FE, is equal to the square of the line
AC. Wherefore the line AC contains in power the parallelograme FE.
Demonstration.
And forasmuch as that which is made of the squares of the lines AB and BC
added together is mediall, and is equal to the parallelogramme DE, therefore
also the parallelogramme DE is mediall. And the parallelogramme DE is applied
to the rational line DI making in breadth the line DG. Wherefore (by the 22. of
the tenth) the line DG is rational and incommensurable in length to the line
DI. Again forasmuch as that which is contained under the lines AB and BC twice
is mediall and is equal to the parallelogramme DH, therefore the
parallelogramme DH is mediall. And the parallelograme DH is applied unto the
rational line DI making in breadth the line DF, wherefore the line DF is
rational and incommensurable in length to the line DI. And forasmuch as that
which is made of the squares of the lines AB and BC added together is
incommensurable to that which contained under the lines AB and BC twice,
therefore the parallelogramme DE is incommensurable to the parallelogramme DH.
But as the parallelogramme DE is to the parallelogramme DH, so (by the first of
the sixth) is the line DG to the line DF: wherefore the line DG is
incommensurable in length to the line DF. And they are both rational lines.
Wherefore the lines DG and DF are rational commensurable in power only,
where^ore the line FG is a residuall line by the 73. of this booke^ But the
line FH is rational for that it is equal unto the line DI. But a rectangle
parallelogramme contained under a rational line and an irrational line is
irrational, and the line also that contains in power the same
parallelogramme is irrational (by the 21. of the tenth). But the line CA
contains in power the parallelogramme FE. Wherefore the line AC is
irrational and is called a line making with a mediall superficies the whole
superficies mediall. And is therefore so called, for that that which is made of
the squares of the lines AB and BC added together is mediall, and is a certain
whole superficies, part whereof is that which is contained under the lines AB
and BC, which is also mediall: you shall also by the 110. proposition of this
book understand an other cause why it is so called.

This proposition may thus more briefly be demonstrated: forasmuch as that
which is composed of the squares of the lines AB and BC is mediall, and that
also which is contained under them is mediall, therefore the parallelogramm^s
DE and DH which are equal unto them are mediall: but a mediall superficies
exceeds not a mediall superficies by a rational superficies. Wherefore the
superficies FE which is the excess of the mediall superficies DE above the
mediall superficies DH is irrational. And therefore the line AC which
contains it in power is irrational. etc.

In this proposition is showed the condition and nature of the thirtenth and
last kind of irrational lines, which is called a line making with a mediall
superficies the whole superficies mediall, whose definition is thus.

A line making with a mediall superficies the whole superficies mediall is an
irrational line which remains, Diffinition of the thirtenth and last
irrational line.
when from a right li^e is taken away a right line incommensurable in power to
the whole line, and the squares of the whole line and of the line taken away
added together make a mediall superficies, and the parallelogramme contained of
the^ is also a mediall superficies, moreover the squares of them are
incommensurable to the parallelogramme contained of them.

An assumpt of Campane.
If there be four qua^tities, and if the difference of the first to the
second, be as the difference of the third to the fourth, then alternately, as
the difference of the first is to the third, so is the difference of the second
to the fourth.

This is to be understand of qua^tities in like sort referred the one to the
other, that is if the first be greater then the second, An Assumpt of Campane.
the third ought to be greater then the fourth and if the first be less then
the second, the third ought to be less then the fourth: and is also to be
understand in arithmeticiall proportionality. As for example let the difference
of A be unto B as the difference of C is to D. I. Dee.

Though Campanes lemma be true, ye^ the manner of demonstrating it, (narrowly
considered) is not artificial.


Then I say that as the difference of A is to C, so is the difference of B to
D. For (by this common sentence, the difference of the extremes is composed of
the differences of the extremes to the means), the difference of A to C is
composed of the difference of A to B and of the difference of B to C. And (by
the same common sentence) the difference of B to D is composed of the
difference of B to C, and of ^he difference of C to D. And forasmuch as (by
supposition) the difference of A to B is as the difference of C to D, and the
difference of B to C is common to them both. Wherefore it follows, that as
the difference of A is to C, so is the difference of B to D: which was required
to be proved.

The 61. Theoreme. The 79. Proposition. Unto a residual line can be joined one
only right line rational, and commensurable in power only to the whole line.
Second Senary.
LEt AB be a residuall line, and unto it let the line BC be supposed to be
joined, so that let the lines AC and BC be rational commensurable in power
only. Then I say that unto the line AB cannot be joined any other rational
line commensurable in power only to the whole line. Demonstration leading to
an impossibility.
For if it be possible, let BD be such a line added unto it. Wherefore the lines
AD and DB are rational commensurable in power only. And forasmuch as how much
the squares of the lines AD and DB do exceed that which is contained under the
lines AD and DB twice, so much also do the squares of the lines AC and CB
exceed that which is contained under the lines AC and CB twice, for the
excess of each is one and the same, namely, the square of the line AB (by the
7. of the second.) Wher^ore alternately (by the ^ormer assumpt of Campanus) how
much the squares of the lines AD and DB do exceed the squares of the lines AC
and CB, so much also excedeth that which is contained under the lines AD and DB
twice, that which is contained under the lines AC and CB twice. But that which
is made of the squares of the lines AD and DB added together, exceeds that
which is made of the squares of the lines AC and CB added together by a
rational super^icies: (for they are either of them rational). Wherefore that
which is contained under the lines AD and DB twice, exceeds that which is
contained under the lines AC and CB twice by a rational superficies. But that
which is contained under the lines AD and DB twice, is mediall, for it is
commensurable to that which is contained under the lines AD and DB once, which
superficies is mediall (by the 21. of the tenth) and by the same reason also
that which is contained under the lines AC and CB twice is mediall. Wherefore a
mediall superficies differs from a mediall superficies by a rational
superficies, which (by the 26. of the tenth) is impossible. Wherefore unto the
line AB cannot be joined any other rational line besides BC commensurable in
power only, to the whole line. Wherefore unto a residuall line can be joined
one only right line rational and commensurable in power only to the whole
line: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 62. Theoreme. The 80. Proposition. Unto a first medial residuall line can
be joined one only mediall right line, commensurable in power only to the
whole line, and comprehendyng with the whole line a rational superficies.
SVppose that AB be a first mediall residuall line, and unto AB join the line
BC, so that let the lines AC and BC be mediall commensurable in power only,
and let that which is contained under the lines AC and BC be rational. Then I
say that unto the line AB cannot be joined any other mediall line commensurable
in power only to the whole line, and comprehending together with the whole
line a rational super^icies. Demonstration leading to an absurdity.
For if it be possible let the line BD be such a line. Wherefore the lines AD
and DB are mediall commensurable in power only, and that which is contained
under the lines AD and DB is rational. And forasmuch as how much the squares of
the lines AD and DB exceed that which is contained under the lines AD and DB
twice, so much also exceed the squares of the lines AC and BC, that which is
contained under the lines AC and CB twice (for the excess of each is one and
the same, namely, the square of the line AB). Wherefore alternately (as it was
said in the former proposition) how much the squares of the lines AD and DB
exceed the squares of the lines AC and CB, so much also that which is
contained under the lines AD and DB twice, excedeth that which is contained
under the lines AC and CB twice. But that which is contained under the lines AD
and DB twice, excedeth that which is contained under the lines AC and CB twice
by a rational superficies, for they are either of them a rational
supersicies. Wherefore that which is made of the squares of the lines AD and DB
excedeth that which is made of the squares of the lines AC and CB by a
rational superficies, which (by the 26. of the tenth) is impossible. For they
are either of them mediall (for those four lines were put to be mediall.)
Wherefore unto a first mediall residuall line can be joined only one right
mediall line commensurable in power only to the whole line, and comprehending
with the whole line a rational super^icies: which was required to be proved.

The 63. Theoreme. The 81. Proposition. Unto a second mediall residuall line
can be joined only one mediall right line, commensurable in power only to the
whole line, and comprehending with the whole line a mediall superficies.
SVppose that AB be a second mediall residual line, and unto the line AB join
the line BC, so that let the lines AC and CB be mediall co^mensurable in power
only, and let that which is comprehended under the lines AC and CB be mediall.
Then I say, that unto the line AB can not be joined any other mediall right
line co^mensurable in power only to the whole line, and comprehending together
with the whole line a mediall superficies. For if it be possible, let the line
BD be such a line. Wherefore the lines AD and DB are mediall commensurable in
power only, and that which is contained under the lines AD and DB is also
mediall. Take a rational line OF. Construction.
And (by the 44. of the first) unto the line OF apply the parallelogramme EG
equal to the squares of the lines AC and CB, and making in breadth the line
EM: and from that parallelogramme EG take away the parallelogramme HG equal to
that which is contained under AC and CB twice, and making in breadth the line
HM. Wherefore the parallelogramme remaining, namely, EL, is (by the 7. of the
second) equal to the square of the line AB. Wherefore the line AB contains
in power the parallelograme EL. Again, unto the line OF apply (by the 44. of
the first) the parallelogramme EI equal to the squares of the lines AD and DB,
and making in breadth the line EN. But the squares of the lines AD and DB are
equal to that which is contained under the lines AD and DB twice, and to the
square of the line AB. Demonstration leading to an absurdity.
Wherefore the parallelogramme EI is equal to that which is contained under
the lines AD and DB twice, and to the square of the line AB. But the
parallelogramme EL is equal to the square of the line AB. Wherefore the
parallelogramme remaining, namely, HI, is equal to that which is contained
under the lines AD and DB twice. And forasmuch as the lines AC and CB are
^^^iall, therefor the squares also of the lines AC and CB are mediall: and
they are equal to the parallelogramme EG: wherefore the parallelogramme EG is
(by that which was spoken in the 75. Proposition) mediall: and it is applied
unto the rational line OF, making in breadth the line EM. Wherefore (by the
22. of the tenth) the line EM is rational, and in^ommensurable in length to
the line OF. Again, forasmuch as that which is contained under the lines AC
and CB is mediall, therefore (by the Corollary of the 23. of the tenth) that
which is contained under the lines AC and CB twice is also mediall: and it is
equal to the parallelogramme HG: wherefore also the parallelogramme HG is
mediall, and is applied to the rational line OF, making in breadth the line
HM. Wherefore (by the 22 of the tenth) the line HM is rational, and
incommensurable in length to the line OF. And forasmuch as the lines AC and CB
are commensurable in power only, therefore the line AC is incommensurable in
length to the line CB. But as the line AC is to the line CB, so (by the Assumpt
going before the 22. of the tenth) is the square of the line AC to that which
is contained under the lines AC and CB. Wherefore (by the 10. of the tenth) the
square of the line AC is incommensurable to that which is contained under the
lines AC and CB. But unto the square of the line AC are commensurable the
squares of AC and CB, and unto that which is contained under the lines AC and
CB, is commensurable that which is contained under the lines AC and CB twice.
Wherefore the squares of the lines AC and CB are incommensurable to that which
is contained under the lines AC and CB twice. But unto the squares of the lines
AC and CB is equal the parallelogramme EG, and unto that which is contained
under the lines AC and CB twice, is equal the parallelogramme GH. Wherefore
the parallelogramme EG is incommensurable to the parallelogramme HG. But as the
parallelogramme EG is to the parallelogrmme HG, so is the line EM to the line
HM. Wherefore the line EM is incommensurable in length to the line HM. And they
are both rational lines. Wherefore the lines EM and MH are rational
commensurable in power only. Wherefore the line EH is a residuall line, and
unto it is joined a rational line HM commensurable in power only to the whole
line EM. In like sort also may it be proved, that unto the line EH is joined
the line HN, being also rational, and commensurable in power only to the
whole line EN. Wherefore unto a residuall line is joined ^^re then one only
line commensurable in power only to the whole line: which (by the 79. of the
tenth) is impossible. Wherefore unto a second mediall residuall line can be
joined only one mediall right line commensurable in power only to the whole
line, and comprehending with the whole line a mediall superficies: which was
required to be demonstrated.

The 64. Theoreme. The 82. Proposition. Unto a less line can be joined only
one right line incommensurable in power to the whole line, and making together
with the whole line that which is made of their squares added together
rational, and that which is contained under them mediall.
SVppose that AB be a less line, and to AB join the line BC, so that let BC
be such a line as is required in the Theoreme. Wherefore the lines AC and CB are
inco^mensurable in power, having that which is made of the squares of them
added together rational, and that which is contained under them mediall. Then
I say that unto AB cannot be joined any other such right line. Demonstration
leading to an absurdity.
For if it be possible, let the line BD be such a line. Wherefore the lines AD
and DB are incommensurable in power, having that which is made of the squares
of them added together, rational, and that which is contained under them
mediall. And for that how much the squares of the lines AD and DB excede the
squares of the lines AC and CB, so much that which is contained under the lines
AD and DB twice, excedeth that which is contained under the lines AC and CB
twice (by those things which were spoken in the 79. proposition) But that which
is made of the squares of the lines AD and DB added together excedeth that
which is made of the squares of the lines AC and CB added together by a
rational superficies, for they are either of them rational by supposition.
Wherefore that which is contained under the lines AD and DB twice, excedeth that
which is contained under the lines AC and CB twice by a rational superficies:
which (by the 26. of the tenth) is impossible, for either of them is mediall by
supposition. Wherefore unto a less line can be joined only one right line
incommensurable in power to the whole line, and making together with the whole
line that which is made of their squares added together rational, and that
which is contained under them mediall: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 65. Theoreme. The 83. Proposition. Unto a line making with a rational
superficies the whole superficies mediall, can be joined only one right line
incommensurable in power to the whole line, and making together with the whole
line that which is made of their squares added together mediall, and that which
is contained under them rational.
SVppose that AB be a line making with a rational superficies the whole
superficies mediall, and unto it let the line BC be joined, so that let BC be
such a line as is required in the Theoreme. Wherefore the lines AC and CB are
incommensurable in power, ha^ing that which is made of the squares of the lines
AC and CB added together mediall, and that which is contained under the lines
AC and CB rational. Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
Then I say that unto the line AB cannot be joined any other such line. For if
it be possible, let the line BD be such a line. Wherefore the lines AD and DB
are incommensurable in power, having that which is made of the squares of the
lines AD and DB added together mediall, and that which is contained under the
lines AD and DB rational. Now for that how much the squares of the lines AD
and DB exceed the squares of the lines AC and CB, so much that which is
contained under the lines AD and DB twice exceeds that which is contained
under the lines AC and CB twice, by that which was spoken in the 79.
proposition. But that which is contained under the lines AD and DB twice,
exceeds that which is contained under the lines AC and CB twice by a
rational superficies, for they are either of them rational by suppositio^.
Wherefore that which is made of the squares of the lines AD and DB added
together, excedeth that which is made of the squares of the lines AC and CB
added together by a rational superficies, which by the 26. of the tenth, is
impossible, for they are either of them mediall by supposition. Wherefore unto
the line AB cannot be joined any other line besides BC, making that which is
required in the proposition. Wherefore unto a line making with a rational
superficies the whole superficies mediall can be joined only one right line
inco^mensurable in power to the whole line, and making together with the whole
line that which is made of their squa^es added together mediall, and that which
is contained under them rational: which was required to be proved.

The 66. Theoreme. The 84. Proposition. Unto a line making with a mediall
superficies the whole superficies medial, can be joined only one right line
incommensurable in power to the whole line, and making together with the whole
line that which is made of their squares added together mediall, and that which
is contained under them mediall, and moreover making that which is made of the
squares of them added together incommensurable to that which is contained under
them.
SVppose that AB be a line making with a mediall superficies the whole
superficies mediall, and unto it let the line BC be joined, so that let BC be
such a line as is required in the Theoreme. Wherefore the lines AC and CB are
incommensurable in power, having that which is made of the squares of the lines
AC and CB added together mediall, and that which is contained under the lines
AC and CB mediall, and moreover that which is made of the squares of the lines
AC and CB is incommensurable so that which is contained under the lines AC and
CB. Then I say, that unto the line AB can be joined no other such line. For if
it be possible, let BD be such a line. Wherefore the lines AD and DB are
inco^mensurable in power, having that which is made of the squares of the lines
AD and DB added together mediall, and that which is contained under the lines
AD and DB mediall, and moreover that which is made of the squares of the lines
AD and and DB added together, is incommensurable to that which is contained
under the lines AD and DB. Take a rational line OF. Construction.
And (by the 44. of the first) unto the line OF apply the parallelogramme EG
equal to the squares of the lines AC and CB, and making in breadth the line
EM^ and from the parallelogramme EG take away the parallelogramme HG equal to
that which is contained under the lines AC and CB twice, and making in breadth
the line HM. Wherefore the residue, namely, the square of the line AB is equal
to the parallelogramme EL (by the 7. of the second). Wherefore the line AB
contains in power the parallelogramme EL. Again (by the 44. of the first)
unto the line OF apply the parallelogramme E^ equal to the squares of the
lines AD and DB, and making in breadth the line EN. But the square of the line
AB is equal to the parallelogra^me EL. Wherefore the residue, namely, the
parallelogramme HI is equal to that which is contained under the lines AD and
DB twice. Demonstration (...) an abjurd^t^^^
And forasmuch as that which is made of the squares of the lines AC and CB is
mediall, and is equal to the parallelogramme EG, therefore also the
parallelogramme EG is mediall. And it is applied unto the rational line OF,
making in breadth the line EM. Wherefore (by the 22. of the tenth) the line EM
is rational and incommensurable in length to the line OF. Again, forasmuch as
that which is contained under the lines AC and CB twice is mediall, and is
equal to the parallelogramme HG. Wherefore the parallelogramme H^G is mediall,
which parallelogramme HG is applied to the rational line OF, making in breadth
the line HM. Wherefore the line HM is rational and incommensurable in length
to the line OF. And forasmuch as the squares of the lines AC and CB are
incommensurable to that which is contained under the lines AC and CB twice,
therefore the parallelogramme EG is incommensurable to the parallelogramme HG.
Wherefore the line EM is incommensurable in length to the line MH, and they are
both rational. Wherefore the lines EM and MH are rational commensurable in
power only, Wherefore EH is a residuall line. And the line joined unto it is
HM. And in like sort may we prove, that the line EH is a residuall line, and
that the line HN is joined unto it. Wherefore unto a residuall line is joined
two sundry lines, being each commensurable in power only so the whole line^
which (by the 79. of the tenth) is impossible. Wherefore unto the line AB can
not be joined any other right line besides the line BC, which shall be
incommensurable in power to the whole line, and have together with the whole
line that which is made of their squares added together mediall, and that which
is contained under them mediall, and moreover incommensurable to that which is
made of their squares added together. Wherefore unto a line making with a
mediall superficies the whole superficies mediall, can be joined only one
right line incommensurable in power to the whole line, and making together with
the whole line that which is made of their squares added together mediall, and
that which is contained under them mediall, and moreover making that which is
made of the squares of them added together incommensurable to that which is
contained under the^ which was required to be proved.

Third Definitions.
AS of binomiall lines, there are 6. diverse kinds, so also of residuall lines
which are correspondent unto them and depend of them (for a residuall line is
nothing else (as was before said) but that which remains when the less part
of a binomiall line is taken from the greater part or name thereof,) there are
likewise six several kinds. All which are known and considered in
comparison to a rational line set forth and appointed, and these residual line
have the self same order of production that the binomials had. Six kinds of
re^iduall lines.
For as the three first kinds of binomiall lines, namely, the first, second,
and third, were produced when the square of the greater part of the part of the
binomiall excedeth the square of the less part thereof by the square of a line
commensurable unto it in length: so in likewise, the first three kinds of
residuall lines, namely, the first, second, and third, are produced, when the
square of the whole, namely, of that which is made of the residuall line, and
the line joined unto it added together, excedeth the square of the line joined
to the residuall, by the square of a line which is commensurable unto it in
length. And as the three last kinds of binomials, namely, the fourth, fifth,
and sixth were produced when the square of the greater part excedeth the square
of the less, by the square of a line incommen^^rable in length unto it, even
so the three last kinds of residuall lines are produced when the square of the
whole excedeth the square of the line adioined, by the square of a line
incommensurable unto it in length. As ye may perceive by their definitions
following.

First diffinition.
A first residuall line is, when the square of the whole excedeth the square of
the line adjoined, by the square of a line commensurable unto it in length, and
also the whole is commensurable in length to the rational line first set.
As let AB be a rational line, whose parts are certain, distinct, and to be
expressed by number. And let the residual line be CD, and let the line joined
unto it be EC^ and let the whole being composed of the residuall CD, and the
line adjoined EC, be the line ED: let moreover the square of the whole line ED,
excede the square of the line adjoined EC by the square of the line F, which
line F let be commensurable in length to the whole line ED, and let the whole
line ED be also commensurable in length to the rational line AB: then is the
residuall line CD by this definition a first residuall line.

Second diffinition.
A second residual line is, when the square of the whole excedeth the square of
the line adjoined, by the square of a line commensurable unto it in length, and
also the line adjoined is commensurable in length to the rational line.
As suppose the line CD to be a residuall, and let the line adjoined unto it be
EC, and the whole made of them both, let be the line ED: and let the square of
ED the whole line excede the square of the line adjoined EC, by the square of
the line F, and let the line F be commensurable in length to the whole line ED,
moreover let the line adjoined EC be commensurable in length to the rational
line AB: then by this definition, the residuall line CD is a second residuall
line.

Third diffinition.
A third residuall line is, when the square of the whole excedeth the square of
the line adjoined, by the square of a line commensurable unto it in length and
neither the whole line, nor the line adjoined is co^mensurable in length to the
rational line.
As (the former supposition standing) suppose that the square of the whole line
ED exceed the square of the line adjoined EC by the square of the line F, and
let the line F be commensurable in length to the whole line EC, and let neither
the whole line ED, nor the line adjoined EC be commensurable in length to the
rational line AB, then by this definition the residuall line CD is a third
residuall line.

A fourth residuall line is, Fourth diffinition.
when the square of the whole line excedeth the square of the line adjoined, by
the square of a line incommensurable unto it in length, and the whole line is
also commensurable in length to the rational line.
As the residuall line being as before CD, and the line adjoined EC, and the
whole ED, let the square of the whole line ED exceed the square of the line
adjoined EC by the square of the line F, and let the line F be incommensurable
in length to the whole line ED, and let ED the whole line be commensurable in
length to the rational line AB, then is the residuall line CD by this
declaration a fourth residuall line.

A fiueth residuall line is, Fifth diffinition.
when the square of the whole line exceeds the square of the line adjoined,
by the square of a line incommensurable unto it in length, and the line
adjoined is commensurable in length to the rational line.
As the residuall line being CD, the line adjoined EC, and the whole line ED,
let the square of the whole line ED exceed the square of the line adjoined EC
by the square of the line F, and let the line F be incommensurable in length to
the whole line ED, and let also EC the line adioy^ed be commensurable in length
to the rational line AE, then shall the residuall CD be by this definition a
fifth residuall line.

A sixth residuall line is when the square of the whole line, Sixth diffinition.
exceeds the square of the line adjoined, by the square of a line
incommensurable unto it in length, and neither the whole line nor the line
adjoined is commensurable in length to the rational line.
As suppose the residuall line to be CD, and the line adjoined to be ^C, and
the whole line composed of them let be ED, and let the square of the whole line
^D exceed the square of the line adjoined by the square of the line F, which
line F let be incommensurable in length to the whole line ED: moreover let
neither the whole line CD nor the line adjoined EC, be comm^nsurable in length
to the rational line A^, then shall the residuall line CD be by this
explication a sixth residuall line, and the last.

The 19. Problem. The 85. Proposition. To find out a first residuall line.
TAke a rational line and let the same be A, Third Senary.
and unto it let the line BG be commensurable in length. Wherefore the line BG
also is rational. And take two square numbers DE and OF which let be such,
Construction.
that the excess of the greater, namely, of DE, above the less OF (which
excess let be the number DF) be no square number (by the corollary of the
first assumpt of the 28. of the tenth). Wherefore the number ED has not to the
number DF that proportion that a square number has to a square number (by the
24. of the eight). And as the number ED is to the number DF, so let the square
of the line BG, be to the square of the line GC (by the corrollary of the sixth
of the tenth). Demonstration
Wherefore the square of the line BG is comme^surable to the square of the line
GC. But the square of the line BG is rational, wherefore also the square of
the line GC is rational. Wherefore the line GC is also rational. And
forasmuch as the number ED has not to the number DF, that proportion that a
square number has to a square number, therefore neither also has ye square o^
the line BG to the square of the line GC that proportion that a square number
has to a square number. Wherefore (by the 9. of the tenth) the line BG is
incommensurable in length to the line GC. And they are both rational.
Wherefore the lines BG and GC are rational commensurable in power only.
Wherefore the line BC is a residuall line. I say moreover that it is a first
residuall line. For forasmuch as the square of the line BG is greater then the
square of the line GC (that it is greater it is manifest, for by supposition
the square of the line BG is to the square of the line GC, as the greater
number, namely, ED is to the number DF) unto the square of the line BG let the
squares of the lines GC and H be equal. And for that as the number DE is to
the number DF, so is the square of the line BG to the square of the line GC,
therefore by conversion of proportion (by the corollary of the 9. of the fifth)
as the number DE is to the number OF, so is the square of the line BG to the
square of the line H. But the number DE has to the number OF that proportion
that a square number has to a square number, for either of them is a square
number, wherefore also the square of the line BG has to the square of the line
H that proportion that a square numbe^ has to a square number. Wherefore the
line GB is commensurable in length to the line H. Wherefore the line GB is in
power more then the line GC by the square of a line commensurable in length to
the line GB: and the whole line, namely, GB is commensurable in length to the
rational line A. Wherefore the line BC is a first residuall line. Wherefore
there is found out a first residuall line which was required to be done.

The 20. Problem. The 86. Proposition. To find out a second residuall line.
Construction.
TAke a rational line, and let the same be A, and unto it let the line GC be
commensurable in length. And take two square numbers DE and OF, and let them be
such that the excess of the greater, namely, DF, be no square number. And as
the number DF is to the number DE, so let the square of the line GC be to the
square of the line GB. Wherefore both the squares are commensurable. And
forasmuch as the square of the line GC is rational, Demo^strati^^.
therefore the square of the line BG is also rational: Wherefore also the line
BG is rational. And forasmuch as the squares of the lines BG and GC have not
that proportion the one to the other that a square number has to a square
number, therefore the lines BG and GC are incommensurable in length, and they
are both rational. Wherefore the lines BG and GC are rational commensurable
in power only. Wherefore the line BC is a residuall line. I say moreover, that
it is a second residual line. For forasmuch as the square of the line BG is
greater the^ the square of the line GC, unto the square of the line BG let the
squares of the lines G^ and H be equal. And for that as the number DE is to
the number DF, so is the square of the line GB to the square of the line GC,
therefore (by conversion of proportion) as the number DE is to the number OF,
so is the square of the line BG to the square of the line H. But either of
these numbers DE and OF is a square number. Wherefore the line GB is
commensurable in length to the line H. Wherefore the line BG is in power more
then the line GC, by the square of a line commensurable in length to the line
BG: and the line GC that is joined to the residuall line is commensurable in
length to the rational line A. Wherefore the line BC is a second residuall
line. Wherefore there is found out a second residuall line: which was required
to be done.

The 21. Problem. The 87. Proposition. To find out a third residuall line.
TAke rational line, and let the same be A: and take three numbers E, B, C,
Construction.
and CD, not having the one to the other that proportion that a square number
has to a square number: and let the number BC have to the number BD that
proportion that a square number has to a square number. And let the number BC
be greater then the number CD. And as the number E is to the number BC, so let
the square of the line A be to the square of the line FG: and as the number BC
is to the number CD, so let the square of the line FG be to the square of the
line HG. Demonstration.
Wherefore the square of the line A is commensurable to the square of the line
FG. But the square of the line A is rational. Wherefore also the square of the
line FG is rational: wherefore the line FG is also rational. And forasmuch as
the number E has not to the number BC that proportion that a square number^
has to a square number, therefore neither also has the square of the line A
to the square of the line FG that proportion that a square number has to a
square number. Wherefore the line A is incommensurable in length to the line
FG. Again for that as the number BC is to the number CD, so is the square of
the line FG to the square of the line HG, therefore the square of the line FG
is commensurable to the square of the line HG. But the square of the line FG is
rational. Wherefore also the square of the line HG is rational. Wherefore
also the line HG is rational. And for that the number BC has not to the
number CD, that proportion that a square number has to a square number,
therefore neither also has the square of the line ^G to the square of the line
HG, that proportion that a square number has to a square number. Wherefore the
line FG is incommensurable in length to the line HG: and they are both
rational. Wherefore the lines FG and HG are rational co^mensurable in power
only. Wherefore the line FH is a residuall line. I say moreover, that it is a
third residuall line. For for that as the number E is to the number BC, so is
the square of the line A to the square of the line FG: and as the number ^C is
to the number CD, so is the square of the line FG to the square of the line HG^
therefore by equality of proportion, as the number E is to the number CD, so
is the square of the line A to the square of the line HG^ but the number E has
^^^ to the number CD that proportion that a square num^^r has to a square
number, therefore neither also has the square of the line A to the square of
the line HG that proportion that a square number has to a square number,
therefore the line A is incommensurable in length to the line HG. Wherefore
neither of the lines FG and HG is commensurable in length to the rational line
A. And forasmuch as the square of the line FG is greater then the square of the
line HG (that the line FG is greater then the line HG it is mani^est, for by
supposition the number BC is greater then the number CD) unto the square of the
line FG let the squares of the lines HG and K^ be equal. And for that as the
number BC is to the number CD, so is the square of the line FG to the square of
the line H^ ^^erfore (by conversion of proportion) as the number BC is to the
number BD, so is the square of the line FG to the square of the line K. But the
number BC has to the number BD that proportion that a square number has to a
square number. Wherefore the square of the line FG has to the square of the
line K that proportion that a square number has to a square number. Wherefore
the line FG is commensurable in length to the line K. Wherefore the line FG is
in power more then the line HG, by the square of a line commensurable in length
to the line FG, and neither of the lines FG and GH is commensurable in length
to the rational line A: when yet notwithstanding either of the lines FG and GH
is rational. Wherefore the line FH is a third residuall line. Wherefore there
is found out a third residuall line: which was required to be done.

The 22. Problem. The 88. Proposition. To find out a fourth residuall line.
TAke a rational line and let the same be A: and unto it let the line BG be
commensurable in length. Wherefore the line BG is rational. And take two
numbers DF and FE, Construction.
and let them be such that the whole number, namely, DE have to neither of the
numbers DF and FE that proportion that a square number has to a square number.
And as the number DE is to the number OF, so let the square of the line BG be
to the square of the line GC: wherefore the square of the line BG is
commensurable to the square of the line GC, wherefore also the square of the
line GC is rational, and the line GC is also rational. And for that the
number DE has not the number OF that proportion that a square number has to a
square number, Demonstration
therefore the line BG is incommensurable in length to the line GC. And they
are both rational: wherefore the line BC is a residuall line. I say moreover
that it is a fourth residuall line. For forasmuch as the square of the line BG
is greater then the square of the line GC, unto the square of the line BG let
the squares of the lines CG and H be equal. And for that as the number DE is
to the number OF, so is the square of the line BG to the square of the line GC,
therefore by conversion of proportion as the number DE is to the number DF, so
is the square of the line BG to the square of the line H. But the numbers DE
and DF have not the one to the other that porportion that a square number has
to a square number. Wherefore the line BG is incommensurable in length to the
line H. Wherefore the line BG is in power more then the line GC by the square
of a line incommensurable in length so the line BG: and the whole line BG is
commensurable in length to the rational line A, Wherefore the line BC is a
fourth residuall line. Wherefore there is found out a fourth residuall line:
which was required to be done.

The 23. Problem. The 89. Proposition. To find out a fifth residuall line.
TAke a rational line and let the same be A, Construction.
and unto it let the line CG be commensurable in length. Wherefore the line CG
is rational. And take two numbers DF and FE, which let be such, that the
number DE have to neither of these numbers DF nor FE that proportion that a
square number has to a square number. And as the number FE is to the number
DE, so let the square of the line CG be to the square of the line BG.
Demonstration.
Wherefore the square of the line CG is commensurable to the square of the line
BG^ Wherefore the square of the line BG is rational, and the line BG is also
rational. But the numbers DE and OF have not that proportion the one to the
other that a square number has to a square number. Wherefore the lines BG and
GC are rational commensurable in power only. Wher^fore the line BC is a
residuall line. I say moreover that it is a fifth residuall line. For forasmuch
as the square of the line BG is greater then the square of the line GC, unto
the square of the line BG let the squares of the lines GC and H be equal. Now
therefore for that as the number DE is to the number OF, so is the square of the
line BG to the square of the line GC, therefore by conversion of proportion, at
the number DE is to the number DF, so is the square of the line BG to the
square of the line H. But the numbers DE and DF have not that proportion the
one to the other that a square number has to a square number. Wherefore the
line BG is incommensurable in length to the line H. Wherefore the line BG is in
power more then the line CG by the square of a line incommensurable in length
to the line BG, and the line CG which is joined to the residual line is
comme^surable in length to the rational line A. Wherefore the line BC is a
fifth residuall line. Wherefore there is found out a fifth residuall line: which
was required to be done.

The 24. Problem. The 90. Proposition. To find out a sixth residuall line.
TAke a rational line and let the same be A, Construction.
And take three numbers E, BC, and CD, not having the one to the other that
proportion that a square number has to a square number. And let not the number
BC have to the number BD that proportion that a square number has to a square
number. And let the number BC be greater then the number CD, and as the number
E is to the number BC, so let the square of the line A be to the square of the
line FG. And as the number BC is to the number CD, so let the square of the
line FG be to the square of the line GH. Now therefore for that as the number E
is to the number BC, Demonstration.
so is the square of the line A to the square of the line FG, therefore the
square of the line A is commensurable to the square of the line F G. Wherefore
the square of the line FG is rational, and the line FG is also rational. And
for that the number E has not to the number BC that proportion that a square
number has to a square number, therefore the line A is incommensurable in
length to the line FG. Again for that as the number BC is to the number CD, so
is the square of the line FG to the square of the line GH, therefore the square
of the line FG is commensurable to the square of the line GH. But the square of
the line FG is rational, wherefore the square also of the line GH is rational,
wherefore the line GH is also rational. And for that the number B^ has not to
the number CD that proportion that a square number has to a square number,
therefore the line FG is incommensurable in length to the line GH, and they are
both rational. Wherefore the lines FG and GH are rational commensurable in
power only. Wherefore the line FH is a residuall line. I say moreover that it
is a sixth residuall line. For for that as the number E is to the number BC, so
is the square of the line A to the square of the line FG, and as the number BC
is to the number CD, so is the square of the line FG to the square of the line
GH, therefore by equality of proportion as the number E is to the number CD,
so is the square of the line A to the square of the line GH. But the number E
has not to the number CD that proportion that a square number has to a square
number. Wherefore the line A is in^^mmensurable in length to the line GH, and
neither of these lines FG nor G^ is commensurable in length to the rational
line A. And forasmuch as the square of the line FG is greater then the square
of the line GH, unto the square of the line FG let the the squares of the lines
GH and K be equal. Now therefore for that as the number B^ is to the number CD,
so is the square of the line FG to the square of the line GH, therefore by
conversion of proportion as the number BC is to the number BD, so is the square
of the line FG to the square of the line K. But the number BC has not to the
number BD that proportion that a square number has to a square number,
therefore the line FG is incommensurable in length to the line K. Wherefore the
line FG is in power more then the line GH by the square of a line
incommensurable in length to the line FG, and neither of the lines FG nor GH is
commensurable in length to the rational line A. Wherefore the line FH is a sixth
residual line. Wherefore there is found out a sixth residuall line: which was
required to be done.

An other more ready way to find out the six residuall lines.
There is also a certain other redier way to find out every one of the foresaid
six residuall lines which is after this manner. Suppose that it were required
to find out a first residuall line: Take a first binomiall line AC, and let
the greater name thereof be AB. And unto the line BC let the line BD be equal.
Wherefore the lines AB and BC, that is the lines AB and BD are rational
commensurable in power only, and the line AB is in power more then the line
BC, that is, then the line BD by the square of a line commensurable in length
to the line AB. And the line AB is commensurable in length to the rational
line given. For the line AC is put to be a first binomiall line. Wherefore the
line AD is a first residual line. And in like manner may ye find out a second,
a third, a fourth, a fifth, and a sixth residuall line, if ye take for each a
binomiall line of the same order.

The 67. Theoreme. The 91. Proposition. If a superficies be contained under a
rational line and a first residuall line: the line which contains in power
that superficies, is a residuall line.
SVppose that there be a rectangle superficies AB contained under a rational
line AC and a first residuall line AD. Fourth Senary.
Then I say that the line which contains in power the superficies AB is a
residuall line. For forasmuch as AD is a first residuall line, The first part
of the Construction.
let the line joined unto it be DG (by the line joined unto it understand such
a line as was spoken of in the end of the 79. proposition). Wherefore the lines
AG and GD are rational co^me^surable in power only, and the whole line AG is
co^mensurable in length to the rational line AC, and the line AG is in power
more then the line GD by the square of a line commensurable in length unto AG,
by the definition of a first residuall line. Divide the line GD into two equal
parts in the point E. And upon the line AG apply a parallelogramme equal to
the square of the line EG and wanting in figure by a square, and let the said
parallelogramme be that which is contained under the lines AF and FG. The first
part of the demonstration.
Wherefore the line AF is commensurable in length to the line FG (by the 17. of
the tenth)^ And by the points E, F and G, draw unto the line AC these parallel
lines EH, FI, and GK. And make perfect the parallelograme AK. And for^as much
as the line AF is commensurable in length to the line FG, therefore also the
whole line AG is commensurable i^ length to either of the lines AF and FG (by
the 15. of the tenth). But the line AG is commensurable in length to the line
AC. Wherefore either of the lines AF and FG is commensurable in length to the
line AC. But the line AC is rational, wherefore either of the lines AF and FG
is also rational. Wherefore (by the 19. of the tenth) either of the
parallelogrammes AI and FK is also rational. Note. AI and FK concluded
rational parallelogramme.
And forasmuch as the line DE is comme^surable in length to the line EG,
therefore also (by the 15. of the tenth) the line DG is commensurable in length
to either of the lines DE and EG. But the line DG is rational, wherefore
either of the lines DE and EG is rational, and the self same line DG is
incommensurable in length to the line AC (by the definition of a first
residuall line, or by the 13. of the tenth^). For the line DG is
incommensurable in length to the line AG, which line AG is co^mensurable in
length to the line AC: Note.

DH and FK parallelogrammes mediall.


wherefore either of the lines DE and EG is rational and incommensurable in
length to the line AC^ Wherefore (by the 21. of the tenth) either of these
parallelogrammes DH and EK is mediall. Unto the parallelogramme AI let the
square LM be equal, and unto the parallelogramme FK let the square NX be
equal, being taken away from the square LM^ and ha^ing the angle LOM common to
them both. Second part of the construction.
(And to do this, there must be found out the mean proportional between the
lines FI and FG. For the square of the mean proportional is equal to the
parallelogramme contained under the lines FI and FG. And from the line LO cut
of a line equal to the mean proportional so found out, and descri^e the
square thereof). Wherefore both the squares LM and NX are about one and the
self same diameter (by the 20. of the sixth) let their diameter be OR and
describe the figure as it is h^^e s^t forth^ Now then forasmuch as the
parallelogramme contained under the lines AF and FG is equal to the square of
the line EG, Second part of the demonstration.
therefore (by the 17. of the sixth) as the line AF is to the line EG, so is
the line EG to the line FG. But as the line AF is to the line EG, so is the
parallelogramme AI to the parallelogramme EK. And as the line EG is to the line
FG, so is the parallelogramme EK to the parallelogramme FK. Wherefore between
the pagrammes AI and FK the parallelogramme EK is the mean proportional. But
(by the second part of the assumpt going before the 54. of the tenth) be^wene
the squares LM and NX the parallelogramme MN is the mean proportional. And
unto the parallelogramme AI is equal the square LM, and unto the
parallelogramme FK is equal the square NX by construction. Wherefore the
parallelogramme MN is equal to the parallelogramme EK (by the 2. assumpt going
before the 54. of the tenth). But the parallelogramme EK is (by the first of
the sixth) equal to the parallelogramme DH, and the parallelogramme MN is (by
the 43. of the first) equal to the parallelogramme LX. Wherefore the whole
parallelogramme DK is equal to the gnomon VTZ (which gnomon consists of
those parallelogrammes by which ye see in the figure passes a portion of a
circle greater then a semicircle) and moreover to the square NX: and the
parallelogramme AK is equal to the squares LM and NX by construction: and it
is now proved, that the parallelogramme DK is equal to the gnomo^ VTZ, and
moreover to the square NX. Wherefore the residue namely the parallelogramme AB
is equal to the square SQ which is the square of the line LN. LN, is the only
li^e that we sought and consider.
Wherefore the square of the line LN is equal to the parallelogramme AB.
Wherefore the line LN contains in power the parallelogramme AB. I say
moreover that the line LN is a residuall line. For forasmuch as either of these
parallelogrammes AI and FK is rationall^ as it is before said, therefore the
squares LM and NX which are equal unto them, that is, the squares of the lines
LO and ON are rational. Wherefore the lines LO and ON are also rational.
Again forasmuch as the parallelogramme DH that is LX is mediall, therefore the
parallelogramme LX is incommensurable to the square NX. Wherefore (by the 1. of
the sixth, and 10. of the tenth) the line LO is inco^mensurable in length to
the line ON^ and they are both rational. Wherefore they are lines rational
commensurable in power only. Wherefore LN is a residuall line by the
definition, and it contains in power the paralleloparallelogramme AB. If
therefore a superficies be contained under a rational line and a first
residual line, the line which contains in power that superficies^ is a
residuall line: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 68. Theoreme. The 92. Proposition. If a superficies be contained under a
rational line and a second residuall line: the line which contains in power
that superficies, is a first mediall residuall line.
SVppose that AB be a superficies contained under ^ra^^onall line AC, and a
second residuall li^^ AD. First part of the construction.
Then I say^ that the line th^^ contains in power the superficies AB is a
first mediall residuall line. For let the line joined to the line AD be DG.
Wherefore the lines AG and GD are rational commensurable in power only, and
the line that is joined to the residual line, namely, the line DG is
co^mensurable in length to the rational line AC: and the line AG is in power
more then the line DG, by the square of a line co^mensurable in length to the
line AG. Divide the line DG into two equal parts in the point E. And unto the
line AG apply a parallelogramme equal to the fourth part of the square of the
line DG, that is, equal to the square of the line EG, and wanting in figure by
a square, and let that parallelogramme be that which is contained under the
lines AF and FG. Wherefore (by the 1^^ of the tenth) the line AF is
commensurable in length to the line FG. And by the points E, F, and G, draw
unto the line AC these parallel lines EH, FI, and GK: and forasmuch as the
line AF is co^mensurable in length to the line FG, The first part of the
demonstration.
therefore the whole line AG is commensurable in length to either of these
lines AF and FG. But the line AG is rational and incommensurable in length to
the line AC. Wherefore either of these lines AF and FG are rational and
incommensurable in length to the line AC. Wherefore either of th^se
parallelogrammes AI and FK is (by the 21. of the tenth) mediall. AI and FK
concluded parallelogra^mes mediall.
Again, forasmuch as the line DE is commensurable in length to the line EG,
therefore the line DG is commensurable in length to either of these lines DE
and EG. But the line DG is commensurable in length to the rational line AC.
Wherefore either of these lines DE and EG is rational and commensurable in
length to the line AC. Wherefore (by the 19. of the tenth) either of these
parallelogrammes DH and EK is rational. DH and EK, rational.
Unto the parallelogramme AI describe an equal square LM, The second part of
the construction.
and unto the parallelogramme FK let the square NX be equal, as in the
Proposition going before. Wherefore the squares LM and NX are both about one
and the same diameter. The second part of the demonstration.
Let the diameter be OR, and describe the figure as is in the former
Proposition expressed. Now therefore forasmuch as the parallelogrammes AI and
FK are mediall are Analytically the pro^e hereof follows amo^g^ other things.
commensurable the one to the other, and the squares of the lines LO and ON
which are equal to those parallelogra^mes, are mediall, therefore the lines LO
and ON are also mediall commensurable in power. (And it is manifest, that the
lines LO and ON are co^mensurable in power, for their squares are
commensurable, and those squares, namely, the squares of the lines LO and ON
are commensurable, for they are equal to the parallelogrammes AI and FK, which
are commensurable the one to the other: and that those parallelogrammes AI and
FK are commensurable the one to the other, hereby it is manifest, for that it
was before proved that the lines AF and FG are commensurable in length.
Wherefore (by the 1. of the sixth, and 10. of the tenth) the parallelogrammes AI
and FK are commensurable the one to the other. Wherefore it is now manifest by
the way of resolution, that the lines LO and ON are co^mensurable in power)^
And forasmuch as the parallelogramme contained under the lines AF and FG is
equal to the square of the line EG, therefore as the line AF is to the line
EG, so is the line EG to the line FG. But as the line AF is to the line EG, so
is the parallelogramme AI to the parallelogramme EK: and as the line EG is to
the line FG, so is the parallelogramme EK to the parallelogramme FK. Wherefore
the parallelogramme ^K is the mean^ proportional between the parallelogrammes
AI and FK: and the parallelogramme MN i^ also the mean proportional between
the squares LM and NX: and the parallelogramme AI is equal to the square LM:
and the parallelogra^me FK is equal to the square NX. Wherefore the
parallelogramme MN is equal to the parallelogramme EK. But the parallelogramme
EK is equal to the parallelogramme DH: and the parallelogramme LX is equal to
the parallelogramme MN. Wherefore the whole parallelogramme DK is equal to the
Gnomon VTZ, and to the square NX. Wherefore the residu^, namely, the
parallelogramme AB is equal to the square SQ, that is, to the square of the
line LN. Wherefore the line LN contains in power the superficies AB. The line
LN found, which is the principal drift of all the former discourse.
I say moreover, that the line LN is a first mediall residuall line. For
forasmuch as the parallelogramme EK is rational, and is equal to the
parallelogramme MN, that is, LX, therefore LX, that is, the parallelogramme
contained under the lines LO and ON is rational. But the square NX is mediall,
for it is already proved that the parallelogramme FK which is equal to the
square NX, is mediall. Wherefore the parallelogramme LX is incommensurable to
the square NX. But as the parallelogramme LX is to the square NX, so is the
line LO to the line ON (by the 1. of the sixth). Wherefore (by the 10. of the
tenth) the lines LO and ON are incommensurable in length. And it is already
proved, that they are mediall commensurable in power. Wherefore the lines LO
and ON are mediall commensurable in power only containing a rational
superficies. Wherefore the line LN is a first mediall residuall line, and
contains in power the superficies AB, which is contained under a rational
line and a second residuall line. If therefore a superficies be contained under
a rational line and a second residuall line: the line which contains in
power that superficies, is a first mediall residuall line: which was required
to be demonstrated.

The 69. Theoreme. The 93. Proposition. If a superficies be contained under a
rational line and a third residuall line: the line that contains in power
that superficies is a second mediall residuall line.
SVppose that AB be a superficies contained under a rational line AC, and a
third residuall line AD. Then I say, that the line which contains in power
the superficies AB is a second mediall residuall line. Let the line joined unto
AD, be DG. Wherefore the lines AG and GD are rational commensurable in power
only, The first part of the Construction.
and neither of the lines AG nor GD is commensurable in length to the rational
line AC, and the whole line AC is in power more then the line GD, by the square
of a line commensurable in length to the line AG. Let the rest of the
construction be as it was in the former Propositions. The first part of the
demonstration.
Wherefore the lines AF and FG are commensurable in length: and the
parallelogramme AI is commensurable to the parallelogramme FK. And forasmuch as
the lines AF and FG are commensurable in length, therefore the whole line AG is
commensurable in length to either of these lines AF and FG. B^^ the lin^ AG is
rational and incommensurable in length to the line AG. Wherefore either of
these lines AF and FG is rational and incommensurable in length to the line
AG. Note.

AI and FK mediall.


Wherefore (by the 21. of the tenth) either of these parallelogrammes AI and FK
is mediall. Again^, forasmuch as the line DB is commensurable in length to the
line EG, therefore also the whole line DG is commensurable in length to either
of these lines DE and EG. But the line DG is rational commensurable in power
only to the line AC. Wherefore also either of the lines DE and EG is rational
and commensurable in power only to the line AC. Note.

DH and EK mediall.


Wherefore either of these parallelogrammes DH and EK is mediall. Again
forasmuch as the lines AG and DG are commensurable in power only, therefore
they are incommensurable in length. But the line AG is commensurable in length
to the line AF: and the line DG is commensurable in length to the line GE.
Wherefore the line AF is incommensurable in length to the line EG. But as the
line AF is to the line EG, so is the parallelogramme AI to the parallelogramme
EK. Note.

AI incommensurable to EK. Second part of the Constructio^.


Wherefore the parallelogramme AI is incommensurable to the parallelogramme EK.
Unto the parallelogramme AI describe an equal square LM: and unto the
parallelogramme FK describe an equal square NX: and describe the figure as you
did in the former Proposition. Now forasmuch as the parallelogramme contained
under the lines AF and FG is equal to the square of the line EG, therefore as
the line AF is to the line EG, so is the line EG to the line FG. But as the
line AF is to the line EG, so is the parallelogramme AI to the parallelogramme
EK: and as the line EG is to the line FG, so is the parallelogramme EK to the
parallelogramme FK. Wherefore as the parallelogra^me AI is to the
parallelogramme EK, so is the parallelogramme EK to the parallelogramme FK.
Wherefore the parallelogramme EK is the mean proportional between the
parallelogra^mes AI and FK. But the parallelogramme MN is the mean
proportional between the squares LM and NX. Wherefore the parallelogramme EK
is equal to the parallelogramme MN. Wherefore the whole parallelogramme DK is
equal to the Gnomon VTZ, and to the square NX. And the parallelogramme AK is
equal to the squares LM and NX. Wherefore the residue, namely, the
parallelogramme AB is equal to the square QS, that is, The principal line, LN
found.
to the square of the line LN. Wherefore the line LN contains in power the
superficies AB. I say moreover, that the line LN is a second mediall residuall
line. For for that as it is proved, the parallelogramme^ AI and FK are mediall,
therefore the squares that are equal unto them, namely, the squares of the
lines LO and ON are also mediall. Wherefore either of these lines LO and ON is
mediall. And forasmuch as the parallelogramme AI is Because the lines AF and ^G
are proved commensurable in length.
commensurable to the parallelogramme FK, therefore the squares that are equal
to them, namely, the squares of the lines LO and ON are also commensurable.
Again, forasmuch as it is proved, that the parallelogramme AI is
incommensurable to the parallelogramme EK, therefore the square LM is
incommensurable to the parallelogramme MN, that is, the square of the line LO
to the parallelogramme contained under the lines LO and ON. Wherefore also the
By the first o^ the sixth and tenth of the tenth.
line LO is incommensurable in length to the line ON. Wherefore the lines LO
and ON are mediall commensurable in power only. I say moreover, that they
contain a mediall superficies. For forasmuch as it is proved, that the
parallelogramme EK is mediall, therefore the parallelogramme which is equal
unto it, namely, the parallelogramme contained under the lines LO and ON is
also mediall. Wherefore the line LN is a second mediall residuall line, and
contains in power the superficies AB. Wherefore the line that contains in
power the superficies AB is a second mediall residuall line. If therefore a
superficies be contained under a rational line and a third residuall line, the
line that contains i^ power that superficies, is a second mediall residuall
line: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 70. Theoreme. The 94. Proposition. If a superficies be contained under a
rational line, and a fourth residuall line: the line which contains in power
that superficies, is a less line.
SVppose that there be a superficies AB contained under a rational line AC,
and a ^ourth residuall line AD. Then I say that the line which contains in
power the superficies AB is a less line. For let the line joined unto it be
DG. Wherefore the lines AG and DG are rational commensurable in power only,
and the line AG is in power more then the line DG, by the square of a line
inco^mensurable in length to the line AG, and the line AG is commensurable in
length to the line AC. Divide the line DG into two equal parts in the point
E. The first part of the construction.
And unto the line AG apply a parallelogramme equal to the square of the line
EG, and wanting in figure by a square, and let that parallelograme be that
which is contained under the lines AF and FG. Wherefore (by the 18. of the
tenth) the line AF is inco^mensurable in length to the line FG. Draw by the
points E, F, and G, unto the lines AC and DB these parallel lines EH, FI, and
GK. The first part of the demonstration.
Now forasmuch as the line AG is rational, and commensurable in length to the
line AC, therefore the whole parallelogramme AK is (by the 19. of the tenth)
rational. Note.

AK rational.


Again forasmuch as the line DG is incommensurable in length to the line AC
(for if the line DG were commensurable in length to the line AC, then forasmuch
as the line AG is commensurable in length to the same line AC, the lines AG and
DG should be commensurable in length the one to the other, when yet they are
put to be commensurable in power only) and both these lines AC and DG are
rational. Note.

DK mediall. AI and FK incommensurable.

The second part of the construction.

The second part of the demonstration.


Wherefore the parallelograme DK is mediall. Again forasmuch as the line AF is
incommensurable in length to the line FG, therefore the parallelogramme AI is
incommensurable to the parallelogramme FK. Unto the parallelogramme AI describe
an equal square LM, and unto the parallelograme FK describe an equal square
NX, and let the angle LOM be common to both those squares. Wherefore the
squares LM and NX are about one and the self same diameter. Let their diameter
be OR, and describe the figure. And forasmuch as the parallelograme contained
under the lines AF and FG is equal to the square of the line EG, therefore
proportionally as the line AF is to the line EG, so is the line EG to the line
FG, but as the line AF is to the line EG, so is the parallelogramme AI to the
parallelogramme EK (by the 1. of the sixth) And as the line EG is to the line
FG, so is the parallelogramme EK to the parallelogramme FK. Wherefore the
parallelogramme EK is the mean proportional between the parallelogrammes AI
and FK: wherefore as i^ was said in the former propositions, the parallelogramme
MN is equal to the parallelogramme EK: but the parallelogramme DH is equal to
the parallelograme EK, and the parallelogramme MN to the parallelogramme LX.
Wherefore the whole parallelogramme DK is equ^ll to the gnomon VTZ, and to the
square NX. Wherefore the residue, namely, the parallelogramme AB is equal to
the residue, namely, to the square SQ, LN (the chief line of this theoreme)
found.
that is to the square of the line LN. I say moreover that LN is that
irrational line which is called a less line. For forasmuch as the
parallelogramme AK is rational, and is equal to the squares of the lines LO
and ON, therefore that which is made of the squares of the lines LO and ON added
together is rational. Again forasmuch as the parallelogramme DK is mediall,
and is equal to that which is contained under the lines LO and ON twice,
therefore that which is contained under the lines LO and ON twice, is also
mediall. And forasmuch as the parallelogramme AI is incommensurable to the
parallelogramme FK, therefore the squares which are equal unto them, namely,
the squares of the lines LO and ON are incommensurable the one to the other.
Wherefore the lines LO and ON are incommensurable in power, having that which is
made of their squares added together rational, and that which is contained
under them twice mediall, which is commensurable to that which is contained
under them once. Wherefore that which is contained under them once is also
mediall. Wherefore LN is that irrational line which is called a less line, and
it contains in power the superficies AB. If therefore a superficies be
contained under a rational line and a fourth residuall line, the line which
contains in power that superficies is a less line: which was required to be
demonstrated.

The 71. Theoreme. The 95. Proposition. If a superficies be contained under a
rational line and a fifth residual line: the line that co^tayneth in power the
same superficies, is a line making with a rational superficies, the whole
superficies mediall.
SVppose that there be a superficies AB contained under a rational line AG and
a fifth residuall line AD. The^ I say that the line that contains in power ye
sup^rficies AB, is a line making with a rational superficies the whole
superficies mediall. For unto the line AD let the line DG be joined, which shall
be co^me^s^^able in length to the rational line AC. And let the rest of the
constructio^ be as in the proposition next going before. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the line AG is inco^mensurable in length to the line AC and
they are both rational, therefore the parallelogra^me AK is medial. Again
forasmuch as the line DG is rational and commensurable in length to the line
AC, theref^re the parallelogramme DK is rational. Unto the parallel^gramme AI
describe an equal square LM; and unto the parallelograme ^^ describe an equal
square N^, and as in (...) proposition next going before, so also in this may
we prove, that the line LN contains in power the superficies AB. The line LN.
I say moreover that that line LN is a line making with a rational superficies
the whole superficies mediall. For forasmuch as the parallelogramme AK is
mediall, therefore that which is equal unto it, namely, that which is made of
the squares of the lines LO and ON added together is also mediall. Again
forasmuch as the parallelogramme DK is rational, therefore that which is equal
unto it, namely, that which is contained under the lines LO and ON twice, is
also rational. And forasmuch as the line AF is incommensurable in length to
the line FG, therefore (by the 1. of the sixth, and 10. of the tenth) the
parallelogra^me A^ is incommensurable to the parallelogramme FK, wherefore also
the square of the line LO is incommensurable to the square of the line ON.
Wherefore the lines LO and ON are incommensurable in power having that which is
made of their squares added together mediall, and that which is contained under
them twice rational. Wherefore the line LN is that irrational line which is
called a line making with a rational super^icies the whole superficies
mediall, and it contains in power the superficies AB. Wherefore the line
containing in power the super^icies AB, is a line making with a rational
superficies the whole superficies mediall. If therefore a superficies be
contained under a rational line and a fifth residuall line, the line that
contains in power the same superficies, is a line making with a rational
superficies the whole super^icies mediall: which was required to be proved.

The 72. Theoreme. The 96. Proposition. If a superficies be contained under a
rational line and a sixth residuall line, the line which contains in power
the same superficies is a line making with a mediall superficies the whole
superficies mediall.
SVppose that AB be a superficies contained under a rational line AC, and a
sixth residuall line AD. Then I say shall the line which contains in power the
superficies AB, is a line making with a medial superficies the whole
superficies mediall. For unto the line AD let the line DG be joined.
Demonstration.
And let the rest be as in the propositions going before. And forasmuch as the
line AF is incommensurable in length to the line FG, therefore the
parallelogramme AI is inco^mensurable to the parallelogramme FK^ And forasmuch
as the lines AG and AC are rational commensurable in power only, therefore
the parallelogramme AK is mediall, and in like manner the parallelogramme DK is
mediall. Now forasmuch as the lines AG and GD are commensurable in power only,
therefore they are incommensurable in length the one to the other. But as the
line AG is to the line GD, so is the parallelogramme AK to the parallelogramme
DK, therefore the parallelogramme AK is incommensurable to the parallelogramme
DK. Describe the like figure that was described in the former propositions, and
we may in like sort prove that the line LN contains in power the superficies
AB. I say moreover that it is a line making with a mediall superficies the
whole superficies mediall. For the parallelograme AK is mediall, wherefore that
which is equal vn^^ it, namely, that which is made of the sq^ares of the lines
LO and ON added together is also mediall. And forasmuch as the parallelogramme
^K is mediall, therefore that which is equal unto ^t, namely, that which is
contained under the lines LO and ON twice is also mediall. And forasmuch as the
parallogramme AK is incommensurable to the parallelogramme DK, therefore the
squares of the lines LO and ON are incommensurable to that which is contained
under the lines LO and ON twice. And forasmuch as the parallelogramme AI is
incommensurable to the parallelogramme FK, therefore also the square of the
line LO is incommensurable to the square of the line ON. Wherefore the lines LO
and ON are incommensurable in power, having that which is made of the squares
of the lines LO and ON mediall, and that which is contained under them twice
mediall, and moreover that which is made of the squares of them is
incommensurable to that^ which is contained under them twice. Wherefore the line
LN is that irrational line which is called a line making with a mediall
superficies the whole superficies mediall, and it contains in power the
superficies AB. Wherefore the line which contains in power the superficies AB
is a line making with a mediall superficies the whole superficies mediall. If
therefore a superficies be contained under a rational line and a sixth
residuall line, the line which contains in power the same superficies is a
line making which a mediall superficies the whole superficies mediall^ which
was required to be demonstrated.

The 73. Theoreme. The 97. Proposition. The square of a residuall line applied
unto a rational line, The fiueth Senary.
makes the breadth or other side a first re^iduall line.
SVppose that AB be a residuall line, These six propositions following are the
conu^rses of the six former propositions.
and let CD be a rational line. And unto the line CD apply the parallelogramme
CE equal to the square of the line AB, and making the breadth the line CF.
Then I say that the line CF is a first residuall line^ Construction.
For unto the line AB let the line conveniently joined be supposed to be B^
(which self line is also called a line joined, as we declared in the end of
the 79. proposition). Wherefore the ^ines AG and GB are rational ^^^mensurable
in power only. And unto the line CD apply the parallelogramme CH equal to the
square of the line AG, and unto the line KH (which is equal to the line CD)
apply the parallelogramme KL equal to the square of the line BG. Demonstration.
Wherefore the whole parallelogramme CL is equal to the squares of the lin^s A^
and GB^ And the parallelogr^mm^ CE is equal to the square of the line AB,
wherefore the parallelogramme remaining, namely, the parallelogramme FL is
equal to that which is contained under the lines AG and GB twice. For (by the
7. of the second) the squares of the lines AG and GB are equal to that which
is contained under the lines AG and GB twice, and to the square of the line AB.
Divide the line FM into two equal parts in the point N. And by the point N
draw unto the line CD a parallel line NX. Wherefore either of the
parallelogrammes FX and NL is equal to that which is contained under the lines
AG and GB once. And forasmuch as the squares of the lines AG and GB are
rational, unto which squares the parallelogramme CL is equal, therefore the
parallelogramme CL also is rational: wherefore the line GM is rational and By
the 20. of the tenth.
commensurable in length to the line CD. Again forasmuch as that which is
contained under the lines AG and GB twice, is By the 21. of the tenth.
mediall, therefore the parallelogramme equal unto it, namely the
paral^elogramme FL is also mediall. Wherefore the line FM is rational and By
the 22. of the tenth.
incommensurable in length to the line CD. And forasmuch as the squares of the
lines AG and GB are rational, and that which is contained under the lines AG
and GB twice, is mediall, therefore the squares of the lines AG and GB are
inco^mensurable to that which is contained under the lines AG and GB twice. But
unto the squares of the lines AG and GB is equal the parallelogramme CL, and
to that which is contained under the lines AG and GB twice is equal the
parallelogramme FL, wherefore the parallelogramme CL is incommensurable to the
parallelogramme FL. Wherefore also the line CM is incommensurable in length to
the line FM: and they are both rational. Wherefore the lines CM and FM are
rational commensurable in power only: and therefore the line CF is a
residuall line (by the 73. of the tenth). I say moreover that it is a first
residuall line. ^F concluded a residual line.
For forasmuch as that which is contained under the lines AG and GB is the
mean proportional between the squares of the lines AG and GB (by the assumpt
going before the 54. of the tenth). And unto the square of the line AG is
equal the parallelogramme CH, and unto that which is contained under the lines
AG and GB is equal the parallelogramme NL, and unto the square of the line GB
is equal the parallelograme KL. Wherefore the parallelogramme NL is the mean
proportional between the parallelogrammes CH and KL. Wherefore as CH is to NL,
so i^ NL to KL. But as CH is to NL, so is the line CK to the line NM and as NL
is to KL, so is the line NM to the line KM. Wherefore as the line CK is to the
line NM, so is the line NM to the line KM. Wherefore the parallelogramme
contained under the lines CK and KM is equal to the square of the line NM,
that is to the fourth part of the square of the line FM. And forasmuch as the
square of the line AG is commensurable to the square of the line GB, therefore
the parallelogramme CH is co^mensurable to the parallelogramme KL. But as CH is
to KL, so is the line CK to the line KM: wherefore the line CK is commensurable
in length to the line KM. Wherefore (by the 17. of the tenth) the line CM is in
power more then the line FM by the square of a line commensurable in length to
the line CM. But the line CM is commensurable in length to the rational line
CD. Wherefore the line CF is a f^irst residuall line. Wherefore the square of a
residuall line applied unto a rational line, makes the breadth or other side
a first residuall line: which was required to be demonstrated.

The ^4. Theoreme. The 98. Proposition. The square of a first mediall residuall
line applied to a rational line, makes the breadth or other side a second
residuall line.
SVppose that AB be a first mediall residual line, and let CD be a rational
line. And unto the line CD apply the parallelogramme CE equal to the square of
the line AB, Construction.
and making in breadth the line CF. Then I say that the line CF is a second
residuall line. For unto the line AB, let the line conveniently joined be
supposed to be BG. Wherefore the lines AG and BG are mediall commensurable in
power only, comprehending a rational super^icies. And unto the line CD apply
the parallelogramme CH equal to the square of the line AG, and making in breadth
the line CK, and vnthe line KH (which is equal to the line CD) apply the
parallelogramme KL equal to the square of the line GB and making in breadth
the line KM. Demonstration.
Wherefore the whole parallelogramme CL is equal to both the squares of the
lines AG and GB which are mediall and commensurable the one to the other.
Wherefore the parallelogrammes CH and KL are mediall and commensurable the one
to the other. Wherefore (by the 15. of the tenth) the whole parallelogramme CL
is commensurable to either of these parallelogrammes CH and KL. Wherefore (by
the corollary of the 23. of the tenth) the whole parallelogramme CL is also
mediall. Wherefore (by the 22. of the tenth) the line CM is rational and
incommensurable in length to the line CD. And forasmuch as the parallelogramme
CL is equal to the squares of the lines AG and GB^ and the squares of the lines
AG and GB are equal to that which is contained under the lines AG and GB
twice, together with the square of the line AB (by the 7. of the second): and
unto the square of the line AB is equal the parallelogramme CE. Wherefore the
residue, namely, that which is contained under the lines AG and GB twice, is
equal to the residue, namely, to the parallelogra^me FL. But that which is
contained under the lines AG and GB twice is rational. Wherefore the
parallelogramme FL is also rational. Wherefore the line FM is rational and
co^mensurable in length to the line CD (by the 20. of the tenth.) Now forasmuch
as the parallelogramme CL is mediall, and the parallelogramme FL is rational,
therefore they are inco^mensurable the one to the other. Wherefore also the line
CM is incommensurable in length to the line FM, and they are both rational.
Wherefore the line CF is a residuall line. CF concl^ded a residuall line.
I say moreover that it is a second residuall line. For divide the line FM into
two equal parts in the point N, from which point draw unto the line CD a
parallel line NX. Wherefore either of these parallelogrammes FX and NL is equal
to the parallelogramme contained under the lines AG and GB. And forasmuch as
the parallelogramme contained under the lines AG and GB is the mean
proportional between the squares of the lines AG and BG. Therefore the
parallelogramme NL is the mean proportional between the parallelogrammes CH
and KL. But as CH is to NL, so is the line CK to the line NM, and as NL is to
KL, so is the line NM to the line KM. Wherefore as the line CK is to the line
NM, so is the line NM to the line KM. Wherefore the parallelogra^me contained
under the lines CK and KM is equal to the square of the line NM, that is, to
the fourth part of the square of the line FM. But the parallelogramme CH is
commensurable to the parallelogramme KL. Wherefore also the line CK is
commensurable in length to the line KM. Wherefore (by the 17. of the tenth) the
line CM is in power more then the line FM, by the square of a line
commensurable in length to the line CM. And the line FM which is the line
conveniently joined, is commensurable in length to the rational line CD.
Wherefore the lin^ CF is a second residuall line. Wherefore the square of a first
mediall residual line applied to a rational line, makes the breadth or other
side a second residuall line: which was required to be proved.

The 75. Theoreme. The 99. Proposition. The square of a second mediall
residuall line applied unto a rational line, makes the breadth or other side
a third residuall line.
SVppose that AB be a second mediall residuall line, and let CD be a rational
line. And unto the line CD apply the parallelogramme CE equal to the square of
the line AB, and making in breadth the line CF. Construction.
Then I say, that the line CF is a third residuall line. For unto the line AB
let the line conveniently joined be supposed to be BG. Wherefore the lines AG
and GB are mediall commensurable in power only containing a mediall
super^icies. And let the rest of the construction be as in the Proposition next
going before. Demonstration.
Wherefore the line CM is rational and incommensurable in length to the
rational line CD. And either of the parallelogrammes FX and NL is equal to
that which is contained under the lines AG and GB. But that which is contained
under the lines AG and GB is mediall. Wherefore that which is contained under
the lines AG and GB twice is also mediall. Wherefore the whole parallelogramme
FL is also mediall. Wherefore the line FM is rational and incommensurable in
length to the line CD. And forasmuch as the lines AG and GB are inco^mensurable
in length, therefore also the square of the line AG is incommensurable to the
parallelogramme contained under the lines AG and GB. But unto the square of the
line AG are commensurable the squares of the lines AG and GB: and unto the
parallelogramme contained under the lines AG and GB, is commensurable that
which is contained under the lines AG and GB twice. Wherefore the squares of
the lines AG and GB are incommensurable to that which is contained under the
lines AG and GB twice. Wherefore the parallelogrammes which are equal unto
them, namely, the parallelogrammes CL and FL are incommensurable the one to the
other. Wherefore also the line CM is incommensurable in length to the line FM:
and they are both rational. Wherefore the line CF is a residuall line. CF
concluded a residual line.
I say moreover, that it is a third residuall line. For forasmuch as the square
of the line AG, that is, the parallelogramme CH is commensurable to the square
of the line BG, that is, to the parallelogramme KL, therefore the line CK is
commensurable in length to the line KM. And in like sort as in the former
Proposition, so also in this may we prove, that the parallelogramme contained
under the lines CK and KM, is equal to the square of the line NM, that is, to
the fourth part of the square of the line FM. Wherefore the line CM is in power
more then the line FM, by the square of a line commensurable in length to the
line CM^ and neither of the lines CM nor FM is commensurable in length to the
rational line ^D. Wherefore the line CF is a third residual line. Wherefore the
square of a second mediall residual line applied unto a rational line, makes
the breadth or other side a third residuall line: which was required to be
demonstrated.

The 76. Theoreme. The 100. Proposition. The square of a less line applied
unto a rational line, makes the breadth or other side a fourth residuall line.
SVppose that AB be a less line, and let CD be a rational line. And unto the
line CD apply the parallelogramme CE equal to the square of the line AB, and
making in breadth the line CF. Then I say, that the line CF is a fourth
residuall line. For unto the line AB let the line conveniently joined be
supposed to be BG. Construction.
Wherefore the lines AG and GB are incommensurable in power, having that which
is made of their squares added together rational, and that which is contained
under them mediall. And let the rest of the construction be as in the
Propositions going before. Wherefore the whole parallelogramme CL is rational.
Demonstration.
Wherefore the line CM is also rational, and commensurable in length to the
line CD. And forasmuch as that which is contained under the lines AG and GB
twice is mediall, therefore the parallelogramme which is equal unto it,
namely, the parallelogramme FL, is also mediall. Wherefore the line FM is
rational and incommensurable in length to the line CD. But the line CM is
commensurable in length to the line CD. Wherefore (by the 13. of the tenth) the
line CM is incommensurable in length to the line FM: and they are both
rational. Wherefore the lines CM and FM are rational commensurable in power
only. CF proved a residuall line.
Wherefore the line CF is a residuall line. I say moreover, that it is a fourth
residuall line. For forasmuch as the lines AG and GB are incommensurable in
power, therefore the squares of them, that is, the parallelogrammes, which are
equal unto them, namely, the parallelogrammes CH and KL, are incommensurable
the one to the other. Wherefore also the line CK is incommensurable in length
to the line KM. And in like sort may we prove, that the parallelogramme
contained under the lines CK and KM, is equal to the square of the line NM,
that is, to the fourth part of the square of the line FM. Wherefore (by the 18.
of the tenth) the line CM is in power more then the line FM, by the square of a
line incommensurable in length to the line CM. And the whole line CM is
commensurable in length to the rational line CD. Wherefore the line CF is a
fourth residuall line. Wherefore the square of a less line applied unto a
rational line, makes the breadth or other side a fourth residuall line: which
was required to be proved.

The 77. Theoreme. The 101. Proposition. The square of a line making with a
rational superficies the whole superficies mediall applied unto a rational
line, makes the breadth or other side a fifth residuall line.
SVppose that AB be a line making with a rational superficies the whole
superficies mediall, and let CD be a rational line. And unto the line CD apply
the parallelogramme CE equal to the square of the line AB, and making in
breadth the line CF. Then I say that the line CF is a fifth residuall line. For
unto the line AB let the line conveniently joined be supposed to ^e BG.
Wherefore the lines AG and GB are incommensurable in power, having that which is
made of their squares added together mediall, and that which is contained under
them rational. Let the rest of the construction be in this as it was in the
former propositions. Wherefore the whole parallelogramme CL is mediall.
Wherefore the line CM is rational and incommensurable in length to the line
CD. And either of the parallelogramme FX and NL is rationall^ Wherfor^ the
whole parallelogramme FL is also rational. Wherefore also the line FM is
rational and commensurable in length to the line CD. And forasmuch as the
parallelogramme CL is mediall, and the parallelogramme FL is rational,
therefore CL and FL are incommensurable the one to the other, and the line CM
is incommensurable in length to the line FM, and they are both rational.
Wherefore the lines CM and FM are rational commensurable in power only.
Wherefore the line GF is a residuall line. I say moreover that it is a ^i^t
residual line. CF proved a residuall line.
For we may in like sort prove, that the parallelograme contained under the
lines CK and KM, is equal to the square of the line NM, that is, to the fourth
part of the square of the line FM. And forasmuch as the square of the line AG,
that is, the parallelogramme CH is incommensurable to the square of the line
BG, that is to the parallelogramme KL, therefore the line CK is incommensurable
in length to the line KM. Wherefore (by the 18. of the tenth) the line CM is in
power more then the line FM, by the square of a line incommensurable in length
to the line CM. And the line conveniently joined, namely, the line FM is
commensurable in length to the rational line CD. Wherefore the line CF is a
^i^t residuall line. Wherefore the line CF is a fifth residuall line. Wherefore
the square of a line making with a rational superficies the whole superficies
medial, applied unto a rational line makes the breadth or other side a fifth
residuall line: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 78. Theoreme. The 102. Proposition. The square of a line making with a
mediall superficies, the whole superficies mediall applied to a rational line,
makes the breadth or other side, a sixth residuall line.
SVppose that AB be a line making with a mediall superficies, the whole
superficies mediall, Construction.
and let CD be a rational line. And unto the line CD apply the parallelogramme
CE equal to the square of the line AB and making in breadth the line CF. Then
I say that the line CF is a sixth residual line. For unto the line AB let the
line conveniently joined be BG. Wherefore the lines AG and BG are
incommensurable in power having that which is made of their squares added
together mediall, and that which is contained under them mediall, and moreover
that which is made of their squares added together is incommensurable to that
which is contained under them. Let the rest of the construction be in this, as
it was in the propositio^s going before. Demonstration.
Wherefore the whole parallelogramme CL is mediall, (for it is equal to that
which is made of the squares of the lines AG and GB added together, which is
supposed to be mediall). Wherefore the line CM is rational and incommensurable
in length to the line CD: and in like manner the parallelogramme FL is mediall.
Wherefore also the line FM is rational and incommensurable ^n length to the
line CD. And forasmuch as that which is made of the squares of the lines AG and
GB added together, is incommensurable to that which is contained under the
lines AG and GB twice, therefore the parallelogra^mes equal to them, namely,
the parallelogrammes CL and FL are incommensurable the one to the other.
Wherefore also the lines GM and FM are incommensurable in length, and they are
both rational. Wherefore they are rational co^mensurable in power only:
Wherefore the line CF is a residuall line. I say moreover that it is a sixth
residuall line. CF ^roued ^ residuall.
Let the rest of the demonstration be as it was in the former propositions. And
forasmuch as the lines AG and BG are incommensurable in power, therefore their
squares, that is, the parallelogrammes which are equal unto them, namely, the
parallelogrammes CH and KL are incommensurable the one to the other. Wherefore
also the line CK is incommensurable in length to the line KM. Wherefore (by the
18. of the tenth) the line CM is in power more then the line FM by the square
of a line incommensurable in length to the line CM. And neither of the lines CM
nor FM is commensurable in length to the rational line CD. Wherefore the line
CF is a sixth residuall line. Wherefore the square of a line making with a medial
superficies the whole superficies mediall applied to a rational line, makes
the breadth or other side a sixth residuall line: which was required to be
demonstrated.

The 79. Theoreme. The 103. Proposition. A line commensurable in length to a
residuall line: is it self also a residuall line of the self same order.
SVppose that AB be a residuall line, unto which let the line CD be
commensurable in length. The sixth Senary.
Then I say, that the line CD is also a residuall line, and of the self same
order of residuall lines that the line AB is. For forasmuch as the line AB is a
residuall line, Construction.
let the line conveniently joined unto it be supposed to be BE. Wherefore the
lines AE and BE are rational commensurable in power only. As the line AB is
to the line CD, so (by the 12. of the sixth) let the line BE be to the line DF.
Demonstration.
Wherefore (by the 12. of the fifth) as one of the antecedentes is to one of the
consequentes, so are all the antecedentes to all the consequentes. Wherefore as
the line AB is to the line CD, so is the whole line AE to the whole line CF,
and the line BE to the line DF. Wherefore (by the 10. of the tenth) the line AE
is commensurable in length to the line CF, and the line BE to the line DF. But
the line AE is rational. Wherefore the line CF is also rational. And in like
sort the line DF is rational, for that the line BE, to whom it is
commensurable, is also rational. And for that as the line BE is to the line
AE, so is the line DF to the line CF. But the lines BE and AE are commensurable
in power only: Wherefore the lines CD and DF are commensurable in power only.
Wherefore the line CD is a residuall line. CD concluded a residuall line.
I say moreouer^ that it is a residuall line of the self same order that the
line AB is. For for that as we have before said, as the line A^ is to the line
CF, so is the line BE to the line DF^ therefore alternately, as the line AE is
to the line BE, so is the line CF to the line DF. But the line AE is in power
more then the line EB, either by the square of a line commensurable in length
to the line AE, or by the square of a line incommensurable in length to the
line AE. If AE be in power (...) then BE, by the square of a line commensurable
in length to AE, then the line ^F^ shall also (by the 14. of the tenth) be in
power more then the line DF, by the square of a line commensurable in length to
the line CF, and so if the line AE be commensurable in length to the rational
line put, forasmuch as the line AE is commens^rable in length to the line CF,
therefore (by the 12. of the tenth) the line CF shall also be commensurable in
length to the same rational line. Wherefore either of the line put, then
neither of the lines CF nor DF shall be commensurable in length to the same
rational line (by the 13. of the tenth). And so either of the lines AB and CD
is a third residuall line. But

As before touching binomiall lines, so also touching residuall lines, this is
to be noted, that a line commensurable in length to a residuall line, is
always a residuall line of the self same order that the residuall line is,
unto whom it is co^mensurable, Note.
as has before in this 103. proposition been proved. But if a line be
co^mensurable in power only to a residuall line^ then follows it not, yea it
is impossible, that that line should be a residuall of the self same order that
the residual line, is unto whom it is commensurable in power only. Howbeit
those two lines shall of necessity be both either of the three first orders of
resid^^ll lines, or of the three last orders: which is not hard to prove, if ye
mark diligently the former demonstration, and that which was spoken of
binomiall lines as touching this matter.

The 80. Theoreme. The 104. Proposition. A line commensurable to a mediall
residuall line, is it self also a medial residuall line, and of the self same
order.
SVppose that AB be a mediall residuall line, unto whom let the line CD be
commensurable in length and in power, or in power only. Then I say that CD is
also a mediall residuall line, and of the self same order. For forasmuch as
the line AB is a mediall residuall line, Construction.
let the line conveniently joined unto i^ (...) BE: wherefore the lines AE and
BE are mediall commensurable in power only. As AB is to CD, so by the 22. of
the sixth) let BE be to DF. And in like sort as in the former so also in this
may we prove, Demonstration.
that the line AE is commensurable in length and in power, or in power only
unto the line CF, and the line BE (...) the line DF. Wherefore (by the 23. of
the tenth (...) line CF is a mediall line, and the line DF is also a mediall
line, for that it is commensurable to the mediall line BE. And in like sort the
lines CF and DF are commensurable in power only: for that they have the self
same proportion the one to the other, that the lines AE and EB have, which are
commensurable in power only. Wherefore the line CD is a mediall residuall
line. CD proved a mediall.
I say moreover that it is of the self same order that the line AB is. For for
that as the line AE is to the line BE, so is the line CF to the line DF. But as
the line AE is to the line BE, so is the square of the line AE to the
parallelogramme contained under the lines AE and BE (by the first of the
sixth): and as the line CF is to the line DF, so is the square of the line CF
to the parallelogramme contained under the lines CF and DF. Wherefore as the
square of the line AE is to the parallelogramme contained under the lines AE
and BE, so is the square of the line CF to the parallelogramme contained under
the lines CF and DF. Wherefore alternately as the square of the line AE is to
the square of the line CF, so is the parallelogramme contained under the lines
AE and BE, to the parallelogramme contained under the ^ines CF and DF. But the
square of the line AE is commensurable to the square of the line CF (for the
line AE is commensurable to the line CF). Wherefore also the parallelogramme
contained under the lines AE and BE, is commensurable to the parallelogramme
contained under the lines CF and DF. Wherefore if the parallelogramme contained
under the lines AE and EB be rational, the parallelogramme also contained
under the lines CF and FD shall be rational. And then either of the lines AB
and CD is a first mediall residuall line. But if the parallelogramme contained
under AE and BE be mediall, the parallelogramme also contained under the lines
CF and FD shall be also mediall (by the corollary of the 23. of the tenth): and
so either of the lines AB and CD is a second mediall residuall line. Wherefore
the line CD is a mediall residuall AB is. A line therefore commensurable to a
mediall residuall line, is it self also a mediall residuall line of the self
same order: which was required to be demonstrated-

This Theoreme is understood generally, that whether a line be commensurable
in length and in power, or in power only to a mediall residuall line, it is it
self also a mediall residuall line, and of the self same order, which thing
also is to be understood of the three Theoremes which follow.

An other demonstration after Campane.
Suppose that A be a mediall residuall line, unto whom let the line B be
commensurable in length, or in power only. And take a rational line CD, unto
which apply the parallelogramme CE equal to the square of the line A,
Construction.
and unto the line FE (which is equal to the line CD) apply the
parallelogramme F^ equal to the square of the line B. Now then the
parallelogrammes CE and FG shall be commensurable, Demonstration.
for that the lines A, B are commensurable in power: wherefore by the 1. of the
sixth and 10. of this book, the lines DE and FG are commensurable in length.
Now then if A be a first mediall residuall line, then is the line DE a second
residuall line by the 98. of this book: and if the line A be a second mediall
residuall line, then is the line ^^ a third residuall line by the 99. of this
book. But if DE be a second residuall line, G^ also shall be a second
residuall line (by the ^03. of this book). And if DE be a third residuall line,
GE also shall (by the same) be also a third residuall line. Wherefore it
follows by the 9^ and 93. of this book, that B is either a first medial
residuall line or a second mediall residuall line, according as the line A is
supposed to be: which was required to be proved.

The 81. Theoreme. The 105. Proposition. A line commensurable to a less line:
is it self also a less line.
Construction.
SVppose that AB be a less line, unto whom let the line CD be commensurable.
Then I say, that the line CD is also a less line. For let the same
construction be in this, that was in the former Propositions. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the lines AE and EB are incommensurable in power, therefore
(by the 22. of the sixth, and 10. of the tenth) the lines CF and FD are
incommensurable in power. Again (by the 22. of the sixth) as the square of the
line AE is to the square of the line BE, so is the square of the line CF to the
square of the line DF. Wherefore by composition as the squares of the lines AE
and BE are to the square of the line BE, so are the squares of the lines CF and
DF, to the square of the line DF: and alternately, as the squares of the lines
AE and BE are to the squares of the lines CF and DF, so is the square of the
line BE to the square of the line DF. But the square of the line BE is
commensurable to the square of the line DF (for the lines BE and DF are
commensurable). Wherefore that which is made of the squares of the lines AE and
BE added together, is commensurable to that which is made of the squares of the
lines CF and DF added together. But that which is made of the squares of the
lines AE and BE added together, is rational. Wherefore that which is made of
the squares of the lines CF and DF added together, is also rational. Again,
for that as the square of the line AE is to the parallelogramme contained under
the lines AE and BE, so is the square of the line CF to the parallelogramme
contained under the lines CF and DF (as we declared in the Proposition next
going before): therefore alternately, as the square of the line AE is to the
square of the line CF, so is the parallelogramme contained under the lines AE
and BE, to the parallelogramme contained under the lines CF and DF. But the
square of the line AE is commensurable to the square of the line CF, for the
lines AE and CF are commensurable. Wherefore the parallelogramme contained
under the lines AE and BE, is commensurable to the parallelogramme contained
under the lines CF and DF. But the parallelogramme contained under the lines AE
and BE is mediall. Wherefore the parallelogramme contained under the lines CF
and DF is also mediall. Wherefore the lines CF and DF are incommensurable in
power, having that which is made of their squares added together rational, and
the parallelogramme contained under them mediall. Wherefore the line CD is a
less line. A line therefore commensurable to a less line, is it self also a
less line: which was required to be proved.

An other demonstration.
Suppose that A be a less line, and unto A let the line B be commensurable
whether in length and power, or in power only. Then I say that B is a less
line. Take a rational line CD. Construction.
And unto the line CD apply (by the 44 of the first) the parallelogramme CE
equal to the square of the line A, and making in breadth the line CF. Wherefore
(by the 100. proposition) the line CF is a fourth residuall line. Unto the line
FE apply (by the same) the parallelogramme EH equal to the square of the line
B, and making in breadth the line FH. Now forasmuch as the line A is
commensurable to the line B, Demonstration.
therefore also the square of the line A is co^mensurable to the square of the
line B. But unto the square of the line A is equal the parallelogramme CE, and
unto the square of the line B is equal the parallelogramme EH. Wherefore the
parallelogramme CE is commensurable to the parallelogramme EH. But as the
parallelogramme CE is to the parallelogramme EH, so is the line CF to the line
FH. Wherefore the line CF is commensurable in length to the line FH. But the
line CF is a fourth residuall line. Wherefore the line FH is also a fourth
residuall line (by the 103. of the tenth): and the line FE is rational. But if
a superficies be contained under a rational line, and a fourth residuall line,
the line that contains in power that superficies is (by the 94. of the tenth)
a less line. But the line B contains in power the superficies EH. Wherefore
the line B is a less line: which was required to be proved.

The 82. Theoreme. The 106. Proposition. A line commensurable to a line making
with a rational superficies the whole superficies mediall, is it self also a
line making with a rational superficies the whole superficies mediall.
SVppose that AB be a line making with a rational superficies the whole
superficies mediall, unto whom let the line CD be commensurable. Then I say
that the line CD is a line making with a rational superficies the whole
superficies mediall. Construction.
Unto the line AB let the line conveniently joined be BE. Wherefore the lines
AE and EB are incommensurable in power, having that which is made of their
squares added together mediall, and the parallelogramme contained under them
rational. Let the construction be in this as it was in the former
propositions. Demonstration.
And in like sort may we prove that as the line AE is to the line BE, so is the
line CF to the line DF, and that that which is made of the squares of the lines
AE and BE added together is commensurable to that which is made of the squares
of the lines CF and DF added together, and that that which is contained under
the lines AE and EB, is in like sort commensurable to that which is contained
under the lines CF and DF. Wherefore also the lines CF and DF are commensurable
in power, having that which is made of their squares added together mediall,
and that which is contained under them rational. Wherefore the line CD is a
line making with a rational superficies the whole superficies mediall.
Wherefore a line commensurable to a line making with a rational superficies the
whole superficies mediall, is it self also a line making with a rational
superficies the whole superficies mediall: which was required to be
demonstrated.

An other demonstration.
Suppose that A be a line making with a rational superficies the whole
superficies mediall, and unto it let the line B be commensurable either in
length and in power, or in power only. Then I say that B is a line making with
a rational superficies the whole superficies mediall. Construction.
Take a rational line CD, and unto the line CD apply the parallelogramme CE
equal to the square of the line A and making in breadth the line GF. Wherefore
(by the 101. proposition) the line CF is a fifth residuall line. Again unto the
line FE apply the parallelogramme FG equal to the square of the line B, and
making in breadth the line FH. Now forasmuch as the line A is co^mensurable to
the line B, Demonstration.
therefore the square of the line A is comme^surable to the square of the line
B. But unto the square of the line A is equal the parallelogramme CE, and unto
the square of the line B is equal the parallelogramme FG. Wherefore the
parallelogramme CE is commensurable to the parallelogramme FG. Wherefore the
line CF is also commensurable in length to the line FH. But the line CF is a
fifth residuall line. Wherefore also the line FH is a fifth residual line. And the
line FE is rational. But if a supersicies be contained under a rational line
and a ^ift residuall line, the line that contains in power that superficies,
is (by the 95. of the tenth) a line making with a rational superficies the
whole super^icies mediall. But the line B contains in power the
parallelogramme FG. Wherefore the line B is a line making with a rational
superficies, the whole superficies mediall^ which was required to be
demonstrated.

The 83. Theoreme. The 107. Proposition. A line co^mensurable to a line, making
with a mediall superficies, the whole superficies mediall, is it self also a
line making with a mediall superficies the whole superficies mediall.
SVppose that AB be a line making with a mediall superficies the whole
superficies mediall, unto whom let the line CD be commensurable. Then I say
that the line CD is also a line making with a mediall superficies the whole
superficies mediall. For unto the line AB let the line coueniently joined be
BE. And let the rest of the construction be in this as it was in the former
propositions. Construction.
Wherefore the lines AE and BE are inco^mensurable in power, having that which
is made of their squares added together mediall, Demonstration.
and that which is contained under them also mediall, and moreover that which
is made of their squares added together is incommensurable to that which is
contained under them. But the lines AE and BE (as we have before proved) are
commensurable to the lines CF and DF, and that which is made of the squares of
the lines AE and BE added together, is commensurable to that which is made of
the squares of the lines CF and FD added together, and the parallelogramme
contained under the lines AE and BE is commensurable to the parallelogramme
contained under the lines CF and DF. Wherefore the lines CF and DF are
incommensurable in power having that which is made of their squares added
together mediall, and that which is contained under them also mediall, and
moreover that which is made of their squares added together, is incommensurable
to that which is contained under them. Wherefore the line CD is a line making
with a mediall superficies the whole superficies mediall. A line therefore
commensurable to a line making with a mediall superficies the whole superficies
mediall, is it self also a line making with a mediall superficies the whole
superficies mediall: which was required to be proved.

This proposition may also be an other way demonstrated, as the three former
propositions were. If upon a rational line you apply parallelogrammes equal
to the squares of the lines AB and CD, the breadthes of which parallelogrames
shall be each a sixth residual line, and therefore the lines which co^tayne them
in power, namely, the lines AB and CD shall be both such lines as is required
in the proposition, which is easy to conclud^ marking the orde^ of the
demonstration in the three former propositions.

The 84. Theoreme. The 108. Proposition. If from a rational superficies be
taken away a medialt superficies, the line which contains in power the
superficies remaining, is one of these two irrational lines, namely, either a
residuall line, or a less line.
SVppose that BC be a rational superficies, Seventh Senary.
and from it take away a mediall superficies, namely, BD. Then I say, that the
line which contains in power the superficies remaining, namely, the
superficies EC, is one of ^hese two irrational lines, namely, either a
residuall line, or a less line. Take a rational line FG. And upon FG describe
(by the 44. of the first) a rectangle parallelogramme GH equal to the
super^icies BC. Constraction.
And from the parallelogramme GH take away the parallelogramme GK equal to the
superficies BD. Demonstration.
Wherefore (by the third common sentence) the super^icies remaining, namely,
EC, is equal to the parallelogramme remaining, namely, to LH. And forasmuch as
BC is rational, and BD is mediall, and BC is equal to the parallelogramme GH,
and BD to the parallelogramme GK: therefore GH is rational, and GK is mediall:
and the parallelogramme GH is applied unto the rational line FG. Wherefore (by
the ^0. of the tenth) the line FH is rational and commensurable in length to
the line FG. And the parallelogramme GK is also applied unto the ra^ionall line
FG. Wherefore (by the 22. of the tenth) the line FK is rational and
incommensurable in length to the line FG. Wherefore (by the Assumpt of the 12.
of the tenth) the line FH is incommensurable in length to the line FK. And they
are both rational. Wherefore the lines FH and FK are rational commensurable
in power only. Wherefore the line KH is a residuall line: and the line
conveniently ^oy^ed unto it is KF. Now the line FH is in power more th^n the
line KF, either by the square of a line commensurable in lengt^ to the line FH,
or by the square of a line incommensurable in length to the line FH. First let
it be in power more then the line FK, by the square of a line commensurable in
length to the line FH, and the whole line FH is commensurable in length to the
rational line put, namely, to FG. Wherefore the line KH is a first residuall
line. But if a superficies be contained under a rational line, and a first
residuall line, the line that contains in power that superficies, is (by the
91. of the tenth) a residuall line. Wherefore the line which contains in
power LH, that is, the superficies EC, is a residuall line. But if the line HF
be in power more then the line FK, by the square of a line incommensurable in
length to the line FH, and the whole line FH is commensurable in length to the
rational line given FG. Wherefore the line KH is a fourth residuall line. But
a line containing in power a superficies contained under a rational line and a
fourth residuall line, as a less line (by the 94. of the tenth). Wherefore the
line that contains in power the superficies LH, that is, the superficies EC,
is a less line. If therefore from a rational superficies be taken away a
mediall super^icies, the line which contains in power the superficies
remaining, is one of these two irrational lines, namely, either a residuall
line, or a less line: which was required to be proved.

The 85. Theoreme. The 109. Proposition. If from a mediall superficies be taken
away a rational superficies, the line which contains in power the
superficies remaining is one of these two irrational lines, namely either a
first mediall residuall line, or a line making with a rational superficies the
whole superficies mediall.
SVppose that BC be a mediall super^icies and from it take away a rational
super^icies, namely, BD. Then I say that the line which contains in power the
superficies remaining, namely, the superficies EC is one of these two
irrational lines, either a first mediall residuall line, or a line making with
a rational superficies the whole superficies mediall. Take a rational line FG,
and let the rest of the construction be in this as it was in the former
proposition. Construction.
Wherefore it follows that the line F^ is rational and incommensurable in
length to the line FG (by the 22. of the tenth). Demonstration.
And that the line KF is (by the 20. of the tenth) rational and commensurable
in length to the line FG. Wherefore the lines FH and FK are rational
commensurable in power only. Wherefore KH is a residuall line. And the line
conveniently joined unto it is FK. Now the line FH is in power more then the
line FK, either by the square of a line commensurable in FH, or by the square
of a line incommensurable in length unto it. If the line FH be in power more
then the line FK by the square of a line commensurable in length to the line FH
and the line conveniently joined unto it, namely, FK, is co^mensurable in
length to the rational line FG. Wherefore the line KH is a second residuall
line. And the line FG is a rational line. But a line containing in power a
superficies comprehended under a rational line and a second residuall line is
(by the 92. of the tenth) a first mediall residuall line. Wherefore the line
thus contains in power the superficies LH, that is, the superficies CE is a
first mediall residuall lne. But if the line HF be in power more then the line
FK by the square of a line incommensurable in length to the line FH, and the
line conveniently joined, namely, the line FK is commensurable in length to the
rational line put, namely, to FG: wherefore the line KH is a ^ift residuall
line. Wherefore (by the 95. of the tenth) the line that contains in power the
superficies LH, that is, the superficies EC, is a line making with a rational
super^icies, the whole superficies mediall which was required to be proved.

The 86. Theoreme. The 110. Proposition. If from a mediall superficies be taken
away a mediall superficies incommensurable to the whole superficies, the line
which contains in power the superficies which remains, is one of these two
irrational lines, namely, either a second mediall residuall line, or a line
making with a mediall superficies the whole superficies mediall.
AS in the former descriptions, s^ (...) also ^ake away from the mediall
superfici^s BC^ mediall superficies BD^ and let ^D be incomm^nsur^ble to the
whole superficies BC. Then I say, that the line which contains in power the
super^icies EC, is one of th^se two irrational lines, namely, either a second
mediall residuall line, or a li^e making with a mediall superfi^^es the whole
superficies mediall. Demo^stratio^.
For forasmuch as either of these superficie^^s BC and BD is mediall, and BC is
incommensurable to BD, it follows (by the 22. of the tenth) tha^ either of
these lines FH and FK is rational and incomm^^surable in length to the line
FG. And forasmuch as the superficies BC is incommensurable to the superficies
BD, that is, the superficies GH, to the super^icies GK, therefore (by the first
of the sixth, and 10^ of the tenth) the line FH is incommensurable in length to
the line FK. Wherefore the lines HF and FK are rational co^mensurable in power
only. Wherefore (by the 73. of the tenth) the line KH is a residuall line, and
the line conveniently joined unto it is FK. Now the line HF is in power more
then the line FK, either by the square of a line co^mensurable in length to the
line HF, or by the square of a line incommensurable in length unto it. If the
line HF be in power more then the line FK, by the square of a line
co^mensurable in length to the line FH,

The 87. Theoreme. The 111. Proposition. A residuall line, is ^ot one and the
same with a binomiall line.
SVppose that AB be a residuall line. Then I say that AB is not one and the
same with a binomiall line. For if it be possible let it be a binomiall line.
And take a rational line DC. Construction.
And (by the 44. of the first) unto the line CD apply a rectangle
parallelogramme CE equal to the square of the line AB, and making in breadth
the line DE. Demonstration on leading to an impossibility.
And forasmuch as AB is a residuall line, therefore (by the 97. of the tenth)
the line DE is a first residuall line. Let the line co^^^niently joined unto it
be E^. Wherefore the lines D F and FE are rational commensurable in power
^nely, and the line DF is in power more then the line FE by the square of a
line commensurable in length to the line DE and the line DF, is co^mensurable
in length to the rational line put DC. Again forasmuch as AB is by position a
binomiall line, therefore (by the 60. of the tenth) the line DE is a first
binomiall line. Divide it into his names in the point G. And let DG be the
greater name. Wherefore the lines DG and ^E are rational commensurable in power
only. And the line DG is in power more then the line GE by the square of a
line commensurable in length to the line DG, and the line DG is commensurable
in length to the rational line put DC. Wherefore the line DF is commensurable
in length to the line DG. Wherefore (by the 13. of the tenth) the whole line DF
is commensurable in length to the line remaining, namely, ^o the line GF. And
forasmuch as the line DF is co^me^surable to the line FG, but the line FD is
rational. Wherefore the line FG is also rational. And forasmuch as the line FD
is commensurable in length to the line FG, but the line DF is incommensurable
in length to the line FE. Wherefore the line FG is incommensurable in length to
the line FE (by the 13. of the tenth) and they are both rational lines.
Wherefore the lines GF and FE are rational commensurable in power only.
Wherefore (by the 73. of the tenth) the line EG is a residuall line, but it is
also rational (as before has been proved): which is impossible, namely, that
one and the same line should be both rational and irrational. Wherefore a
residuall line is not one and the same with a binomiall line, that is, is not a
binomiall line: which was required to be demonstrated.

A Corollary.
A Corollary.
A residuall line and the other five irrational lines following it, are
neither mediall lines, nor one and the same between themselues^ that is, one is
utterly of a diverse kind from an other. For the square of a mediall line
applied to a rational line, makes the breadth rational and incommensurable
in length to the rational line, whereunto it is applied (by the 22. of the
tenth) The square of a residuall line applied to a rational line, makes the
breadth a first residuall line (by the 97. of the tenth). The square of a first
mediall residuall line applied to a rational line, makes the breadth a second
residuall line (by the 98. of the tenth) The square of a second mediall
residuall line applied unto a rational line, makes the breadth a third
residuall line (by the 99. of the tenth) The square of a less line applied to
a rational line, makes the breadth a fourth residuall line (by the 100. of
the tenth) The square of a line making with a rational superficies the whole
superficies mediall applied to a rational line, makes the breadth a ^ift
residuall line (by the 101. of the tenth) And the square of a line making with
a mediall super^icies the whole superficies mediall applied to a rational
line, makes the breadth a sixth residuall line (by the 102. of the tenth) Now
forasmuch as these foresaid sides which are the breadthes differ both from the
first breadth, sor that it is rational, and differ also the one from the other,
for that they are residuals of diverse orders and kinds, it is manifest that
those irrational lines differ also the one from the other. And forasmuch as it
has been proved in the 111. proposition, that (...) residual (...) is not one
and the same with a binomiall line, and it has also been proved that the (...)
of a residuall line and of the five irrational lines that follow it being
applied to a rational line do make their breadthes one of the residuals of that
order of which they were, whose square^ were applied to the rational line,
likewise also the squares of a binomiall line, and of the five irrational
lines which follow it, being applied to a rational line, do make the breadthes
one of the binomials of that order of which they were, whose squares were
applied to the rational line. Wherefore the irrational lines which follow the
binomiall line, and the irrational lines which follow the residuall line,
differ the one from the other, so that all the irrational lines are 13. in
number, namely, these.

1 A mediall line. 2 A binomiall line. 3 A first bimediall line. 4 A second
bimediall line. 5 A greater line. 6 A line containing in power a rational
superficies and a mediall superficies. 7 A line containing in power two mediall
superficieces. 8 A residuall line. 9 A first mediall residuall line. 10 A
second mediall residuall line. 11 A less line. 12 A line making with a
rational superficies the whole superficies mediall. 13 A line making with a
mediall superficies the whole superficies mediall.
The 88. Theoreme. The 112. Proposition. The square of a rational line applied
unto a binomiall line, makes the breadth or other side a residuall line, whose
names are commensurable to the names of the binomiall line, and in the self
same proportion: and moreover that residuall line is in the self same order of
residuall lines, that the binomiall line is of binomiall lines.
SVppose that A be a rational line, The determination has sundry parts
orderly to be proved.
and BC a binomiall line whose greater name let be CD. And unto the square of
the line A let the parallelogramme contained under the lines BC and OF (so that
OF be the breadth) be equal. Then I say that OF is a residuall line, whose
names are commensurable to the names of the binomiall line BC, which names let
be CD and DB, and are in the same proportion with them: and moreover the line
OF is in the self same order of residual lines, that the line BC is of
binomiall lines. Unto the square of the line A let the parallelogramme
contained under the lines BD and G be equal. Construction.
Now forasmuch as that which is contained under the lines BC and OF is equal to
that which is contained under the lines BD and G, therefore reciprocally (by the
14. of the sixth) as the line CB is to the BD, so is the line G to the line OF.
But the line BC is greater then the line BD, wherefore the line G is greater
then the line OF. Demonstration.
Unto the line G let the line EH be equal. Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth)
as the line CB is to the line BD, so is the line HE to the line FE. Wherefore
by division (by the 17. of the fifth) as the line CD is to the line BD, so is
the line HF to the line FE. This is an Assumpt, problematicall, artificially
used and demonstrated.
As the line HF is to the FE, so let the line FK be to the line KE (how this is
to be done we will declare at the end of this demonstration). Wherefore (by the
12. of the fifth) the whole line HK Therefore those three lines are in continual
proportion.
is to the whole line KF as the line FK is to the line KE. For as one of the
antecedentes is to one of the consequentes, so are all the antecedentes to all
the consequentes. But as the line FK is the line KE, so is the line CD to the
line DB (for FK is to EK as HF is to FE, and HF is to FE as CD is DB). Wherefore
(by the 11. of the fifth) as the line HK is to the line KF, so is the line CD to
the line DB. But the square of the line CD is commensurable to the square of
the line DB: wherefore (by the 10. of the tenth) the square of the line HK is
co^mensurable to the square of the line FK. But these three lines HK, FK, and
EK are proportional in continual proportion (as it has already been proved).
Wherefore (by the second corrollary of the 20. of the sixth) the square of the
line HK is to the square of the line FK as the line HK is to the line EK:
wherefore the line HK is commensurable in length to the line EK. Wherefore (by
the 15. of the tenth) the line HE is commensurable in length to the line FK.
And forasmuch as the square of the line A is equal to that which is contained
under the lines EH and BD, but the square of the line A is rational, where^ore
that which is contained under the lines EH and BD is rational. And it is
applied unto the rational line BD. Wherefore (by the 20. of the tenth) the
line EH is rational and commensurable in length to the line BD. Wherefore also
the line EK which is commensurable in length to the line HE is BD. Now for that
as the line CD is to the line DB, so is the line FK to the line EK (for it was
before proved, that as CD is to DB, so is HF to FE, and as HF is to FE, so is
FK to EK) but the lines CD and DB are commensurable in power only, wherefore
(by the 10. of the tenth) the lines FK and KE are also commensurable in power
only. And for that as the line CD is to the line DB, so is the line FK to the
line EK, therefore by contrary proportion as DB is to CD, so is EK FK, and
alternately as DB is to EK, so is CD to FK: but the lines BD and EK are
commensurable in length (as it has already been proved). Wherefore also the
lines CD and FK are commensurable in length. But the line CD is rational:
wherefore also the line FK is rational. Wherefore the lines FK and EK are
rational commensurable in power only. FE is a residuall line: whose names FK
and KE are commensurable to the names CD and BD of the binomiall line BC and in
the same proportion as is proved. FE concluded a residuall li^^, which is
s^^what prep^^icro^sly, in respect o^ the ^^der propounded, both in the
proposition, and also in the determination.
CD is in power more then the line BD either by the square of a line
commensurable in length to the line CD, or by the square of a line
incommensurable in length. Now if the line CD be in power more then the line BD
by the square of a line commensurable in length unto the line CD, then (by the
13. of the tenth) the line FK is in power more then EK by the square of a line
co^mensurable in length to the line FK. And so if the line CD be co^mensurable
in length to the rational line put, the line FK also shall be co^mensurable in
length to the same rational line: wherefore then the line BC is a first
binomiall line, and the FE is likewise a first residuall line. And if the line
BD be commensurable in length to the rational line, the line ^K is also
commensurable in length to the same, and then the line BC is a second binomiall
line, and the line FE a second residuall line. And if neither of the CD nor DB
be commensurable in length unto the rational line, neither of the lines FK nor
EK are commensurable in length unto the same, and then the line BC is a third
binomiall line, and the line FE is a third residuall line. And if the line CD
be in power more then the line BD, by the square of a line incommensurable in
length to the line CD, the line FK is also (by the 14. of the tenth) in power
more then the line EK by the square of a line incommensurable in length to the
line FK. And so if the line CD be commensurable in FK also is commensurable in
length to the same, where^ore the line BC is a fourth binomiall line, and the
line FE is a fourth residuall line. And if BD be commensurable in length to the
rational line, the line EK is likewise commensurable in length to the same,
and then the line BC is a fifth binomiall line and the line OF a fifth
residuall line. And if neither of the lines CD nor DB be commensurable in
length to the rational line, neither also of the lines FK nor EK is
commensurable in length to the same, and then the line BC is a sixth binomiall
line, and the line FE a sixth residuall FE is a residuall line, whose names,
namely, FK and EK are comme^surable to the names of the binomiall line, namely,
to the names CD and DB, and are in the self same proportion, and the residuall
line OF is in the self same order of residuall lines, that the binomiall line
BC is of binomiall lines. Wherefore the square of a rational line applied unto
a binomiall line makes the breadth (or other side) a residuall line, whose
names are commensurable to the names of the binomiall line, and in the self
same proportion, and moreover that residuall line is in the self same order of
residuall lines, that the binomiall line is of binomiall lines: which was
required to be demonstrated.

Here is the Assumpt (of the foregoing Proposition) confirmed.
Now let us declare how as the line HF is to the line FE, so to make the line
FK to the line EK. The line CD is greater then the line BD by supposition.
Wherefore also the line HF is greater then the line FE (by alternate
proportion, and the 14. of the fifth). Construction.
From the line HF take away the line FL equal to the line FE. Wherefore the
line remaining, namely, HL, is less then the line HF, for the line HF is
equal to the lines HL and LF. As HL is to HF, so (by the 12. of the sixth) let
FE be to FK. Demonstration.
Wherefore by contrary proportion (by the Corollary of the 4. of the fifth) as
HF is to HL, so is FK to FE. Wherefore by conversion of proportion (by the
Corollary of the 19. of the fifth) as HF is to LF, that is, to the line equal
unto it, namely, to FE, so is the line FK to the line EK.

M. Dee, of this Assumpt, makes ((...), that is, Acquisiuely,) a Problem
universal, thus:
Two unequal right lines being propounded, to adioyne unto the less, a right
line, which taken with

The construction and demonstration hereof, is word for word to be taken, as
it stands here before: after these words: The line HF is greater then the
line FE.

A Corollary also noted by I. Dee.
It is therefore evident, that thus are three right lines (in our handling) in
continual proportion:

This is proved in the beginning of the demonstration, after the Assumpt used.

An other demonstration after Flussas.
Take a rational line A, and let GB be a binomiall line, whose greater line
let be GD: Construction.
and upon the line GB apply (by the 45. of the first) the parallelogra^me BZ
equal to the square of the line A, and making in breadth the line GZ. Likewise
upon the line DB (by the same) apply the parallelogramme BY equal also to the
square of the line A, and making in breadth the line DI: and put the line GZT
equal to the line DI. Then I say, that GZ is such a residuall line as is
required in the Proposition. Forasmuch as the parallelogrammes BZ and BY are
equal, therefore (by the 14. of the sixth) reciprocally as the line GB is to
the line BD, so is the line DI or the line GT, (which is equal unto it) unto
the line GZ. Wherefore by division, as the line GD is to the line DB, so is the
line TZ to the line ZG (by the 17. of the fifth). Wherefore the line TZ is
greater then the line ZG. (For the line GD is the greater name of the binomiall
line GB). Unto the line ZG put the line ZC equal. And as the line TC is to the
line TZ, so (by the 11. of the sixth) let the line ZG be to line ZK. Wherefore
contrary wise (by the Corollary of the 4. of the fifth) the line TZ is to the
line TC, Demons^ration.
as the line ZK is to the line ZG. Wherefore by conversion of proportion (by
the 19. of the fifth) as the line TZ is to the line ZC (that is, to ZG, which
is equal unto it) so is the line ZK to the line KG. But the line TZ is to the
line ZG, as the line GD is to the line DB. Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth)
the line ZK is to the line KG, as the line GD is to the line DB. But the lines
GD and DB are commensurable in power only. Wherefore also the lines ZK and KG
are commensurable in power only, by the 10. of this book. Farther, forasmuch
as the line TZ is to the line ZG, as the line ZK is to the line KG, therefore
by the 12. of the fifth, all the antecedentes, namely, the whole line TK are to
all the consequentes, namely, to the line KZ, as one of the antecedentes,
namely, the line ZK is to one of the consequentes, namely, to the line KG.
Wherefore the line ZK is the mean proportional between the lines TK and KG.
And therefore (by the Corollary of the 20. of the sixth) as the first, namely,
the line TK, is to the third, namely, to the line KG: so is the square of the
line TK to the square of the second, namely, of the line KZ. And forasmuch as
the parallelogra^me BY (which is equal to the square of the rational line A)
is applied upon the rational line DB, it makes the breadth DI rational and
commensurable in length unto the line DB, by the 20. of the tenth. And therefore
the line GT (which is equal unto the line DI) is commensurable in length to
the same line DB. And for that as the line GD is to the line DB, so is the line
KZ to the line KG, but as the line KZ is to the line KG, so is the line TK to
the line KZ, therefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as the line GD is to the line
DB, so is the line T K to the line KZ. Wherefore (by the 22. of the sixth) as
the square of the line GD is to the square of the line DB, so is the square of
the line T K to the square of the line KZ. But the square of the line GD is
commensurable to the square of the line DB (for the names GD and DB of the
binomiall line GB are commensurable in power). Wherefore the square of the line
T K shall be commensurable to the square of the line KZ, by the 10. of this
book. But as the square of the line T K is to the square of the line KZ, so is
it proved, that the right line T K is to the right line KG. Wherefore the right
line T K is commensurable in length to the right line KG. Wherefore it is also
commensurable in length to the line TG (by the 15. of the tenth). Which line TG
is (as it has been proved a ^ationall line, and equal to the line DI.
Wherefore the lines T K and KG are rational commensurable in length. And
forasmuch as it has been proved, that the line Z K is commensurable in power
KG, therefore the lines Z K and KG are rational commensurable in power only.
Here are the ^ower parts of the propositi^ more orderly h^dled the^ in the
former demostration.
Wherefore the line GZ is a residuall line. And forasmuch as the rational line
TG is commensurable in length to either of these lines DB and KG. Wherefore the
lines DB and KG shall be commensurable in length, by the 12. of the tenth. But
the line Z K is to the line KG, as the line GD is to the line DB. Wherefore
alternately, by the 16. of the fifth, the line KZ is to the line GD, as the
line KG is to the line DB. Wherefore the line Z K is commensurable in length
unto the line GD. K and KG (the names of the residuall line GZ) are
commensurable in length to the lines GD and DB, which are the names of the
binomiall line GB: and the line Z K is to the line KG in the same proportion,
that the line GD is to the line DB. K be in power more then the line
conveniently joined KG, by the square of a line commensurable in length to the
line Z K, then the greater name G D shall be in power more then the less name
DB, by the square of a line commensurable in length to the line GD, by the 14.
of the tenth. And if the line Z K be in power more then the line KG, by the
square of a line incommensurable in length to the line Z K, the line also GD
shall be in power more then the line DB, by the square of a line
incommensurable in length unto the line GD (by the same Proposition). And if
the greater or less name of the one be commensurable in length to the
rational line put, the greater of l^sse name also of the other shall be
commensurable in length to the same rational line, (by the 12. of this book).
But if neither name of the one be commensurable in length to the rational line
put, neither name of the other also shall be commensurable in length to the
same rational line GZ shall be in the self same order of residuall lines,
that the binomiall line GB is of binomiall lines (by the definitions of
residuall and binomiall lines. The square therefore of a rational line applied
to a binomiall line^ and^: which was required (...) be proved.

The 89. Theoreme. The 113. Proposition. The square of a rational line applied
unto a residuall, makes the breadth or other side a binomial line, whose names
are commensurable to the names of the residuall line, and in the self same
proportion: and moreover that binomiall line is in the self same order of
binomiall lines, that the residual line is of residuall lines.
SVppose that A be a rational line, and BD a residuall line. And unto the
square of the line A let that which is contained under the lines BD and KH be
equal. Wherefore the square of the rational line A applied unto the residuall
line BD makes the breadth or other side KH. Then I say that the line KH is a
binomiall line, whose names are commensurable to the names of the residuall
line BD, and in the self same proportion, and that the line KH is in the self
same order of binomiall lines, that the line BD is of residuall lines. Unto the
line BD let the line conveniently joined be DC. Construction.
Wherefore the lines BC and DC are rational commensurable in power only. And
unto the square of the line A let the parallelogramme contained under the lines
BC and G be equal. But the square of the line A is rational. Demons^ration.
Wherefore the parallelogramme contained under the lines BC and G is also
rational. Wherefore also the line G is rational and commensurable in length to
the line BC (by the 20. of the tenth). Now forasmuch as the parallelogramme
contained under the lines BC and G is equal to that which is contained under
the lines BD and KH, therefore (by the 16. of the sixth) as the line BC is to the
line BD, so i^ the line KH to the line G. But the line BC is greater then the
line BD. Wherefore also the line KH is greater then the line G. Unto the line G
let the line KE be equal. Wherefore the line KE is rational and co^mensurable
in length to the line BC, as also the line G was (by the 12. of the tenth) And
for that as BC is to BD, so is KH to KE. Wherefore by ^duersion of proportion
(by the corollary of ye 19. of the fifth) as BC is to DC, so is KH, to EH, An
Assumpt.
^KH into EH so let the line FH be to the line OF (how this is to be done, we
will decare at the end of this demonstration). Wherefore the residue KF is to
the residue FH, as the whole KH is to the whole HE (by the 19. of the fifth)
that is, as the line BC is to the line CD. But the lines BC and CD are
commensurable in power only. Wherefore also the lines KF and FH are
commensurable in power only. And for that as KH is to HE, so is KF to FH, but
as KH is to HE, so is also HF to FE, therefore as KF is to FH, so is FH to FE.
Wherefore (by the corollary of the 19. of the sixth) as the first is to the
third, so is the square of the first, to the square of the second. Wherefore as
KF is to FE, so is the square of the line KF to the square of the line FH, but
these squares are commensurable, for the lines KF and FH are commensurable in
power. Wherefore the lines KF and FE are commensurable in length. Wherefore (by
the second part of the 15. of the tenth) the lines KE and OF are commensurable
in length. Wherefore (by the same) the lines KF and FE are commensurable in
length. But the line KE is rational and commensurable in length to the line
BC: wherefore the line KF is also rational and commensurable in length to the
line BC. And for that as the line BC is to the line CD, so it KF to EH,
therefore alternately. (by the 16. of the fifth) as BC is to KF, so is CD to FH.
But the line BC is commensurable in length to the line KF. Wherefore the line CD
is commensurable in length to the line FH. But the line CD is rational.
Wherefore also the line FH is rational. And the lines BC and CD are rational
commensurable in power only. Wherefore the lines KF and FH are rational
commensurable line KF (by the 14. of the tenth). And if the line BC be
commensurable in length to the rational line put, the line KF is also (by the
12. of the tenth) commensurable in length to the rational line, and so the

The Assumpt confirmed.
Now let us declare how, as the line KH is to the line EH, so to make the line
HF to the line FE. Add unto the line KH directly a line equal to HE, and let
the whole line be KL, and (by the tenth of the sixth) let the line HE be divided
as the whole line KL is divided in the point H: let the line HE be so divided
in the point F. Wherefore as the line KH is to the line HL, that is, to the line
HE, so is the line HF to the line FE.

An other demonstration after Flussas.
Suppose that A be a rational line, and let BD be a residuall line. And upon
the line BD apply the parallelogramme DT equal to the square of the line A (by
the 45. of the first) making in breadth the line BT. An other demonstration
after Flussas.
Then I say that BT is a binominall line such a one as is required in the
proposition. Forasmuch as BD is a residuall line, let the line conveniently
joined unto it be GD. Wherefore the lines BG and GD are rational commensurable
in power only. Construction.
Upon the rational line BG apply the parallelogramme BY equal to the square
of the line A and making in breadth the line BE. Wherefore the line BE is
rational and commensurable in length to the line BG (by the 20. of the tenth).
Now forasmuch as the parallelogrammes BY and TD are equal (for that they are
each equal to the square of the line A): Demons^ration.
therefore reciprokally (by the 14. of the sixth) as the line BT is to the line
BE, so is the line BG to the line BD. Wherefore by conversion of proportion (by
the corrollary of the 19. of the fifth) as the line BT is to the line TE, so is
the line BG to the line GD. As the line BG is to the line GD, so let the line
TZ be to the line ZE by the corrollary of the 10. of the sixth. Wherefore by
the 11. of the fifth the line BT is to the line TE, as the line TZ is to the
line ZE. For either of them are as the line BG is to the line GD. Wherefore the
residue BZ is to the residue ZT, as the whole BT is to the whole TE by the 19.
of the fifth. Wherefore by the 11. of the fifth the line BZ is to the line ZT
as the line ZT is to the line ZE. Wherefore the line TZ is the mean
proportional between the lines BZ and ZE. Wherefore the square of the first,
namely, of the line BZ, is to the square of the second, namely, of the line ZT,
as the first, namely, the line BZ, is to the third, namely, to the line ZE (by
the corollary of the 20. of the sixth). And for that as the line BG is to the
line GD, so is the line TZ to the line ZE: but as the line TZ is to the line
ZE, so is the line BZ to the line ZT. Wherefore as the line BG is to the line
GD, so is the line BZ to the line ZT (by the 11. of the fifth). Wherefore the
lines BZ and ZT are commensurable in power only, as also are the lines BG and
GD (which are the names of the residuall line BD) by the 10. of this book.
Wherefore the right lines BZ and ZE are co^mensurable in length, for we have
proved that they are in the same proportion that the squares of the lines BZ
and ZT are. And therefore (by the corollary of the 15. of this book) the
residue BE (which is a rational line) is commensurable in length unto the same
line BZ. Wherefore also the line BG (which is commensurable in length unto the
line BE) shall also be commensurable in length unto the same line EZ (by the
12. of the tenth). And it is proved that the line RZ is to the line ZT
commensurable in power only. Wherefore the right lines BZ and ZT are rational
commensurable in power only. Wherefore the whole line BT is a binomiall BG is
to the line GD, so is the line BZ to the line ZT: therefore alternately (by the
16. of the fifth) the line BG is to the line BZ, as the line GD is to the line
ZT. But the line BG is commensurable in length unto the line BZ. Wherefore (by
the 10. of this book) the line GD is commensurable in length unto the line ZT.
Wherefore the names BG and GD of the residuall line BD are commensurable in
length unto the names BZ and ZT of the binomial line BT: and the line BZ is to
the line ZT in the same proportion that the line BG is to the line GD BG or GD
be co^mensurable in length to any rational line put: the greater name also or
less, namely, BZ or ZT shall be commensurable in length to the same rational
line put by the 12. of this book. And if neither of the names of the residuall
line be commensurable in length unto the rational line put, neither of the
names of the binomiall line shall be commensurable in length unto the same
rational line put (by the 13. of the tenth). And if the greater name BG be in
power more then the less name by the square of a line commensurable in length
unto the line BG, the greater name also BZ shall be in power more then the less
by the square of a line commensurable in length unto the line BZ. And if the
one be in power more by the square of a line incommensurable in length, the
other also shall be in power more by the square of a line incommensurable in
length by the 14. of this book. The square therefore of a rational line. etc.
which was required to be proved.

The 90. Theoreme. The 114. Proposition. This is in a manner the converse of
both the former propositions, jointly.
If a parallelogra^me be contained under a residuall line and a binomiall line,
whose names are commensurable to the names of the residuall line, and in the
self same proportion: the line which contains in power that superficies is
rational.
SVppose that a parallelogramme be contained under a residuall line AB and a
binomiall line CD, and let the greater name of the binomiall line be CE, and
the less name be ED, and let the names of the binomiall line, namely, CE and
ED be commensurable to the names of the residuall line, namely, to AF and F^,
and in the self same proportion. And let the line which contains in power
that parallelogra^me be G. The^ I say that the line G is rational. Take a
rational line, namely, H. And unto the line CD apply a parallelogra^me equal to
ye square of the line H, Construction.
and making in breadth the line KL. Wherefore (by the 112. of the tenth) KL is
a residuall line, Demonstration.
whose names let be KM and ML, which are (by the same) co^mensurable to the
names of the binomiall line, that is to CE and ED, and are in the self same
proportion. But by position the lines CE and ED are co^mensurable to the lines
AF and FB, and are in the self same proportion. Wherefore (by the 12. of the
tenth) as the line AF is to the line FB^ so is the line KM to the line ML.
Wherefore alternately (by the 16. of the fifth) as the line AF is to the line KM,
so is the line BF to the line LM. Wherefore the residue AB is to the residue KL,
as the whole AF is to the whole KM. But the line AF is commensurable to the
line KM, for either of the lines AF and KM is commensurable to the line CE.
Wherefore also the line AB is commensurable to the line KL. And as the line AB
is to the line KL, so (by the first of the sixth) is the parallelogramme
contained under the lines CD and AB to the parallelogramme contained under the
lines CD and KL. Wherefore the parallelogramme contained under the lines CD and
AB is commensurable to the parallelogramme contained under the lines CD and KL.
But the parallelogramme contained under the lines CD and KL is equal to the
square of the line H. Wherefore the parallelogra^me contained under the lines CD
and AB is co^mensurable to the square of the line H. But the parallelogra^me
contained under the lines CD and AB is equal to the square of the line G.
Wherefore the square of the line H is commensurable to the square of the line G.
But the square of the line H is rational. Wherefore the square of the line G is
also rational. Wherefore also the line G is rational, and it contains in
power the parallelogramme contained under the lines AB and CD. If therefore a
parallelogramme be contained under a residuall line and a binomiall line, whose
names are commensurable to the names of the residuall line, and in the self
same proportion, the line which contains in power that superficies, is
rational: which was required to be proved.

Corollary.
Hereby it is manifest, that a rational parallelogramme may be contained under
irrational lines.

An ot^^r (...) Flussas.
(...) line ^D: whos^ names A^ and ^D let be commensurable in length unto the
names of the residuall line A^, which let be AF and FB. And let the li^e AE^ be
to the line ED^ in the same proportion that the line AF is to the line F^. And
let the right line ^ contain in power the superficies D^. Then I say, tha^ the
li^e ^ is a rational lin^ (...) l^ne, Construction.
which l^^ b^ ^: And upon the line ^^ describe (by the 4^. of the first) a
parallelogramme eq^all to the squar^ of the line ^^ and making in breadth the
line DC. Wherefore (by the ^12. of this book) CD is a residu^ll line^ whose
names (Which let be ^^ and OD) shall be co^mensurabl^ in length unto the names
A^ and ^D, and the line C o shall be unto the line OD, Demonstration.
in the same propor^ion that the line AE is to the line ED^ But as the line A^
is to the line ^D, so by supposition, is the line AF to the line FE. Wherefore
as the line CO is to the line OD, so is the line AF to the line F^^ Wherefore
the lines CO and OD are commensurable with the lines A^ and ^^ (by the ^^. of
this book). Wherefore the residue, namely, the line CD is to the residue,
namely, to the line A^, as the line CO is to the line AF (by the 19. of the
fifth). But it is proved, that the line CO is co^mensurable unto the line AF.
Wherefore the line CD is commensurable unto the line AB. Wherefore (by the
first of the sixth) the parallelogramme CA is commensurable to the
parallelogramme D^. But the parallelogramme ^^ i^ (by construction) rational
(for it is equal to the square of the rational line ^). Wh^refore the
parallelogramme ^D ^s also rat^^n^ll^ Wher^fore the line ^ which by supposition
co^tayneth in power the superficies ^D^ is also rational. If therefore a
parallelogra^me be contained etc: which was required to be proved.

The 91. Theoreme. The 115. Proposition. Of a mediall line are produced
infinite irrational lines, of which none is of the self same kind with any
of those that were before.
SVppose that A be a mediall line. Then I say, that of the line A may be
produced infinite irrational lines, of which none shall be of the self same
kind with any of those that were before. Take a rational line B. And unto
that which is contained under the lines A and B let the square of the line C be
equal (by the 14. of the second)^ Demonstration.
Wherefore the line C is irrational. For a superficies contained under a
rational line and an irrational line, is (by the Assumpt following the 38. of
the tenth) irrational: and the line which contains in power an irrational
superficies, is (by the Assumpt going before the 21. of the tenth) irrational.
And it is not one and the self same with any of those thirtene that were
before. For none of the lines that were before applied to a rational line
makes the breadth mediall. Again unto that which is contained under the lines
B and C, let the square of D be equal. Wherefore the square of D is
irrational. Wherefore also the line D is irrational and not of the self same
kind with any of those that were before. For the square of none of the lines
which were before, applied to a rational line, makes the breadth the line C.
In like sort also shall it so follow, if a man proceed infinitely. Wherefore
it is manifest, that of a mediall line are produced infinite irrational lines,
of which none is of the self same kind with any of those that were before:
which was required to be proved.

An other demonstration
An other demonstration.
Suppose that AC be a mediall line. Then I say, that of the line AC may be
produced infinite irrational lines, of which none shall be of the self same
kind with any of those irrational lines before named. Unto the line AC and
from the point A, draw (by the 11. of the first) a perpe^dicular line AB, and
let AB be a rational line, and make perfect^ the parallelogramme BC. Wherefore
BG is irrational, by that which was declared and proved (in manner of an
Assumpt) in the end of the demonstration of the 38: and the line that
contains it i^ power is also irrational. Let the line CD contain in power
the super^icies BC. Wherefore CD is irrational and not of the self same kind
with any of those that were before: for the square of the line CD applied to a
rational line, namely, AB, makes the breadth a mediall line, namely, AC. But
the square of none of the foresaid lines applied to a rational line makes the
breadth a mediall line. Again, make perfect the parallelogramme ED. Wherefore
the parallelogramme ED is also irrational (by the said Assumpt in the end of
the 98. his demonstration brie^ly proved) and the line which contains it in
power is irrationall^ let the line which contains it in power be DF.
Wherefore DF is irrational and not of the self same kind with any of the
foresaid irrational lines. For the square of none of the foresaid irrational
lines applied unto a rational line, makes the breadth the line CD. Wherefore
of a mediall line are produced infinite irrational lines, of which none is of
the self same kind with any of those that were before: which was required to
be demonstrated.

The 92. Theoreme. The 116. Proposition. Now let us prove that in square
figures, the diameter is incommensurable in length to the side.
SVppose that ABCD be a square, and let the diameter thereof be AC. Then I say
that the diameter AC is incommensurable in length to the side AB. For if it be
possible, Demonstration leading to an impossibili^ie.
let it be co^mensurable in length. I say that the^ this will follow, that one
and the self same number shall be both an even number and an odd number. It
is manifest (by the 47. of the first) that the square of the line AC is double
to the square of the line AB. And for that the line AC is commensurable in
length to the line AB (by supposition), therefore the line AC has unto the line
AB that proportion that a number has to a number (by the 5. of the tenth). Let
the line AC have unto the line AB that proportion that the number OF has to
the number G. And let OF and G be the least numbers that have one and the same
proportion with them. Wherefore OF is not unity. For if OF be unity, and it
has to the number G that proportion that the line AC has to the line AB, and
the line AC is greater then the line AB. Wherefore unity OF is greater then the
number G, which is impossible. Wherefore FE is not unity, wherefore it is a
number. And for that as the square of the line AC is to the square of the line
AB, so is the square number of the number OF, to the square number of the
number G, for in each is the proportion of their sides doubled (by the
corollary of the 20 of the sixth and 11. of the eight): and the proportion of
the line AC to the line AB doubled, is equal to the proportion of the number OF
to the number G, doubled, for as the line AC is to the line AB, so is the
number OF to the number G. But the square of the line AC is double to the
square of the line AB. Wherefore the square number produced of the number OF is
double to the square number produced of the number G. Wherefore the square
number produced of OF is an even number. Wherefore OF is also an even number.
For if OF were an odd number, the square number also produced of it, should
(by the 23. and 29. of the ninth) be an odd number. For if odd numbers how
many soever be added together, and if the multitude of the^ be odd, the whole
also shall be odd. Wherefore OF is an even number. Divide the number OF into two
equal parts in H. And forasmuch as the numbers OF and G are the lest numbers
in that proportion, therefore (by the 24. of the seventh) they are prime numbers
the one to the other. And OF is an even number. Wherefore G is an odd number.
For if G were an even number, the number two should measure both the number OF
and the number G (for every even number has an half part by the definition)
but these numbers OF and G are prime the one to the other. Wherefore it is
impossible that they should be measured by two or by any other number besides
unity. Wherefore G is an odd number. And forasmuch as the number OF is double
to the number EH, therefore the square number produced of OF is quadruple to the
square number produced of EH. And the square number produced of OF is double to
the square number produced of G. Wherefore the square number produced of G is
double to the square number produced of EH. Wherefore the square number produced
of G is an even number. Wherefore also by those things which have been before
spoken, the number G is an even number, but it is proved that it is an odd
number, which is impossible. Wherefore the line AC is not commensurable in
length to the line AB, wherefore it is incommensurable.

An other demonstration.
We may by an other demonstration prove, that the diameter of a square is
incommensurable to the side thereof. An other demonstration leading to an
impossibili^ie.
Suppose that there be a square, whose diameter let be A and let the side
thereof be B. Then I say that the line A is incommensurable in length to the
line B. For if it be possible let it be commensurable in length. And again as
the line A is to the line B so let the number OF be to the number G: and let
them be the least that have one and the same proportion with them: wherefore
the numbers OF and G, are prime the one to the other. First I say that G is not
unity. For if it be possible let it be unity. And for that the square of the
line A is to the square of the line B as the square number produced of OF is to
the square number produced of G (as it was proved in the ^ormer demonstration)
but the square of the line A is double to the square of the line B. Wherefore
the square number produced of OF is double to the square number produced of G.
And by your supposition G is unity. Wherefore the square number produced of OF
is the number two which is impossible. Wherefore G is not unity. Wherefore it
is a number. And for that as the square of the line A is to the square of the
line B, so is the square number produced of OF to the square number produced of
G. Wherefore the square number produced of OF is double to the square number
produced of G. Wherefore the square number produced of G. measures the square
number produced of OF. Wherefore also (by the 14. of the eight) the number G
measures the number OF: and the number G also measures it self. Wherefore
the number G measures these numbers OF and G, when yet they are prime the one
to the other: which is impossible. Wherefore the diameter A is not
commensurable in length to the side B. Wherefore it is incommensurable: which
was required to be demonstrated.

An other demonstration after Flussas.
Suppose that upon the line AB be described a square whose diameter let be the
line AC. Then I say that the side AB is incommensurable in length unto the
diameter AC. Forasmuch as the lines AB and BC are equal, therefore the square
of the line AC is double to the square of the line AB by the 47. of the first.
Take by the 2. of the eight numbers how many soever in continual proportion
from unity, and in the proportion of the squares of the lines AB and AC. Which
let be the numbers D, E, F, G. And forasmuch as the first from unity namely E
is no square number, for that it is a prime number, neither is also any other
of the said numbers a square number except the third from unity and so all the
rest leuing one between, by the 10. of the ninth. Wherefore D is to E, or E to
F, or F to G, in that proportion that a square number is to a number not
square. Wherefore by the corrollary of the 25. of the eight, they are not in
that proportion the one to the other that a square number is to a square
number. Wherefore neither also have the squares of the lines AB and AC (which
are in the same proportion) that porportion that a square number has to a
square number. Wherefore by the 9. of this book their sides, namely, the side
AB and the diameter AC are incommensurable in length the one to the other which
was required to be proved.

This demonstration I thought good to add, for that the former demonstrations
seem not so full, and they are thought of some to be none of Theons, as also
the proposition to be none of Euclides.

Here follows an instruction by some studious and skillful Grecian (perchance
Theon) which teaches us of farther use and fruit of these irrational lines.
Seeing that there are found out right lines incommensurable in length the one
to the ^ther, as the lines A and B, there may also be found out many other
magnitudes having length and breadth (such as are plain superficieces) which
shall be incomme^surable the one to the other. For if (by the 13. of the sixth)
between the lines A and B there be taken the mean proportional line, namely
C, then (by the second corrollary of the 20. of the sixth) as the line A is to
the line B, so is the figure described upon the line A to the figure described
upon the line C, being both like and in like sort described, that is, whether
they be squares (which are always like the one to the other), or whether they
be any other like rectiline figures, or whether they be circles about the
diameters A and C. For circles have that proportion the one to the other, that
the squares of their diameters have (by the 2. of the twelfth). Wherefore (by
the second part of the 10. of the tenth) the ^igures described upon the lines A
and C being like and in like sort described are incommensurable the one to the
other. Wherefore by this means there are found out superficieces
incommensurable the one to the other. In like sort there may be found out
figures co^me^surable the one to the other, if ye put the lines A and B to be
co^mensurable in length the one to the other. And seeing that it is so, now let
us also prove that even in soli^es also or bodies there are some commensurable
the one to the other, and other some incommensurable the one to the other. For
if from each of the squares of the lines A and B, or from any other rectiline
figures equal to these squares be ^rected solides of equal alti^ude, whether
those solides be comp^sed of equidistant supersicieces, or whether they be
p^ramids or prismes, thos^ solides s^ er^c^ed shall be in that proportion the one
to the other that their bases are (by the 32. o^ the eleventh and 5. and 6. of
the twelfth) Howbeit there is no such proposition concerning prismes, And so if
the bases of the solides b^ commensurable the one to the other, the solides
also shall be commensurable the one to the other, and if the bases be
incommensurable the one to the other, the solides also shall be incommensurable
the one to the other (by the 10. of the tenth). And if there be two circles A
and B: and upon each of the circles be erected Cones or Cilinders of equal
altitude, those Cones and Cilinders s^all be in that proportion the one to the
other that the circles are, which are their bases (by the 11. of the twelfth):
and so if the circles be commensurable the one to the other, the Cones and
Cilinders also shall be commensurable the one to the other. But if the circles
be inco^mensurable the one to the other, the Cones also and Cilinders shall be
inco^mensurable the one to the other, (by the 10. of the tenth). Wherefore it
is manifest that not only in lines and super^icieces, but also in solides or
bodies is found commensurabilitie or incommensurability.

An advertisement by John Dee.
Although this proposition were by Euclide to this book allotted, (as by the
ancient grecian published under the name of Aristoteles (...), it would seem
to be, and also the property of the same, agreeable to the matter of this book,
and the proposition it self, so famous in Philosophy and Logic, as it was,
would in manner crave his eleme^tal place, in this tenth book) yet the dignity
and perfection^ of Mathematical Method can not allow it here: as in due order
following: But most aptly after the 9. proposition of this book, as a
Corrollary of the last part thereof. And undoubtedly the propo^itio^ has for
this 2000. years been notably regarded among the greek Philosophers: and
before Aristotle's time was concluded with the very same inconvenience to the
gaynesayer, that the first demonstration here induces, namely, Odd number to
be equal to even: as may appear^ in Aristotle's work, named Analitica prima,
the first book and 40. chapter. But else in very many places of his works he
makes mention of the proposition. Evident also it is that Euclide was about
Aristotle's time, and in that age the most excellent Geometrician among the
Greeks. Wherefore, seeing it was so public in his time, so famous, and so
appertayning to the property of this book: it is most likely, both to be
known to Euclide, and also to have been by him in apt order placed. But of the
disordring of it, can remain no doubt, if ye consider in Zamberts translation,
two other propositions going next before it, so far misplaced, that where
they are, word for word, before du^ly placed, being the 105. and 106. yet here
(after the book ended), they are repeated with the numbers of 116. and 117.
proposition. Zambert therein was more faithful to follow as he found in his
greek example, than he was skillful or careful to do what was necessary. Yea
and some greek written ancient copyes have them not so: Though in deed they
be well demonstrated, yet truth disorded, is half disgraced^ especially where
the pattern of good order, by profession is avouched to be. But through
ignorance, arrogance and ^emerltie of unskillful Method Masters, many things
remain yet, in these Geometrical Elements, unduly tumbled in: though true,
yet with disgrace: which by help of so many wits and ability of such, as
now may have good cause to be skillful herein, will (I hope) ere long be taken
away: and things of importance (wanting) supplied.

The end of the tenth book of Euclides Elements
The eleventh book of Euclides Elements.
The argument of the eleventh book.
HITHERTO HAS ^VCLID^ IN TH^S^ former books with a wonderful Method and
order entreated of such kinds of figures superficial, which are or may be
described in a superficies or plain. And has taught and set forth their
properties, natures, generations, and productions even from the first root,
ground, and beginning of them: namely, from a point, which although it be
indivisible, yet is it the beginning of all quantity, A point the beginning of
all quantity continual.
and of it and of the motion and slowing thereof is produced a line, and
consequently all quantity continual, as all figures plain and solid what so
ever. Euclide therefore in his first book began with it, The method used by
Euclide in the ten ^^^mer boo^es.
and from thence went he to a line, as to a thing most simple next unto a
point, then to a superficies, and to angles, and so through the whole first
book, first bo^^e.
he entreated of these most simple and plain grounds. In the second book he
entreated further, Second ^^o^e.
and went unto more harder matter, and taught of divisions of lines, and of the
multiplication of lines, and of their parts, and of their passions and
properties. And for that rightlined ^igures are far distant in nature and
property from round and circular figures, in the third book he instructs
the reader of the nature and condition of circles. Third boo^e.
In the fourth book he compares figures of right lines and circles together,
^ourth b^o^e.
and teaches how to describe a figure of right lines with in or about a
circle: and contra^iwi^e a circle with in or about a rectiline figure. In the
fifth book he searches out the nature of proportion (a matter of wonderful
use and deep consideration), ^iueth bo^^e.
for that otherwise he could not compare ^igure with figure, or the sides of
figures together. For whatsoever is compared to any other thing, is compared
unto it undoubtedly under some kind of proportion. Wherefore in the sixth
book he compares figures together, Sixth boo^e.
one to an other, likewise their sides. And for that the nature of proportion,
can not be fully and clearly seen without the knowledge of number, wherein it
is first and chiefly found: in the seventh, Seventh book^
eight, ^ight boo^^.
and ninth books, Ninth book.
he entreat^th of number, and of the kinds and properties thereof. And because
that the sides of solid bodies, for the most part are of such sort, that
compared together, they have such proportion the one to the other, Tenth boo^e.
which can not be expres^ed by any number certain, and therefore are called
irrational lines, he in the tenth book has written and taught which line^ are
co^me^surable or inco^me^surable the one to the other, and of the diversity of
kinds of irrational lines, with all the conditions and proprieties of them.
And thus has Euclide in these ten foresaid books, fully and most ple^teously
in a marvelous order taught, whatsoever seemed necessary, and requisite to the
knowledge of all superficial figures, of what sort and form so ever they be.
Now in these books following he entreats of figures of an other kind,
namely, of bodily figures: What is entrea^ea of in the fi^e boo^es foll^wi^^.
as of Cubes, Piramids, Cones, Columns, Cilinders, Parallelipipedons. Spheres
and such others^ and shows the diversity of the^, the generation, and
production of them, and demonstrateth with great and wonderful art, their
proprieties and passions, with all their natures and conditions. He also
compares one o^ them to an other, whereby to know the reason and proportion of
the one to the other, chiefly of the five bodies which are called regular
bodies. (...) ^^^ular bodies^ the ^^all end (...) o^ I u^^^^es ^eome^^^all
^^ementes.
And these are the things of all other entreated of in Geometry, most worthy
and of greatest dignity, and as it were the end and final intent of the whole
are of Geometry, and for whose cause has been written, and spoken whatsoever
has hitherto in the former books been said or written. As the first book was
a ground, and a necessary entrye to all the r^st ^ollowing, so is this eleventh
book a necessary entry and ground to the rest which follow. Co^^a^is^n ^^ the
(...) ^^o^e and (...) book (...).
And as that contained the declaration of words, and definitions of thinge^
requisite to the knowledge of superficial figures, and entreated of lines (and
of their divisions and sections) which are the terms and limits of
superficial figures: so in this book is set forth the declaration of words
and definitions of things pertaining to solid and corporal figures: and also
of superficieces which are the terms and limits of solides: moreover of the
division and intersection of them, and diverse other things, without which the
knowledge of bodily and solid forms can not be attained unto. And first is
set the definitions as follow^th.

Definitions. A solid or body is that which has length, breadth, and
thicknes, First dif^inition
and the term or limite of a solid is a superficies.
There are three kinds of continual quantity, a line, a superficies, and a
solid or body: the beginning of all which (as before has been said) is a
point, which is indivisible. Two of these quantities, namely, a line and a
superficies, were defined of Euclide before in his first book. But the third
kind, namely, a solid or body he there defined not, as a thing which
pertayned not then to his purpose: but here in this place he sets the
definition thereof, as that which chiefly now pertayneth to his purpose, and
without which nothing in these things can profitably be taught. A solid
(says he) is that which has length, breadth, and thicknes, or depth. There
are (as before has been taught) three reasons or means of measuring, which
are called commonly dimensions, namely, l^ngth, breadth, and thicknes. These
dimensions are ascribed unto quantities only. By these are all kinds of
quantity de^ined, ^^ are counted perfect or imperfect, according as they are
pertaker of fewer or more of them. As Euclide defined a line, ascribing unto it
only one of these dimensions, namely, length: Wherefore a line is the
imperfectest kind of quantity. In defining of a superficies, he ascribed unto
it two dimensions, namely, length, and breadth: whereby a superficies is a
quantity of greater perfection then is a line, but here in the definition of a
solid or body. Euclide attributes unto it all the three dimensio^s, length,
breadth, and thicknes. Wherefore a solid is the most perfectest quantity, A
solid the most perfectest quantity.
which wants no dimension at all, passing a line by two dimensions, and
passing a super^icies by one. This definition of a solid is without any
designation of ^orme or figure easily understood, only conceiving in mind,
or beholding with the eye a piece of timber or stone, or what matter so ever
else, whose dimension^ let be equal or unequal. For example let the length
thereof be 5. inches, the breadth 4. and the thicknes 2. if the dimensions were
equal, the reason is like, and all one, as it is in a Sphere and in ^ cube.
For in that respect and consideration only, that it is long, broad, and
thick, it bears the name of a solid or body, and has the nature and
properties thereof. There is added to the end^ of the definition of a solid,
that the term and limite of a solid ^s a superficies. Of things infinity
there i^ no Art or Scien^e. All quantities therefore in this Art entreated of,
are imagined to be finite, No science of things infinite.
and to have their ends and borders as has been showed in the first book,
that the limits and ends of a line are points, and the limits or borders of
a superficies are lines, so now he says tha^ the ends, limits, or borders of
a solide^ are superficieces. As the side of any ^quare piece of timber, or of a
table, or die, or any other lik^, are the terms and limits of them.

2 A right line is then erected perpendicularly to a pl(...)erficies, when the
right line makes right angles with all the lines (...) it, Second diffinition.
and are drawn upon the ground plain superficies.
Suppose that upon the ground plain superficies, CDEF from the point B be
erected a right line, namely, ^A, so that let the point A be a love in the
air. Draw also from the point ^ in the plain superficies CDBF, as many
right lines as ye list, as the lines BC, BD, ^^, BF, BG, HK, BH, and BL. If the
erected line BA with all these lines drawn in the superficies CDEF make a
right angle, so that all those ^ngles A^^, AND, A^E, ABF^ A^G, A^K, ABH, ABL,
and so of others, be right angles, then by this definition, the line AB, i^ a
line ^^^cted upon the superficies CDEF: it is also called commonly a
perpendicular line or a plumb line, unto or upon a superficies.

Third diffinition.
3 A plain superficies is then upright or erected perpendicularly to a plain
superficies, when all the right lines drawn in one of the plain superficieces
unto the common section of those two plain superficieces, making therewith
right angles, do also make right angles to the other plain superficies.
Inclination or leaning of a right line, to a plain superficies, is an acute
angle, contained under a right line falling from a point above to the plain
superficies, and under an other right line, from the lower end of the said line
(let down) drawn in the same plain superficies, by a certain point
assigned, where a right line from the first point above, to the same plain
superficies falling perpendicularly, touches.
In this third definition are included two definitions: the first is of a
plain superficies erected perpendicularly upon a plain superficies. Two
dif^initions included in this di^^inition.
The second is of the inclination or leaning of a right line unto a
superficies: of the first take this example. Suppose ye have two super^icieces
ABCD and CDEF. Of which let the superficies CDEF be a ground plain
superficies, and let the superficies ABCD be erected unto it, and let the line
CD be a common term or intersection to them both, that is, let it be the end
or bound of either of them, Declaration of the first part.
and be drawn in either of them: in which line note at pleasure certain
points, as the point G, H. From which points unto the line CD, draw
perpendicular lines in the super^icies ABCD, which let be GL and HK, which
falling upon the superficies CDEF, if they cause right angles with it, that is,
with lines drawn in it from the same points G and H, as if the angle LGM or
the angle LGN contained under the line ^G drawn in the superficies erected,
and under the GM or GN drawn in the ground superficies CDEF lying flat, be a
right angle, then by this definition, the superficies ABCD is upright or
erected upon the superficies CDEF. It is also commonly called a superficies
perpendicular upon or unto a superficies.

Declaration of the second part.
For the second part of this definition, which is of the inclination of a right
line unto a plain superficies, take this example. Let ABCD be a ground plain
superficies, upon which from a point being a loft, namely, the point E, suppose
a right line to fall, which let be the line EG, touching the plain superficies
ABCD at the point G. Again, from the point E, being the top or higher limite
and end of the inclining line EG, let a perpendicular line fall unto the plain
superficies ABCD, which let be the line OF, and let F be the point where OF
touches the plain superficies ABCD. Then from the point of the fall of the
line inclining upon the superficies unto the point of the falling of the
perpendicular line upon the same superficies, that is, from the point G to the
point F, draw a right line GF. Now by this definition, the acute angle EGF is
the inclination of the line EG unto the superficies ABCD. Because it is
contained of the inclining line, and of the right line drawn in the
superficies, from the point of the fall of the line inclining to the point of
the fall of the perpendicular line: which angle must of necessity be an acute
angle. For the angle EFG is by construction a right angle, and three angles in
a triangle are equ^(...) ^ight angles. Wherefore the other two angles, namely,
the angles EGF, and GEF, are equ^(...) right angle. Wherefore either of them is
less then a right angle. Wherefore the angle EGF is an (...)gle.

Fourth diffinition.
4 Inclination of a plain superficies to a plain superficies, is an acute
angle contained under the right lines, which being drawn in either of the
plain superficieces to one and the self same point of the common section, make
with the section right angles.
Suppose that there be two superficieces ABCD and EFGH, and let the superficies
ABCD be supposed to be erected not perpendicularly, but somewhat leaning and
inclining unto the plain superficies EFGH, as much or as little as ye will: the
common term or section of which two superficieces let be the line CD. From
some one point, a^ from the point M assigned in the common section of the two
superficieces, namely, in the line CD, draw a perpendicular line in either
superficies. In the ground superficies EFGH draw the line MK, and in the
superficies ABCD draw the line ML. Now if the angle LMK be an acute angle, then
is that angle the inclination of the superficies ABCD unto the superficies
EFGH, by this definition, because it is contained of perpendicular lines drawn
in either of the superficieces to one and the self same point being the common
section of them both.

5 Plain superficieces are in like sort inclined the on^ (...)her, Fifth
diffinition.
when the said angles of inclination are equal the one to the o(...)
This definition needs no declaration at all, but is most manifest by the
definition last going before. For in considering the inclinations of diverse
superficieces to others, if the acute angles contained under the perpendicular
lines drawn in them from one point assigned in each of their common sections be
equal, as if to the angle LMK in the former example be given an other angle in
the inclination of two other superficieces equal, then is the inclination of
these superficieces like, and are by this definition said in like sort to
incline the one to the other.

Theodosius gives an other definition of like inclination of plain
superficieces the one to the other, after this manner. One plain superficies is
like inclined to an other, as an other superficies is to an other, when in
either of the plain superficieces right lines being drawn, and making right
angles with their common section, contain in the same points equal angles.
This definition is in substance the same with that given of Euclide, and is an
elucidation of it. For example let ABCD be a ground plain superficies, unto
which let the superficies EFIK incline and lean. And let the common section of
these two superficieces be the line OF. Then draw in each of these
superficieces right lines to some one point of the common section OF, which let
be the point G: with which section let them make right angles. As in the
superficies ABCD draw the line ^G, which in the point G let it make with the
common sectio^ a right angle HGF or HGE. Also in the superficies EFIK draw the
line LG, which in the point G together with the common section OF let make also
a right angle LGF, or the right angle LG^.

Now also let there be an other ground plain superficies, namely, the
superficies MNOP, unto whom also let lean and incline the superficies Q^^T,
and let the common section or segment of them be the line QR. And draw in the
superficies MNOP to some one point of the common section as to the point X the
line VX, making with the common section right angles, namely, the angle VXR, or
the angle VXQ: also in the superficies STQR draw the right line YX to the same
point X in the common section, making therewith right angles, as the angle YX^,
or the angle YXQ. Now (as says the definition) if the angles contained under
the right lines drawn in these superficieces and making right angles with the
common section, be in the points, that is, in the points of their meting in
the common section, equal: then is the inclination of the superficieces
equal. As in this example, if the angle LGH contained under the line LG being
in the inclining superficies ^KEF and under the line HG being in the ground
superficies ABCD, be^ equal, to the angle YXV contained under the line VX
being in the ground superficies MNOP and under the line YX being in the
inclining superficies STQR: then is the inclination of the super^icies IKEF
unto the superficies ABCD, like unto the inclination of the superficies STQR
unto the superficies MNOP. And so by this definition these two superficieces
are said to be in like sort inclined.

Sixth diffinition.
6 Parallel plain superficieces are those, which being produced or extended
any way never touch or concur together.
Neither needs this definition any declaration, but is very easy to be
understood by the definition of parallel lines: ^or as they being drawn on
any part, never touch or come together: so parallel plain super^icieces are
such, which admit no touch, that is, being produced any way infinitely never
meet or come together.

Seventh def^inition.
7 Like solid or bodily figures are such, which are contained under like plain
superficieces, and equal in multitude.
What plain super^icieces are called like, has in the beginning of the sixth
book, been sufficiently declared. Now when solid figures or bodies be
contained under such like plain superficieces as there are defined, and equal
in number, that is, that the one solid have as many in number as the other, in
their sides and limits: they are called like solid figures, or like bodies.

Eighth di^finition.
8 Equal and like solid (or bodily) figures are those which are contained
under like superficieces, and equal both in multitude and in magnitude.
In like solid figures it is su^ficient, that the superficieces which contain
them be like and equal in number only, but in like solid figures and equal,
it is necessary that the like superficieces contaynyng them, be also equal in
magnitude. So that besides the likeness between them, they be (each being
compared to his correspondent super^icies) o^ one greatness, and that their
areas or fields be equal. When such super^icieces contain bodies or solides,
then are such bodies equal and like solides or bodies.

Ninth di^^i^ition.
9 A solid or bodily angle, is an inclination of more then two lines to all the
lines which touch themselves mutually, and are not in one and the self same
super^icies.
Or else thus: A solid or bodily angle is that which is contained under mo then
two plain angles, not being in one and the self same plain superficies, but
consisting all at one point.
Of a solid angle does Euclide here give two seue^all definitio^s. The first
is given by the concurse and touch of many lines. The second by the touch and
concurse of many superficial angles. And both these definitions tend to one,
and are not much different, for that lines are the limittes and terms of
superficieces. But the second given by super^iciall angles is the more natural
definition, because that supe^ficieces a^e the next and immediate limits of
bodies, and so are not lines. An example of a solid angle cannot well and at
^ully be given or described in a pla^^e superficies. But touching this first
definition, lay before you a cube or a die, and consider any of the corners or
angles thereof so shall ye see that at eue^y angle there concur three lines (for
two lines co^curring cannot make a solid angle) namely, the line or edge of
his breadth, of his length, and of his thicknes, which their so inclining and
co^curring touether, make a solid angle, and so of others. And now co^c^rning
the second definition, what super^icial or plain angles be has been taught
before in the first bok^, namely, that it is the touch of two right lines. And
as a super^iciall or plain angle is caused and contained of right lines, so si
a solid angle caused and contained of plain superficial angles. Two right
lines touching together, make a plain angle, but two plain angles joined
together can not make a solid angle, but according to the definition, they
must be more the^ two, as three, ^oure, ^iue, or mo^: which also must not be in
one and the self same superfici^s, but must be in diverse superficieces,
^eeting at one point. This definition is not hard, but may easily be conceived
in a cube or a die, where ye see three angles of any three superficieces or
sides of the die concur and meet together in one point, which three plain
angles so joined together, make a solid angle. Likewise in a Pyrami^ or a
spi^e of a steple or any other such thing, all the sides thereof te^ding upward
narower and narower, at length end their angles (at the heig^^ or top
thereof) in one point. So all their angles there joined together, make a solid
angle. And for the better ^ig^t thereof, I have set here a figure whereby ye
shall more easily conceive ^^ the base of the figure is a triangle, namely,
ABC, if on every side of the triangle ABC, ye raise up a triangle, as upon the
side AB, ye raise up the triangle AFB, and upon the side AC the triangle AFC,
and upon the side BC, the triangle BFC, and so bowing the triangles raised up,
that their tops, namely, the points F meet and join together in one point,
ye shall easily and plainly see how these three superficial angles AFBBFC, CFA,
join and close together, touching the one the other in the point F, and so
make a solid angle.

10 A Pyramid is a solid figure contained under many plain superficieces set
upon one plain superficies, and gathered together to one point. Tenth
diffinition.

Two superficieces raised upon any ground can not make a Pyramid, for that two
superficial angles joined together in the top, cannot (as before is said)
make a solid angle. Wherefore when three, four, five, or more (how many soever)
superficieces are raised up from one superficies being the ground, or base, and
ever asce^ding diminish their breadth, till at the length all their angles
co^curre in one point, making there a solid angle: the solid enclosed,
bounded, and terminated by these superficieces is called a Pyramid, as ye see
in a taper of four sides, and in a spire of a tower which contains many
sides, either of which is a Pyramid.

And because that all the superficieces of every Pyramid ascend from one plain
superficies as from the base, and tend to one point, it must of necessity
come to pass; that all the superficieces of a Pyramid are trianguler, except
the base, which may be of any form or figure except a circle. For if the base
be a circle, then it ascends not with sides, or diverse superficieces, but
with one round superficies, and has not the name of a Pyramid, but is called
(as hereafter shall appear) a Cone.

Of Pyramid, there are diverse kinds. For according to the variety of the base
is brought forth the variety and diversity of kinds of Pyramids. If the base
of a Pyramid be a triangle, then is it called a triangled Pyramid. If the base
be a figure of four angles, it is called a quadrangled Pyramid. If the base be
a Pentagon, then is it a Pentagonall or five angled Pyramid. And so forth
according to the increase of the angles of the base infinitely. Although the
figure of a Pyramid can not be well expressed in a plain superficies, yet may
ye sufficiently conceive of it both by the figure before set in the de^inition
of a solid angle, and by the figure here set, if ye imagine the point A
together with the lines AB, AC, and AD, to be elevated on high. And yet that
the reader may more clearly see the form of a Pyramid, I have h^re set two
sundry Pyramids which will appear bodilike, if ye erecte the papers wherein are
drawn the triangular sides of each Pyramid, in such sort that the points of
the angles F of each triangle may in every Pyramid concur in one point, and
make a solid angle: one of which has to his base a four sided figure, and
the other a five sided figure. T(...)me of a triangled Pyramid ye may before
behold in the examp(...) solid angle. And by these may ye conceive of all
other kinds o^ ^yramids.

Eleventh diffinition.
11 A prisme is a solid or a bodily figure contained under many plain
superficieces, of which the two superficieces which are opposite, are equal
and like, and parallells, and all the other superficieces are parallelogra^mes.
Although you may in a plaing superficies by this figure here set, This
diffinition agrees to the general name of a prisme, which also may be applied
to Parallel^pedons (a^ may appear in the 12. book following and 10.
propo^^tio^, his demonstration) and to some other body likewise.
without any hardne^ conceive what a prisme is, namely, if ye imagine the
super^icies ABDC to be the ground and base of the solid^, and the two
sup^^ficieces, namely, the superficies AEFB, and the superficies CEFD to be
erected upon the sides of the base, the one on the one side, namely; on the
line AB, and the other on the other side, namely, on the line DC, not
perpendicularly, but inclining and bending the one to the other, till they
meet in the top, namely, on the line OF. For so ye see that this solid
figure is contained under many plain superficieces, of which two, namely, the
superficies AEC, and the superficies BFD, which are the ends of the solid,
and opposite the one to the other, are equal like and parallels, and all the
other superficieces, namely, the base ABCD, and the two erected superficieces,
that is, the super^icies AEFB, and the superficies CEED are parallelogrammes.
Yet notwithstanding, to make the thing more clear unto the reader, I have here
set a Prisme which will appear bodilike, if you erecte bending wise the^
papers wherein are drawn the parallelogra^mes ABEF, and CDE^ that they may
concurr^^ (...) OF in the top, and (...) pers wherein are drawn the (...)
gles AC^ and BDE, that the (...) AE of the one triangle may exactly agree with
the side AE of the one parallelogramme ABEF, and the side CE of the same
triangle, with the side CE of the parallelogramme CDEF: and moreover, the side
BF of the other triangle, with the side DF of the parallelogramme CDEF: and
finally, the side BF of the same triangle, with the side BF of the
parallelogramme ABEF. And so shall you most easily see the form of a Prisme:
that it consists of two equal, like, and parallel triangular superficieces,
and of three parallelogrammes: whereof the one is the base, and the other two
are erected bending wise. Here also behold the form thereof as it is by art
described in a plain to appear bodilike.

Flussas here notes that Theon and Campane disagree in defining a Prisme, and
he prefers the definition given of Campane before the de^inition given of
Euclide (which because he may seem with out less offense to reject, he calls
it Theons definition) and following Campane he gives an other definition,
which is this.

An other diffinition of a prisme, which is a special diffinition of a prisme:
as it is commonly called and used.
A Prisme is a solid figure, which is contained under five plain
superficieces, of which two are triangles, like, equal, and parallels, and the
rest are parallelogrammes.

The example before set agrees likewise with this definition, and manifestly
declares the same. For in it were ^iue superficieces, the base, the two
erected superficieces, and the two ends: of which the two ends are triangles
like, equal and parallels, and all the other are parallelogrammes as this
definition requires. The cause why he prefers the difinion of Campane
before the difinition of Theon (as he calls it, but in very deed it is
Euclides definition, as certainly, as are all those which are given of him in
the former books, neither is there any cause at all, why it should be doubted
in this one definition more then in any of the other) as he him self
alleges, is, for that it is (as he says) to large, and comprehends many mo
kinds of solid figures besides Prismes, as Columns having sides, and all
Parallelipipedons, which a definition should not do: but should be conuertible
with the thing defined, and declare the nature of it only, and stretch no
farther.

Me ^hinketh Flussas ought not to have made so much a do in this matter, nor
to have been so sharp in sight and so quick as to see and espy out such
faults, which can of no man that will see rightly without affection be espied
for such great faults. For it may well be answered that these faults which
he notes (if yet they be faults) are not to be found in this definion. It may
be said that it extends it self not ^arther then it should, but declares
only the thing defined, namely, a Prisme. Neither does it agree (as ^lussas
cauilleth) with all Parallelipipedons and Columns having sides. All
Parallelipipedons what so ever right angled, or not right angled which are
described of equidistant sides or superficieces, have their sides opposite. So
that in any of them there is no one side, but it has a side opposite unto it.
So likewise is it of eue^ sided Columns, each has his opposite side directly
against it, which agrees not with this definition of Euclide. Here it is
evidently said, that of all the superficieces, the two which are opposite are
equal, like, and parallels, meaning undoubtedly only two and no more. Which is
manifest by that which follows. The other (says he) are parallelogrammes,
signifiing most evidently that none of the rest besides the two aforesaid,
which are equal, like, and parallels, are opposite: but two of necessity are
raised up, and concur in one common line, and the other is the base. So that
it contains not under it the figures aforesaid, that is sided Columns, and
al Parallelipipedons, as Flussas has not so advisedly noted.

Again where Flussas sets in his definition, as an essential part thereof,
that of the five superficieces, of which a Prisme is contained, two of them
must be triangles, that undoubtedly is not of necessity, they may be of some
other figure. Suppose that in the figure before given that in the place of the
two opposite figures, which there were two triangl^s, were placed two
pentago^s: yet should the figure remain a Prisme still, and agree with the
definition of Euclide, and ^alleth not under the definition of Flussas. So that
his definition seems to be to narrow and stretches not so far as it ought
to do, nor declares the whole nature of the thing defined. Wherefore it is not
to be preferrd before Euclides definition, as he would have it. This figure of
Euclide called a Prisme, is called of Campane and certain others Figura
Serr^tilis, for that it repres^teth in some manner the form of a Saw. This
body called Figura Serratilis.
And of some others it is called Cuneus, that is, a Wedge, because it bears
the figure of a wedge.

Moreover although it were so, that the definition of a Prisme should be so
large, that it should co^taine all these figures noted of Flussas as sided
Columns, and all Parallelipipedons: yet should not Flussas have so great a
cause to find so notably a fault, so utterly to reject it. It is no rare thing
in all learninges, chiefly in the Mathematicalls, to have one thing more
general then an other. Is it not true that every Isosceles is a triangle, but
not every triangle is an Isosceles? And why may not likewise a Prisme be more
general, then a Parallelepipedon, or a Column having sides (and contain them
under it as a triangle co^tayneth under it an Isosceles and other kinds of
triangles). So that every Prallelipipedon, or every sided Column be a Prisme,
but not every Prisme a Parallelipipedo^ or a sided Column. This ought not to
be so much offensive. And indeed it seems manifestly of many, yea and of the
learned so to be taken, as clearly appears by the words of Psellus in his
Epitome of Geometry, where he entreats of the production and constitution of
these bodies. His words are these. Psellus.
All r^ctili^e figures being erected upon their playnes or bases by right
angles, make Prismes. Who perceaueth not but that a Pentagon erected upon his
base of ^iue sides makes by his motion a sided Column of five sides? Likewise
an Hexagon erected at right angles produces a Column having six sides: and
so of all other rectillne figures. All which solides or bodies so produced,
whether they be sided Columns or Parallelipipedons, be here in most plain
words (of this excellent and ancient Greek author Psellus) called Prismes.
Wherefore if the definition of a Prisme given of Euclide should extend it self
so largely as Flussas imagines, and should enclude such figures or bodies, as
he noted: he ought not yet for all that so much to be offended, and so narowly
to have sought faults. For Euclide in so defining might have that meaning and
sense of a Prisme which Psellus had. So ye see that Euclide may be defended
either of these two ways, either by that that the definition extends not to
these figures, and so not to be over general nor stretch farther then it
ought: or else by that that if it should stretch so far it is not so heinous.
For that as ye se many have tak^ it in that sense. In deed commonly a Prisme
is taken in that signification and meaning in which Campa^^^ Flussas and others
take it. In which sense it seems also that in diverse propositions in these
books following it ought of necessity to be taken.

12 A Sphere is a figure which is made, Twelueth diffinition.
when the diameter of a semicircle abiding fixed, the semicircle is turned
round about, until it return unto the self same place from whence it began
to be moved.
To the end we may fully and perfectly understand this definition, how a Sphere
is produced of the motion of a semicircle, it shall be expedient to consider
how quantities Mathematically are by imagination conceived to be produced, by
flowing and motion, as was somewhat touched in the beginning of the first
book. Ever the less quantity by his motion brings for^h the quantity next
above it. As a point moving, flowing, or gliding, brings forth a line, which
is the first quantity, and next to a point. A line moving produces a
superficies, which is the second quantity, and next unto a line. And last of
all, a superficies moving brings forth a solid or body, which is the third
and last quantity. These things well marked, it shall not be very hard to
attain to the right understanding of this definition. Upon the line AB being
the diameter, describe a semicircle ACB, whose center let be D: the diameter AB
being sixed on his ends or^ points, imagine the whole superficies of the
semicircle to move round from some one point assigned, till it return to the
same point again. So shall it produce a perfect Sphere or Globe, the form
whereof you see in a ball or bowl. And it is fully round and solid, for that
it is described of a semicircle which is perfectly round, as our country man
Johannes de Sacro Busco in his book of the Sphere, What is to be ta^^n heed
of in the diffinition of a sphere given by Johannes de Sacro Busco.
of this definition which he takes out of Euclide, does well collecte. But it
is to be noted and taken heed of, that none be deceived by the definition of a
Sphere given by Johannes de Sacro Busco: A Sphere (says he) is the passage or
moving of the circumference of a semicircle, till it return unto the place
where it began, which agrees not with Euclide. Euclide plainly says, that a
Sphere is the passage or motion of a semicircle, and not the passage or motion
of the circumference of a semicircle: neither can it be true that the
circumference of a semicircle, which is a line, should describe a body. It was
before noted that every quantity moved, describes and produces the quantity
next unto it. Wherefore a line moved can not bring forth a body, but a
superficies only. As if ye imagine a right line fastened at one of his ends
to move about from some one point till it return to the same again, it shall
describe a plain superficies, namely, a circle. So also if ye likewise
conceive of a crooked line, such as is the circumference of a semicircle, that
his diameter fastened on both the ends it should move from a point assigned
till it return to the same again, it should describe and produce a ^ound
superficies only, which is the superficies and limite of the Sphere, and
should not produce the body and soliditie of the Sphere. But the whole
semicircle, which is a superficies, by his motion, as is before said, produces
a body, that is, a perfect Sphere. So see you the error of this definition of
the author of the Sphere: which whether it happened by the author him self,
which I think not: or that that particle was thrust in by some one after him,
which is more likely, it it not certain. But it is certain, that it is
unaptly put in, and makes an untrue definition: which thing is not here
spoken, any thing to derogate the author of the book, which assuredly was a
man of excellent knowledge^ neither to the hindrance or diminishing of the
worthiness of the book, which undoubtedly is a very necessary book, then which
I know none more mere to be taught and red in schools touching the grounds
and principles of Astronomy and Geographie: but only to admonish the young
and vnskil^ull reader of not falling into error. Theodosiu^ di^^inition of a
sphere.
Theodosius in his book De Sphericis (a book very necessary for all those
which will see the grounds and principles of Geometry and Astronomy, which
also I have translated into our vulgar tongue, ready to the press) defines a
Sphere after this manner: A Sphere is a solid or body contained under one
superficies, in the middle whereof there is a point, from which all lines drawn
to the circumference are equal. This definition of Theodosius is more
essential and natural, then is the other given by Euclide. The other did not
so much declare the inward nature and substance of a Sphere, as it showed the
industry and knowledge of the producing of a Sphere, and therefore is a causall
definition given by the cause efficient, or rather a description then a
definition. But this definition is very es^entiall, declaring the nature and
substance of a Sphere. As if a circle should be thus defined, as it well may: A
circle is the passage or moving of a line from a point till it return to the
same point againe^ it is a causall definition, showing the efficient cause
whereof a circle is produced, namely, of the motion of a line. And it is a very
good description fully showing what a circle is. Such like description is the
de^inition of a Sphere given o^ Euclide^ by the motion of a semicircle. But
when a circle is defined to be a plain superficies, in the midst whereof is a
point, from which all lines drawn to the circumference thereof, are equal:
this definition is essential and formal, and declares the very nature of a
circle. And unto this definition of a circle, is correspondent the de^inition
of a Sphere given by Theodosius, saying: that it is a solid o^ body, in the
midst, whereof there is a point, from which all the lines drawn to the
circumference are equal. So see you the affinity between a circle and a
Sphere. For what a circle is in a plain, that is a Sphere in a Solid. The
fulness and content of a circle is described by the motion of a line moved
about: but the circumference thereof, which is the limite and border thereof, is
described of the end and point of the same line moved about. So the fulness,
content, and body of a Sphere or Globe is described of a semicircle moved
about. But the Sphericall superficies, which is the limite and border of a
Sphere, The circumference of a sphere.
is described of the circumference of the same semicircle moved about. And this
is the superficies meant in the definition, when it is said, that it is
contained under one superficies, which superficies is called of Johannes de
^acro Busco and others, the circumference of the Sphere.

Galens diffinition (...) a sph^r^.
Galene in his book de diffinitionibus medici^^ gives yet an other definition
of a Sphere, by his property or common accide^ce of moving, which is thus. A
Sphere is a figure most apt to all motion, as having no base whereon th stay.
This is a very plain and witty de^inition, declaring the dignity thereof
above all figures generally. The dig^itie of a s^here.
All other bodies or solides, as Cubes, Pyramids, and others have sides, bases,
and angles, all which are stays to rest upon, or impedimentes and lets to
motion. But the Sphere having no side or base to stay one, nor angle to let the
course thereof, but only in a point touching the plain wherein (...)
stands, moves freely and fully with out let. And for the dignity and
worthiness thereof, this circular and Sphericall motion is attributed to the
heavens, which are the most worthy bodies. Wherefore there is ascribed unto
them this chief kind of motion. This solid or bodily figure is also commonly
called a Globe. A sphere called a Globe.


13 The axe of a Sphere is that right line which abides fixed, about which the
semicircle was moved. Thirtenth diffinition.

As in the example before given in the definition of a Sphere, the line AB,
about which his ends being fixed, the semicircle was moved (which line also
yet remains after the motion ended) is the axe of the Sphere described of
that semicircle. Theodosius defines the axe of a Sphere after this manner.
Theodosius diffinition of the axe of a sphere.
The axe of a Sphere is a certain right line drawn by the center, ending on
either side in the superficies of the Sphere, about which being fixed the
Sphere is turned. As the line AB in the former example. There needs to this
definition no other declaration, but only to consider, that the whole Sphere
turns upon that line AB, which passes by the center D, and is extended one
either side to the superficies of the Sphere, wherefore by this definition of
Theodosius it is the axe of the Sphere.

14 The center of a Sphere is that point which is also the center of the
semicircle. Fourtenth diffinition.

This definition of the center of a Sphere is given as was the other definition
of the axe, namely, having a relation to the definition of a Sphere here given
of Euclide: where it was said that a Sphere is made by the revolution of a
semicircle, whose diameter abides fixed. The diameter of a circle and of a
semicrcle is all one. And in the diameter either of a circle or of a semicircle
is contained the center of either of them, for that they diameter of each ever
passes by the center. Now (says Euclide) the point which is the center of the
semicircle, by whose motion the Sphere was described, is also the center of the
Sphere. As in the example there given, the point D is the center both of the
semicircle and also of the Sphere. Theodosius gives as other definition of the
center of a Sphere which is thus. Theodosius diffinition of the center of a
sphere.
The center of a Sphere is a point with in the Sphere, from which all lines
drawn to the superficies of the Sphere are equal. As in a circle being a
plain figure there is a point in the midst, from which all lines drawn to
the circumfrence are equal, which is the center of the circle: so in like
manner with in a Sphere which is a solid and bodily figure, there must be
conceived a point in the midst thereof, from which all lines drawn to the
superficies thereof are equal. And this point is the center of the Sphere by
this definition of Theodosius. Flussas in defining the center of a Sphere
comprehends both those definitions in one, after this sort. The center of a
Sphere is a point assigned in a Sphere, from which all the lines drawn to the
superficies are equal, and it is the same which was also the center of the
semicircle which described the Sphere. Flussas diffinition of the center of a
sphere.
This definition is superfluous and contains more the^ needs. For either
part thereof is a full and sufficient diffinition, as before has been showed.
Or else had Euclide been insufficient for leaving out the one part, or
Theodosius for leaving out the other. Paraduenture Flussas did it for the more
explication of either, that the one part might open the other.

15 The diameter of a Sphere is a certain right line drawn by the ce^tre, and
one each side ending at the superficies of the same Sphere. Fiuetenth
diffinition

This definition also is not hard, but may easily be couceaued by the
definition of the diameter of a circle. For as the diameter of a circle is a
right line drawn from one side of the circu^frence of a circle to the other,
passing by the center of the circle: so imagine you a right line to be drawn
from one side of the superficies of a Sphere to the other, passing by the
center of the Sphere, Difference between the diameter and axe of a sphere.
and that line is the diameter of the Sphere. So it is not all one to say, the
axe of a Sphere, and the diameter of a Sphere. Any line in a Sphere drawn from
side to side by the center is a diameter. But not every line so drawn by the
center is the axe of the Sphere, but only one right line about which the
Sphere is imagined to be moued^ So that the name of a diameter of a Sphere is
more general, then is the name of an axe. For every axe in a Sphere is a
diameter of the same: but not every diameter of a Sphere is an axe of the same.
And therefore Flussas sets a diameter in the definition of an axe as a more
general word ^n this manner. The axe of a Sphere, is that fixed diameter above
which the Sphere is moved. A Sphere (as also a circle) may have infinite
diameters, but it can have but only one axe.

Seuententh diffinition.
16 A cone is a solid or bodily figure which is made, when one of the sides of
a rectangle triangle, namely, one of the sides which contain the right angle,
abiding fixed, the triangle is moved about, until it return unto the self
same place from whence it began first to be moved. Now if the right line which
abides fixed be equal to the other side which is moved about and contains
the right angle: then the cone is a rectangle cone. But if it be less, then is
it an obtuse angle cone. And if it be greater, the^ is it an a cuteangle cone,
This definition of a Cone is of the nature and condition that the definition
of a Sphere was, for either is given by the motion of a superficies. There, as
to the production of a Sphere was imagined a semicircle to move round, from
some one point till it returned to the same point again: so here must ye
imagine a rectangle triangle to move about till it come again to the place
where it began. Let ABC be a rectangle triangle, having the angle ABC a right
angle, which let be contained under the lines AB and BC. Now suppose the side
AB, namely, one of the lines which co^taine the right angle ABC to be fastened,
and about it suppose the triangle ABC to be moved from some one point assigned
till it return to the same again (as upon the diameter in the definition of
a Sphere ye imagined a semicircle to move about): so shall the solid or body
thus described be a perfect Cone. As you may imagine by this figure here set.
And the form of a Cone you may sufficiently conceive by the figure set in the
margent. There are of Cone three kinds, namely, a rectangle Cone, an
obtuseangle Cone, and an acute angle Cone, all which were before in the former
definition defined: Namely, the first kind after this manner.

If the right line which abides fixed, be equal to the other side which
moves ro^^d about, and contains the right angle, then the Cone is a
rectangle Cone.

First kind of Cones.
As suppose in the former example, that the line AB which is fixed, and about
which the triangle was moved, and after the motion yet remains, be equal to
the line BC, which is the other line containing the right angle, which also is
moved about together with the whole triangle^ then is the Cone described, as
the Cone ADC in this example, a right angled Cone: so called for that the angle
at the top of the Cone is a right angle. For forasmuch as the lines AB and BC
of the triangle ABC are equal, the angle BAC is equal to the angle BCA (by
the 5. of the first). And each of them is the half of the right angle ABC (by
the 32. of the first). In like sort may it be showed in the triangle ABD, that
the angle ^DA is equal to the angle ^AD, and that each of them is the half of
a right angle. Wherefore the whole angle CAD, which is composed of the two
half right angles, namely, DA^ and CA^ is a right angle. And so have ye what
is a right angled Cone.

But if it be less, then is it an obtuseangle Cone. As in this example, the
line AB fixed is less then the line BC moved about. Wherefore the Cone
described of the circumuolution of the triangle ABC about the line A^, is an
obtuseangle Cone, for that the angle at the top DAC is greater then a right
angle. Wherefore it is an obtuseangle. And therefore the Cone is called an
obtuse angle Cone.

And if it be greater, then i^ i^ an acuteangle Cone. As in this figure, the
line AB fastened, is greater then the line BC moved about. Wherefore the Cone
described by the motion and turning of the triangle ABC about AB is an
acuteangle Cone, having the angle at the top BAC an acute angle. Of whom the
Cone is called an acuteangle Cone. For the easier sight and consideration of
all these kinds of Cones, and also for the plainer demonstration of the
varieties of their angles in their tops, I have described them all three in
one plain figure, of which the Cone ACB is a right angled Cone, having his
fixed side CF equal to the line FB, and his angle ACB a right angle: the Cone
AEB is an obtuse angle Cone, and ADB an acuteangle Cone. By which figure ye may
easily demonstrate (by the 21. of the first) that the angle ADB of the Cone
ADB, whose fixed line DF is greater then the side FB, is less then the right
angle ACB, and so is an acute angle. And also (by the same 21. of the first) ye
shall with like facility perceive how the angle AEB of the Cone AEB whose
fixed line OF is less then the side FB, is greater then the right angle ACB:
and therefore is an obtuse angle.

This figure of a Cone is of Campane, of Vitellio, and of others which have
written in these latter times, called a round Pyramid, A Cone called of Campane
a ro^^de Piramis.
which is not so aptly. For a Pyramid, and a Cone, are far distant, and of
sundry natures. A Cone is a regular body produced of one circumuolution of a
rectangle triangle, and limited and bordered with one only round superficies.
But a Pyramid is terminated and bordered with diverse superficieces. Therefore
can not a Cone by any just reason bear the name of a Pyramid. This solid of
many is called Turbo, which to our purpose may be Englished a Top or Ghyg: and
moreover, peculiarly Campane calls a Cone the Pyramid of a round Column,
namely, of that Column which is produced of the motion of a parallelogramme
(contained of the lines AB and BC) moved about, the line AB being fixed. Of
which Columns shall be showed hereafter.

17 The axe of a Cone is that line, which abides fixed, about which the
triangle is moved. Seuententh diffinition.
And the base of the Cone is the circle which is described by the right line
which is moved about.
As in the example the line AB is supposed to be the line about which the right
angled triangle ABC (to the production of the Cone) was moved: and that line is
here of Euclide called the axe of the Cone described. The base of the Cone is
the circle which is described by the right line which is moved about. As the
line AB was fixed and slayed, so was the line BC (together with the whole
triangle ABC) moved and turned about. A line moved, as has been said before,
produces a superficies: and because the line BC is moved about a point,
namely, the point B, being the end of the axe of the Cone AB, it produces by
his motion, and revolution a circle, which circle is the base of the Cone: as
in this example, the circle CDE.

The line which produces the base of the Cone, is the line of the triangle
which together with the axe of the Cone contains the right angle. The other
side also of the triangle, namely, the line AC, is moved about also with the
motion of the triangle, which with his revolution describes also a
superficies, A conicall superficies.
which is a round superficies, and is erected upon the base of the Cone, and
ends in a point, namely, in the higher part or top of the Cone. And it is
commonly called a Conicall superficies.

Eightenth diffinition.
18 A cylinder is a solid or bodily figure which is made, when one of the sides
of a rectangle parallelogramme, abiding fixed, the parallelogramme is moved
about, until it return to the self same place from whence it began to be
moved.
This definition also is of the same sort and condition, that the two
definition^ before geu^ were, namely, the definition of a Sphere and the
definition of a Cone. For all are given by moving of a superficies about a
right line fixed, the one of a semicircle about his diameter, the other of a
rectangle triangle about one of his sides And this solid or body here de^ined
is caused of the motion of a rectangle parallelogra^me having one of his sides
containing the right angle fixed from some one point till it return to the
same again where it began. As suppose ABCD to be a rectangle parallelogramme,
having his side AB fastened, about which imagine the whole parallelogramme to be
turned, till it return to the point where it began, then is that solid or
body, by this motion described, a Cylinder: which because of his roundnes can
not at full be described in a plain superficies, yet have you for an example
thereof a sufficient designation thereof in the margent (...) as in a plain may
be. If you will perfectly behold the form of a cilinder. Consider a round
pillar that is perfectly round.

Ninetenth diffinition.
19 The axe of a cilinder is that right line which abides fixed, about which
the parallelogramme is moved. And the bases of the cilinder are the circles
described of the two opposite sides which are moved about.
Even as in the description of a Sphere the line fastened was the axe of the
Sphere pro^uced: and in the description of a cone, the line fastened was the
axe of the cone brought forth: so in this description of a cilinder the line
abiding, which was fixed, about which the rectangle parallelogramme was moved
is the axe of that cilinder. As in this example is the line AB. The bases of
the cilinder ^^c. In the revolution of a parallelogramme only one side is
fixed, therefore the three other sides are moved about: of which the two sides
which with the axe make right angles, and which also are opposite sides, in
their motion describe each of them a circle, which two circles are called the
bases of the cilinder. As ye see in the figure before put two circles described
of the motion of the two opposite lines AD and BC, which are the bases of the
Cilinder.

A cillindricall superficies.
The other line of the rectangle parallelogramme moved, by his motion describes
the round superficies about the Cilinder. As the third line or side of a
rectangle triangle by his motion described the round Conical superficies about
the Cone. And as the circu^fere^ce of the semicircle described the round
sphericall superficies about the Sphere. In this example it is the superficies
described of the line DC.

Corollary.
By this definition it is plain that the two circles, or bases of a cilinder
are ever equal and parallels: for that the lines moved which produced them
remained always equal and parallels. Also the axe of a cilinder is ever an
erected line unto either of the bases. For with all the lines described in the
bases, and touching it, it makes right angles,

A round^ Column or sphere.
Campane, Vitell^o, with other later writers, call this solid or body a round
Column^ or pillar. And Campane adds unto this definition this, as a
corrollary. That of a round Column, of a Sphere, and of a circle the ce^tre is
one and the self same. A Corollary added by Campane.
That is (as he him self declares it and proves the same) where the Column,
the Sphere, and the circle have one diameter.

20 Like cones and cilinders are those, Twenty diffinition.
whose axes and diameters of their bases are proportional
The similitude of cones and cilinders stands in the proportion of those
right lines, of which they have their original and spring. For by the
diameters of their bases is had their length and breadth, and by their axe is
had their height or deepenes. Wherefore to see whether they be like or unlike,
ye must compare their axes together, which is their depth, and also their
diameters together, which is their length and breadth. As if the axe ^G of the
cone ABC be to to the axe EI of the cone DEF, as the diameter AC of the cone
ABC is to the diameter DF of the cone DEF, then a^e the cones ABC and DEF like
cones. Likewise in the cilinders. If the axe LN of the cilinder LHMN have that
proportion to the axe OQ of the cilinder ROPQ, which the diameter HM has to
the diameter RP: then are the cilinders HLMN and ROPQ like cilinders, and so of
all others.

21 A Cube is a solid or bodily figure contained under six equal squares.
Twenty one diffinitio^.

As is a dye which has six sides, and each of them is a full and perfect
square, as limits or borders under which it is contained. And as ye may
conceive in a piece of timber containing a foot square every way, or in any
such like. So that a Cube is such a solid whose three dimensions are equal,
the length is equal to the breadth thereof, and each of them equal to the
depth. Here is as it may be in a plain superficies set an image thereof, in
these two figures whereof the first is as it is commonly described in a plain,
the second (which is in the beginning of the other side of this leaf) is drawn
as it is described by art upon a plain superficies to show somewhat bodilike.
And in deed the latter description is for the sight better the^ the first. But
the first for the demo^strations of Euclides propositions in the five books
following is of more use, for that in it may be considered and seen all the
fix sides of the Cube. And so any lines or sections drawn in any one of the
six sides. Which can not be so well seen in the other figure described upon a
playnd. And as touching the first figure (which is set at the end of the other
side of this leaf) ye see that there are six parallelogrammes which ye must
conceive to be both equilater and rectangle, although in deed there can be in
this description only two of them rectangle, they may in deed be described al
equilater. Now if ye imagine one of the six parallelogrammes, as in this
example, the parallelogramme ABCD to be the base lieng upon a ground plain
superfices. And so conceive the parallelogramme EFGH to be in the top over
it, in such sort, that the lines AE, CG, DH, and BF may be erected
perpendicularly from the points A, C, B, D, to the ground plain superficies
or square ABCD. For by this imagination this figure will show unto you bodilike.
And this imagination perfectly had, will make many of the propositions in these
five books following, in which are required to be described such like solides
(although not all cubes) to be more plainly and easily conceived.

In many examples of the Greek and also of the Latin, there is in this place
set the diffinition of a Tetrahedron, which is thus.

Twenty two diffinition.
22 A Tetrahedron is a solid which is contained under four triangles equal
and equilater.
A form of this solid ye may see in these two examples here set, whereof one
is as it is commonly described in a plain. Neither is it hard to conceive. For
(as we before taught in a Pyramid) if ye imagine the triangle BCD to lie upon a
ground plain superficies, and the point A to be pulled up together with the
lines AB, AC, and AD, ye shall perceive the form of the Tetrahedron to be
contained under 4. triangles, which ye must imagine to be al four equilater
and equiangle, though they can not so be drawn in a plain. And a Tetrahedron
thus described, is of more use in these five books following, then is the
other, although the other appear in form to the eye more bodilike. A
Tetrahedron one of the five regular bodies.


Why this definition is here left out both of Campane and of Flussas, I can not
but marvel, considering that a Tetrahedron, is of all Philosophers counted one
of the five chief solides which are here defined of Euclide, which are called
commonly regular bodies, without mention of which, the entreatie of these
should seem much maimed: unless they thought it sufficiently defined under
the definition of a Pyramid, Di^^erence between a Tetrahedron and a Piramis.
which plainly and generally taken, includes in deed a Tetrahedron, although
a Tetrahedron properly much differe^h from a Pyramid, as a thing special or a
particular, from a more general. For so taking it, every Tetrahedron is a
Pyramid, but not every Pyramid is a Tetrahedron. By the general definition of
a Pyramid, the superficieces of the sides may be as many in number as ye list,
as 3.4. 5.6. or more, according to the form of the base, whereon it is set,
whereof before in the definition of a Pyramid were examples given. But in a
Tetrahedron the superficieces erected can be but three in number according to
the base thereof, which is ever a triangle. Again, by the general definition
of a Pyrami^, the superficieces erected may ascend as high as ye list, but in a
Tetrahedron they must all be equal to the base. Wherefore a Pyramid may seem
to be more general then a Tetrahedron, as before a Prisme seemed to be more
general then a Parallelipipedon, or a sided Column: so that every
Parallelipipedon is a Prisme, but not every Prisme is a Parallelipipedon. And
every axe in a Sphere is a diameter: but not every diameter of a Sphere is the
axe thereof. So also noting well the definition of a Pyramid, every Tetrahedron
may be called a Pyramid, but not every Pyramid a Tetrahedron. And in deed
Psellus in numbering of these five solides or bodies, calls a Tetrahedron a
Pyramid in manifest words. Psellus calls a Tetrahedron a Piramis.
This I say might make Flussas and others (as I think it did) to omit the
definition of a Tetrahedron in this place, as sufficiently comprehended within
the definition of a Pyramid given before. But why then did he not count that
de^inition of a Pyramid faulty, for that it extends it self to large, and
comprehends under it a Tetrahedron (which differs from a Pyramid by that it
is contained of equal triangles) as he not so advisedly did before the
definition of a Prisme.

Twenty three definition.
23 An Octohedron is a solid or bodily figure contained under eight equal and
equilater triangles.
As a Cube is a solid figure contained under six superficial figures of
four sides or squares which are equilater, equiangle, and equal the one to
the other: so is an Octohedron a solid figure contained under eight triangles
which are equilater and equal the one to the other. As ye may in these two
figures here set behold. Whereof the first is drawn according as this solid
is commonly described upon a plain superficies. The second is drawn as it is
described by art upon a plain, to show bodilike. And in deed although the
second appear to the eye more bodilike, yet as I before noted in a Cube, for
the understanding of diverse Propositions in these five books following, is the
first description of more use yea and of necessity. For without it, ye can not
conceive the draught of lines and sections in any one of the eight sides which
are sometimes in the descriptions of some of those Propositions required.
Wherefore to the consideration of this first description, imagine first that
upon the upper face of the superficies of the parallelogramme ABCD, be
described a Pyramid, having his four triangles AFB, AFC, CFD, and DFB,
equilater and equiangle, and concurring in the point F. The^ conceive that on
the lower face of the super^icies of the former parallelogramme be described an
other Pyramid, having his four triangles AEB, AEC, CED, and DEB, equilater and
equiangle, and concurring in the point E. For so although somewhat grossly by
reason the triangles can not be described equilater, you may in a plain
perceive the form of this solid, and by that means conceive any lines or
sections required to be drawn in any of the said eight triangles which are the
sides of that body.

24 A Dodecahedron is a solid or bodily figure contained under twelve equal,
equilater, Twenty ^o^er definition.
and equiangle Pentagons.
As a Cube, a Tetrahedron, and an Octohedron, are contained under equal plain
figures, a Cube under squares, the other two under triangles: so is this solid
figure contained under twelve equilater, equiangle, and equal Pentagons, or
figures of five sides. As in these two figures here set you may perceive. Of
which the first (which thing also was before noted of a Cube, a Tetrahedron,
and an Octohedron) is the common description of it in a plain, the other is
the description of it by art upon a plain to make it to appear somewhat
bodilike. The first description in deed is very obscure to conceive, but yet
of necessity it must so, neither can it otherwise, be in a plain described to
understand those Propositions of Euclide in these five books a following which
concern the same. For in it although rudely, may you see all the twelve
Pentagons, which should in deed be all equal, equilater, and equiangle. And
now how you may somewhat conceive the first figure described in the plain to
be a body. Imagine first the Pentagon ABCDE ^o be upon a ground plain
superficies, then imagine the Pentagon FGHKL to be on high opposite unto the
Pentagon ABCDE. And between those two Pentagons there will be ten Pentagons
pulled up, five from the five sides of the ground Pentagon, namely, from the
side AB the Pentagon ABONM, from the side BC the Pentagon BCQPO, from the side
CD the Pentagon CDSRQ, from the side DE, the Pentagon DEVTS, from the side EA
the Pentagon EAMXV, the other five Pentagons have each one of their sides
common with one of the sides of the Pentagon FGHKL, which is opposite unto the
Pentagon in the ground superficies: namely, these are the other five Pentagons
FGNMX, GHPON, HKRQP, KLRST, LFXVT. So here you may behold twelve Pentagons,
which if you imagine to be equal, equilater, and equiangle, and to be lifted
up, ye shall (although somewhat rudely) conceive the bodily form of a
Pentagon. And some light it will give to the understanding of certain
Propositions of the five books following concerning the same.

Twenty five diffinition.
25 An Icosahedron is a solid or bodily figure contained under twenty equal
and equilater triangles.
As the solides before last mentioned are all described by the number and form
of the superficieces which contain them: so this body likewise is de^ined by
that that it is contained of twenty triangles equal, equilater, and
equiangle. And although this solid also be very hard to conceive, as it is
commonly described upon a plain (an example whereof you have in the first
figure here set): yet is it of necessity that in that form it be described,
if we will understand such descriptions as are set forth of Euclide touching
that body in the five books following. Howbeit you may by it (although
somewhat rudely) see the 20. triangles, which are imagined to be equal,
equilater, and equiangle, if you consider ^iu: angles of five triangles to
concur together at a point. And forasmuch as there are in this solid 20.
triangles, and every t^iangle has three angles, the concurse of the said
triangles will be in twelve points. As in this example the points of the
concurse are A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, K, L, M, and N. Where note that in this
plain the two points M and N are but one point, yet must ye imagine one of
those points to be erected upward, and the other downward. Now the ^iue
triangles which concur in the point M, are these, BMD, DMF, FMH, HML, and
LMB: the five triangles which concur in the point N, and are imagined to be
erected downward, are these, ANC, CNE, ENG, GNK, and KNA: the other ten
triangles which include this body, are these, ABC, BCD, CDE, DEF, EFG, FGH,
GHK, HKL, KLA, LAB. The second figure here appears more bodilike unto the eye.

These ^iue solides now last defined, namely, a Cube, a Tetrahedro^, an
Octohedron, a Dodecahedron and an Icosahedro^ are called regular bodies. Five
regular bodies.
As in plain superficieces, those are called regular figures, whose sides and
angles are equal, as are equilater triangles, equilater pentagons, hexagons,
and such like, so in solides such only are counted and called regular, which
are co^prehe^ded under equal plain superficieces, which have equal sides and
equal angles, as all these five foresaid have, as manifestly appears by their
definitions, which were all given by this propriety of equality of their
superficieces, which have also their sides and angles equal. And in all the
course of nature there are no other bodies of this condition and perfection,
but only these five. Wherefore they have ever of the ancient Philosophers been
had in great estimation and admiration, and have been thought worthy of much
contemplacion, about which they have bestowed most diligent study and endeavor
to search out the natures and properties of them. They are as it were the end
and perfection of all Geometry, for whose sake is written whatsoever is written
in Geometry. They were (as men say) first invented by the most witty Pithagoras
then afterward set forth by the divine Plato, and last of all meruelously
taught and declared by the most excellent Philosopher Euclide in these books
following, and ever since wonderfully embraced of all learned Philosophers. The
dignity of these bodies.
The knowledge of them contains infinite secrets of nature. Pithag^ras,
Timeus and Plato, by them searched out the composition of the world, with the
harmony and preservation thereof, and applied these ^iue solides to the simple
parts thereof, the Pyramid, or Tetrahedro^ they ascribed to the ^ire, A
Tetrahedron ascribed unto the fire.
for that it ascends upward according to the figure of the Pyramid. To the
air they ascribed the Octohedron, An octohedron ascribed unto the air.
for that through the subtle moisture which it has, it extends it self
every way to the one side, and to the other, according as that figure does.
Unto the water they assigned the Ikosahedron, for that it is continually
flowing and moving, An Ikosahedron assigned unto the water.
and as it were making angle^ (...) ^ide according to that figure. And to the
earth they attributed a Cube, A cube assigned unto the earth.
as to a thing stable^ (...) and sure as the figure ^ignifieth. Last of all a
Dodecahedron, A dodecahedron assigned to heaven.
for that it is made of P^ntago^, whose angles are more ample and large then
the angles of the other bodies, and by that ^ea^^^ draw more ^^ roun^nes, (...)
and to the form and nature of a sphere, they assigned to a sphere, namely,
(...). Who so will (...) in his Tineus, shall ^ead of these figures, and of
their mutual proportion^ ^^raunge ma^ter^, which h^re are not to be entreated
of, this which is said, shall be sufficient for the (...) of them and for the
declaration of their diffinitions.

After all these diffinitions here set of Euclide, Flussas has added an other
diffinition, which (...) of a Parallelipipedon, which because it has not
hitherto of Euclide in any place been defined, and because it is very good and
necessary to be had, I thought good not to omit it, thus it is.

A parallelipipedon is a solid figure comprehended under four plain
quadrangle figures, Diffinition of a parallelipipedon.
of which those which are opposite are parallels.
As in plain superficieces a parallelogramme is that which is contained under
four sides being lines, and whose opposite sides are equidistant and parallel
lines, so in solid figures a Parallelipipedon is that solid which is
contained under four quadrangle superficieces, whose opposite sides are also
parallels, as it is easily to be seen and conceived in a cube or die, all whose
opposite sides are parallel superficieces, and so of others like, ye may also
somewhat conceive thereof by the example in the margent.

There is also in these books following, mention made of solides, whose two
bases are Poligonon figures, like, equal, equilater, and parallels, and the
sides set upon the bases are parallelogrammes: which kind of solides Campane
calls sided Columns (and which as was before noted, may be co^preded under
the definition of a Prisme) a form whereof although grosely^ A sided Column.
behold in this example, whose bases are two like equal, equilater, equiangle,
and parallel hexagons, and the sides set upon those bases are six
parallelogra^mes: ye may better conceive the form thereof by the figure put
under the figure of the parallelipipedon, which apeareth more bodilike. There
may of these be infinite forms according to the diversity of their bases.

Because these five regular bodies here defined are not by these figures here
set, so fully and lively expressed, that the studious beholder can thoroughly
according to their definitions conceive them. I have here given of them other
descriptions drawn in a plain, by which ye may easily attain to the knowledge
of them. For if ye draw the like forms in matter that will bow and give place,
as most aptly ye may do in fine pasted paper, such as pastwiues make wome^s
pastes of, and the^ with a knife cut every line finely, not through, but half
way only, if the^ ye bow and bend them accordingly, ye shall most plainly and
manifestly see the forms and shapes of these bodies, even as their definitions
show. And it shall be very necessary for you to had^ ^tore of that pasted paper
by you, for so shall yo^ upon it (...) the forms of other bodies, as Prismes
and Parallelipopedons, (...) set forth in these five books following, and see
the very (...) of th^se bodies there me^cioned: which will make these books
concerning bodies, as easy unto you as were the other books, whose figures you
might plainly see upon a plain superficies.

If ye draw this figure con^i^^ing a^ ye s^e of ^ower ^quila^er and equiangle
triangles upon pasted paper, or upon any other such like matter that will bow
and give place, A Tetrahedron.
and then cut not through the paper, but as it were half the thicknes of the
p^per, the three lines contained within the figure, and bow and fold in the
four triangles accordingly^ they will close together in such sort, that they
will make the perfect form of a T^trahedron.

This figure (consisting of six equal squares) drawn upon pasted paper, A
c^be.
and the five lines contained within the figure being cut finely half the
thicknes of the paper, or not through, if their ye bow and fold accordingly
the six equal squares, they will so close together, that they will caus^ the
perfect form of a Cube.

This figure (which consists of eight ^quilater and equiangle triangle^)
drawn upon the foresaid matter, and the s^u^n lin^^ contained within the
figure being (...) as before was taught, A^ octo^ed^o^.
and the triangles bowed and folded accordingly, they will clos^ to^ether in
such sort, that they will mak^ the per^^c^^ form of an Octohedron.

Describe thi^ figur^, which consist^th of tw^lu^ ^quil^^^^ and ^quiangl^
P^nt^^^^^, upon the foresaid matt^r, and finely cut as before was ^^ught t^^
^l^u^n lines contain^d within the figur^, and bow and fold the Pen^^gon^
accordingly. And they will so close to^eth^^, tha^ they will ^^k^ the very
form of a Dodecahedron. A D^d^^^^edron.




An Icosa^edron.
If ye describe this figure which consists of twenty equilater and equiangle
triangles upon the foresaid matter, and finely cut as before was showed the
nin^t^ne lines which are contained within the figure, and then bow and fold
them accordingly, they will in such sort close together, that ther^ will be
made a perfect form of an Icosahedron.



Because in these five books there are sometimes required other bodies besides
the foresaid five regular bodies, as Pyramises of diverse forms, Prismes, and
others, I have here set forth three figures of three sundry Pyramises, one
having to his base a triangle, an other a quadrangle figure, the other ^
Pentagon^ which if ye describe upon the foresaid matter and finely cut as it
was before taught the lines contained within each figure, namely, in the first,
three lines, in the second, four lines, and in the third, five lines, and so
bend and fold them accordingly, they will so close together at the tops,
that they will ^ake Pyramids of that form that their bases are of. And if ye
conceive well the describing of these, ye may most easily describe the body of
a Pyramid of what form so ever ye will.

A triangled Pyramid.


The form of a quadrangled Pyramid.
The form of a five angled Pyramid.


Likewise if ye describe this figure upon the foresaid matter, and finely cut
the four lines contained within the figure, and bow and fold them together
accordingly, the three parallelogrammes and the two triangles will so close
together, that they will cause the perfect form of a Prisme contained under
three parallelogra^mes and two equedistant triangles. The form of a prisme.
And conceauing this description well, it shall not be hard to describe any
other Prisme of any other form.

Touching the description of Parallelipipedons I shall not need to speak. For
if ye consider well the description of a Cube, it shall not be hard to describe
a Parallelipipedon of what form ye will. The form of a parallelip^pedon.
Only where as in a Cube all the parallelogra^mes in the description of that
figure are squares, in the describing of a Parallelipipedon, the said
parallelogramme may be of what form ye will. So that ye take heed that the
opposite parallelogrammes be equal and equiangle. Which opposite
parallelogra^mes in the figure as it lies in a plain, is any two
parallelogrames leaving one parallelogramme between them. An example whereof
behold in this figure.

Because these five books following are somewhat hard for young beginners, by
reason they must in the figures described in a plain imagine lines and
superficieces to be elevated and erected, the one to the other, and also
conceive solides or bodies, which, for that they have not hitherto been
acquainted with, will at the first sight be somewhat s^raunge unto the^, I have
for their more ^ase, in this eleventh book, at the end of the demonstration of
every Proposition either set new figures, if they concern the eleuating or
erecting of lines or superficieces, or else if they concern bodies, I have
showed how they shall describe bodies to be compared with the constructions and
demonstrations of the Propositions to them belonging. And if they diligently
weigh the manner observed in this eleventh book touching the description of new
figures agreing with the figures described in the plain, it shall not be hard
for them of them selves to do the like in the other books following, when they
come to a Proposition which concerns either the eleuating or erecting of
lines and superficieces, or any kinds of bodies to be imagined.

The 1. Theoreme. The 1. Proposition. That part of a right line should be in a
ground plain superficies, and part elevated upward is impossible.
FOr if it be possible, let part of the right line ABC, namely, the part AB be
in a ground plain superficies, and the other part thereof, namely, BC be
elevated upward. And produce directly upon the ground plain superficies the
right line AB beyond the point B unto the point D. Wherefore unto two right
lines given ABC, and ABD, the line AB is a common section or part, which is
impossible. Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
For a right line can not touch a right line in (...) points then one,
v^lesse those right be exactly agreing and laid the one upon the other.
Wherefore that part of a right line should be in a ground plain superficies,
and part elevated upward is impossible: which was required to be proved.

This figure more plainly sets forth the foresaid demonstration, if ye
eleuate the superficies wheri^ the line BC.

An other demonstration after Fl^s^^s.
If it be possible let there be a right line ABG, whose part AB let be in the
ground plain superficies AED; An other demonstration after Flussas.
and let the rest thereof BG be elevated on high, that is, without the plain
AED. Then I say that ABG is not one right line. For forasmuch as AED is a
plain superficies, produce directly and equally upon the said plain AED the
right line AB toward D, which by the 4. definition of the first shall be a
right line. And from some one point of the right line ABD, namely, from C, dra^
unto the point G a right line CG. Wherefore in the triangle (...) the outward
ang^^ AB^ is eq^^ll to the two inward and opposite angles (by the 32. of the
first) and therefore it is less then two right angles (by the 17. of the same)
Wherefore the line ABG forasmuch as it makes an angle, is not ^ right line.
Wh^refore that part of a right line should be in a ground plain superficies,
and part elevated upward is impossible.

If ye mark well the figure before added for the play^er declaration of
Euclides demonstration, i^ will not be hard for you to co^^^^e this figure
which ^luss^s puts for his demonst^^tion ^ wherein is no difference but
only the draught of the line GC.

The 2. Theoreme. The 2. Proposition. If two right line cut the ou^ to the
other, they are ^^ ^ne and the self same plain superficies: and every
triangle is in one and the self same superficie^.
SVppose that these two right lines AB and CD do cut the one the other in
the point E. Then I say that these lines AB and CD are in one and the self
same superficies, and that every triangle is in one and self same plain
superficies. Construction.
Take in the lines EC and EB points at all auentures, and let the same be F and
G, and draw a right line from the point B to the point C, and an other from the
point F to the point G. And draw the lines FH and GK. First I say that the
triangle EBC is in one and the same ground superficies. Demonstration leading
to an impossibility.
For if part of the triangle EBC, namely the triangle FCH, or the triangle GBK
be in the ground superficies, and the residu^ be in an other, then also part of
one of the right lines EC or EB shall be in the ground superficies, and part in
an other. So also if part of the triangle EBC, namely, the part EFG be in the
ground superficies and the residue be in an other, then also one part of each
of the right lines EC and EB shall be in the ground superficies, and an other
part in an other superficies, which (by the first of the eleventh) is proved to
be impossible. Wherefore the triangle EBC is in one and the self same plain
superficies. For in what superficies the triangle BCE is, in the same also is
either of the lines EC and EB, and in what superficies either of the lines EC
and EB is, in the self same also are the lines AB and CD. Wherefore the right
lines lines AB and CD are in one and the self same plain superficies, and
every triangle is in one and the self same plain superficies: which was
required to be proved.

In this figure here set may ye more plainly conceive the demonstration of the
former proposition where (...) may ele^^^^ what part of the triangle ECB ye
will, namely the part FCH or the part GBK, or finally the part FCGB as is
required in the demonstration.

The 3. Theoreme. The 3. Proposition. If two plain superficieces cut the one
the other: their common section is a right line.
SVppose that these two superficieces AB and BC do cut the one the other, and
let their common secti^^ ^e the line DB. Then I say that DB is a right line.
For if not, draw from the point D to the point B a right line DFB in the plain
superficies AB, Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
and likewise from the same points draw an other right line DEB in the plain
superficies BC. Now therefore two right lines DEB and DFB shall ^aue the self
sa^^ e^de^, and therefore do include a superficies which (by the last common
sentence) is impossible^ Wherefore the lines DEB and DFB are not right lines.
In like sort also may we prove that no other right line can be drawn from the
point D to the point B besides the line DB which is the common section of the
two superficieces AB and BC. If therefore two plain superficieces cut the
one the other, their common section is a right line: which was required to be
demonstrated.



This figure here set, shows most plainly not only this third proposition,
but also the demonstration thereof, if ye eleuate the superficies AB, and so
compare it with the demonstration.

The 4. Theoreme. The 4. Proposition. If from two right lines, cutting the one
the other, at their common section, a right line be perpendicularly erected:
the same shall also be perpendicularly erected from the plain superficies by
the said two lines passing.
SVppose that there be two right lines AB and CD cutting the one the other in
the point E. And from the point E let there be erected a right line OF
perpendicularly to the said two right lines AB and CD: then I say that the
right line OF, Construction.
is also erected perpendicular to the plain superficies which passes by the
lines A B and CD. Let these lines AE, EB, EC, and ED be put equal the one to
the other. And by the point E extend a right line at all auentures, and let the
same be GEH. And draw these right lines AD, CB, FA, FG, FD, FC, FH, and FB.
Demonstration.
And forasmuch as these two right lines AE and ED are equal to these two lines
CE and EB, and they comprehend equal angles (by the 15. of the first):
therefore (by the 4. of the first) the base AD is equal to the base CB, and
the triangle AED is equal to the triangle CEB. Wherefore also the angle DAE,
is equal to the angle EBC. But the angle AEG is equal to the angle BEH (by
the 15 of the first). Wherefore there are two triangles AGE, and BEH having two
angles of the one equal to two angles of the other, each to his correspondent
angle, and one side of the one equal to one side of the other, namely one of
the sides which lie between the equal angles, namely, the side AE is equal to
the side EB. Wherefore (by the 26. of the first) the sides remaining are equal
to the sides remaining. Wherefore the side GE is equal to the side EH, and the
side AG to the side BH. And forasmuch as the line AE is equal to the line EB,
and the line FE is common to them both, and makes with them right angles,
wherefore (by the fourth of the first) the base FA it equal to the base FB.
And (by the same reason) the base FC is equal to the base FD. And forasmuch as
the line AD is equal to the line BC, and the line FA is equal to the line FB
as it has been proved. Therefore these two lines FA and AD are equal to these
two lines FB and BC, the one to the other, and the base FD is equal to the
base FC. Wherefore also the angle FAD is equal to the angle FBC. And again
forasmuch as it has been proved, that the line AG is equal to the line BH,
but the line FA is equal to the line FB. Wherefore there are two lines FA and
AG equal to two lines FB and BH and it is proved that the angle FAG is equal
to the angle FBH: wherefore (by the 4. of the first) the base FG is equal to
the base FH. Again forasmuch as it has been proved that the line GE is equal
to the line EH, and the line OF is common to them both: wherefore these two
lines GE and OF are equal to these two lines HE and OF, and the base FH is
equal to the base FG: wherefore the angle GEF is equal to the angle HEF.
Wherefore either of the angles GEF, and HEF is a right angle. Wherefore the
line OF is erected, from the point E, perpendicularly to the line GH. In like
sort may we prove, that the same line FE makes right angles with all the right
lines which are drawn upon the ground plain superficies and touch the point
B. But a right line is then erected perpendicularly to a plain superficies,
when it makes right angles with all the lines which touch it, and are drawn
upon the ground plain superficies (by the 2. definition of the eleventh).
Wherefore the right line FE is erected perpendicularly to the ground plain
superficies. And the ground plain superficies is that which passes by these
right lines AB and CD. Wherefore the right line FE is erected perpendicularly
to the plain superficies which passes by the right lines AB and CD. If
therefore from two right lines cutting the one the other and at their common
section a right line be perpendicularly erected: it shall also be erected
perpendicularly to the plain superficies by the said two lines passing: which
was required to be proved.

In this figure you may most evidently conceive the former proposition and
demonstration, if ye erect perpendicularly unto the ground plain superficies
ACBD the^ triangle AFB: and eleuate the triangles AFD, and CFB in such sort,
that the line AF of the triangle AFB may join and make one line with the line
AF of the triangle AFD: and likewise that the line BF of the triangle AFB may
join and make one right line with the line BF of the triangle BFC.

The 5. Theoreme. The 5. Proposition. If unto three right lines which touch the
one the other, be erected a perpendicular line from the common point where
those three lines touch: those three right lines are in one and the self same
plain superficies.
SVppose that unto these three right lines BC, BD, and BE, touching the one the
other in the point B, be erected perpendicularly from the point B, the line AB.
Then I say, that those three right lines BC, BD and BE, are in one and the self
same plain superficies. For if not, then if it be possible, let the lines BD
and BE be in the ground superficies, and let the line BC be erected upward (now
the lines AB and BC are in one and the same plain superficies (by the 2. of
the eleventh) for they touch the one the other in the point B). Extend the
plain superficies wherein the lines AB and BC are, Demonstration leading to an
impossibility.
and it shall make at the length a common section with the ground superficies,
which common section shall be a right line (by the 3. of the eleventh): let
that common section be the line BF. Wherefore the three right lines AB, BC, and
BF are in one and the self same superficies, namely, in the superficies
wherein the lines AB and BC are. And forasmuch as the right line AB is erected
perpendicularly to either of these lines BD and BE, therefore the line AB is
also (by the 4. of the eleventh) erected perpendicularly to the plain
superficies, wherein the lines BD and BE are. But the superficies wherein the
lines BD and BE are is the ground superficies. Wherefore the line AB is erected
perpendicularly to the ground plain superficies. Wherefore (by the 2.
definition of the eleventh) the line AB makes right angles with all the lines
which are drawn upon the ground superficies and touch it. But the line BF
which is in the ground superficies does touch it. Wherefore the angle ABF is a
right angle. And it is supposed that the angle ABC is a right angle. Wherefore
the angle ABF is equal to the angle ABC, and they are in one and the self
same plain superficies which is impossible. Wherefore the right line BC is not
in an higher superficies. Wherefore the right lines BC, BD, BE are in one and
the self same plain superficies. If therefore unto three right lines touching
the one the one the other, be erected a perpendicular line from the common
point where those three lines touch: those three right lines are in one and the
self same plain superficies: which was required to be demonstrated.

This figure here set more plainly declares the demonstration of the former
proposition, if ye erect perpendicularly unto the ground superficies, the
s^^perficies wherein is drawn the line (...) and so compare it with the said
de^^^^stration.

The 6. Theoreme. The 6. Proposition. If two right lines be erected
perpendicularly to one and the self same plain superficies: those right lines
are parallels the one to the other.
SVppose that these two right lines AB and CD be erected perpendicularly to a
ground plain superficies. Then I say that the line AB is a parallel to the
line CD. Let the points which those two right lines touch in the plain
superficies be B and D. Construction.
And draw a right line from the point B to the point D. And (by the 11. of the
first) from the point D, draw unto the line BD in the ground superficies a
perpendicular line DE. And (by the 2. of the first) An Assumpt as M. Dee
pr^ueth it. Demonstration.
put the line DE equal to the line AB. And draw these right lines BE, AE, and
AD. And forasmuch as the line AB is erected perpendicularly to the ground
superficies, therefore (by the 2. definition of the eleventh) the line AB makes
right angles with all the lines which are drawn upon the ground plain
super^icies and touch it. But either of t^ese lines BD and BE which are in the
ground superficies, touch the line AB, wherefore either of these angles ABD and
ABE is a right angle^ and by the same reason also either of the angles CDB, and
CDE is a right angle. And forasmuch as the line AB is equal to the line DE,
and the line BD is common to them both, therefore these two lines AB and BD, are
equal to these two lines ED and DB, and they contain right angles: wherefore
(by the 4. of the first) the base AD is equal to the base BE. And forasmuch as
the line AB is equal to the line DE, and the line AD to the line BE, therefore
these two lines AB and BE are equal to these two lines ED and DA, and the line
AE is a common base to them both. Wherefore the angle ABE is (by the 8. of the
first) equal to the angle EDA. But the angle ABE is a right angle: whefore also
the angle EDA is a right angle: wherefore the line ED is erected perpe^dicularly
to the line DA: and it is also erected perpe^dicularly to either of these lines
BD and DC, wherefore the line ED is unto these three right lines BD, DA, and DC
erected perpendicularly from the point where these three right lines touch the
one the other: wherefore (by the 5. of the eleventh) these three right lines
BD, DA, and DC are in one and the self same superficies. And in what
superficies the lines BD and DA are, in the self same also is the line BA: for
every triangle is (by the 2. of the eleventh) in one and the self same
superficies. Wherefore these right lines AB, BD, and DC are in one and the
self same superficies, and either of these angles ABD and BDC is a right angle
(by supposition). Wherefore (by the 28. of the first) the line AB is a parallel
to the line CD. If therefore two right lines be erected perpendicularly to one
and the self same plain superficies, those right lines are parallels the one
to the other: which was required to be proved.

Here for the better understanding of this 6. proposition I have described an
other figure: as touching which if ye erect the superficies ABD perpendicularly
to the superficies BDE, and imagine only a line to be drawn from the point A
to the point E ( if ye will ye may extend a thread from the said point A to the
point E) and so compare it with the demonstration, it will make both the
proposition, and also the demonstration most clear unto you.

An other demonstration of the sixth proposition by M. Dee.
Suppose that the two right lines AB and CD be perpendicularly erected to one
and the same plain superficies, namely the plain superficies OP. Then I say
that ^^ and CD are parallels. Let the end points of the right lines AB and CD,
which touch the plain sup^^^^cies O^, be the points ^ and D, from ^ to D let
a straight line be drawn (by the first petition) and (by the second petition)
let the straight line ^D be exte^ded, as to the points M and N. Now forasmuch
as the right line AB, from the point ^ produced, does cut the line MN (by
construction). Therefore (by the second proposition of this eleventh book) the
right lines AB and MN are in one plain^ superficies. Which let be QR, cutting
the superficies OP in the right line MN. By the same means may we conclude the
right line CD to be in one plain superficies with the right line MN. But the
right line MN (by supposition) is in the plain superficies QR: wherefore CD is
in the plain superficies QR. And A^ the right line was proved to be in the
same plain superficies QR. Therefore AB and CD are in one plain superficie^,
namely QR. And forasmuch as the lines A^ and CD (by supposition) are
perpendicular upon the plain superficies OP, therefore (by the second
definition of this book) with all the right lines drawn in the superficies OP
and touching AB and CD, the same perpe^diculars A^ and CD, do make right
angles. But (by construction) MN, being drawn in the plain superficies OP
touches the perpendiculars AB and CD at the points ^ and D. Therefore the
perpendiculars A^ and CD, make with the right line MN two right angles namely
ABN, and CDM: and MN the right line is proved to be in the one and the same
plain superficies, with the right lines AB and CD: namely in the plain
superficies QR. Wh^refore by the second part of the 28. proposition of the
first book, the right line^ AB and CD are parallel^. If therefore two right
lines be erected perpendicularly to one and the self same plain superficies
those right lines are parallels the one to the other: which was required to be
demonstrated.

A Corollary added by M. Dee.
Hereby it is evident that any two right lines perpendicularly erected to one
and the self same

The first part hereof is proved by the former construction and demonstration,
that the right lines

Io. Dee his advise upon the Assumpt of the 6.
As concerning the making of the line DE, equal to the right line AB, verily
the second of the first, without some farther consideration, is not properly
enough alleged. And no wonder it is, for that in the former booke^, whatsoe^^^
^a^h of lines been spoken, the same has alway^s been imagined to be in one
only plain superficies considered or executed. But here the perpendicular
line AB, is not in the same playn^ superficies, that the right line DB is.
Therefore some other help must be put into the hands of young beginners, how
to bring this problem to execution: which is this, most plain and brief.
Understand that BD the right line, is the common section of the plain
superficies, wherein the perpendiculars AB and CD are, and of the other plain
superficies, to which they are perpendiculars. The first of these (in my former
demonstration of the 6)^ I noted by the plain superficies QR: and the other, I
noted by the plain superficies OP. Wherefore BD being a right line common to
both the plain sup^rficieces QR and OP, thereby the ponits B and D are common
to the playnes QR and OP. Now from BD (sufficiently extended) cut a right
line equal to AB, (which suppose to be BF) by the third of the first, and
orderly to BF make DE equal, by the 3. o^ the first, if DE be greater then BF.
(Which always you may cause so to be, by producing of DE sufficiently). Now
forasmuch as BF by construction is cut equal to AB, and DE also, by
construction, put equ^ll to BF, therefore by the 1. common sentence, DE is put
equal to AB: which was required to be done.

In like sort, if DE were a line given to whom AB were to be cut and made
equal, first out of the line DB (su^^iciently produced) cutting of DG, equal
to DE by the third of the first: and by the same 3. cutting from BA
(sufficiently produced) BA, equal to DG: then is it evident, that to the right
line DE, the perpe^dicular line AB is put equal. And though this be easy to
conceive, yet I have designed the figure accordingly, whereby you may instruct
your imagination. Many such helps are in this book requisite, as well to
inform the young students therewith, as also to master the froward gaynesayer
of our conclusion, or interrupter of our demonstrations course.

The 7. Theoreme. The 7. Proposition. If there be two parallel right lines, and
in either of them be taken a point at all adventures: a right line drawn by
the said points is in the self same superficies with the parallel right lines.
SVppose that these two right lines AB and CD be parallels, and in either of
the^ take a point at all adventures, namely, E and F. Then I say, that a right
line drawn from the point E to the point F, is in the self same plain
superficies that the parallel lines are. For if not, then if it be possible,
let it be in an higher superficies, Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
as the line EGF is, and draw the superficies wherein the line EGF is, and
extend it, and it shall make a common section with the ground superficies,
which section shall (by the 3. of the eleventh) be a right line: let that
section be the right line OF. Wherefore two right lines EGF and OF include a
superficies: which (by the last common sentence) is impossible. Wherefore a
right line drawn from the point E to the point F, is not in an higher
superficies. Wherefore a right line drawn from the point E to the point F, is
in the self same superficies wherein are the parallel right lines AB and CD.
If therefore there be two parallel right lines, and in either of them be taken
a point at all adventures, a right line drawn by th^se points is in the self
same plain superficies with the parallel right lines: which was required to be
demonstrated.

By this figure it is easy to see the former demonstration, if ye eleuate the
superficies wherein is drawn the line EGF.

The 8. Theoreme. The 8. Proposition. If there be two parallel right lines, of
which one is erected perpendicularly to a round plain superficies: the other
also is erected perpendicularly to the self same ground plain superficies.
SVppose that there be two parallel right lines AB and CD, and let one of them,
namely, AB be erected perpendiculerly to a ground superficies. This proposition
is as it were the converse of the sixth Construction.
Then I say that the line CD is also erected perpendiculerly, to the self same
ground superficies. Let the lines AB and CD fall upon the ground superficies in
the points B and D, and (by the first peticion) draw a righ^ line from the
point B to the point D. And draw (by the 11. of the first) in the ground
superficies from the point D unto the line BD a perpendiculer line DE, and (by
the 2. of the first) put the line DE equal to the line AB, and draw a right
line from the point B to the point E, and an other from the point A to the
point E, and an other from the ^oint A to the point D. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the line AB is erested perpendicularly to the ground
superficieces, therefore (by the 2. definition of the eleventh) the line AB is
erected perpendicularly to all the right lines that are in the ground
superficies and touch it. Wherefore either of these angles ABD and ABE is a
right angle. And forasmuch as upon these parallel lines AB and CD falls a
certain right line BD, therefore (by the 29. of the first) the angles ABD and
CDB are equal to two right angles. But the angle ABD is a right angle, wherefore
also the angle CDB is a right angle. Wherefore the line CD is erected
perpendic^larly to the line BD. And forasmuch as the line AB is equal to the
line DE, and the line ^D is common to them both, therefore these two lines AB
and BD are equal to these two lines ED and DB, and the angle ABD is equal to
the angle EDB for either of them is a right angle. Wherefore (by the 4. of the
first) the base AD is equal to the base BE. And forasmuch as the line AB is
equal to the line DE, and the line BE to the lin^ AD, therefore these two lines
AB and BE are equal to these two lines AD and DE, the on^ to the other, and
the line AE is a common base to them both. Wherefore (by the 8. of the first)
the angle ABE is equal to the angle ADE: but the angle A^E is a right angle,
wherefore the ^ngle EDA, is also a right angle. Wherefore the line ED is erected
perpendicularly to the line AD, and it is also erected perpendicularly to the
line DB. Wherefore the line ED is erect^d perpendicularly to the plain
superficies wherein the l^n^s BD and BA are (by the 4. of ^his book) Wherefore
(by the 2. definition of the eleventh) the line ED is erected perpendicularly
to all the right lines that touch it and are in the s^perficies wherein the
lines BD and AD are. But in what superficies the lines BD and DA are, in the
self same superficies is the line DC. For the line AD being drawn from two
points taken in the parallel lines AB and CD is by the former proposition in
the self same superficies with them. Now f^rasmuch as the lines AB and BD ar^
in the superficies wherein the lines BD and DA are, but in what superficies the
lines AB and BD are, in the same is the line DC. Wherefore the line ED is
erected perpendicularly to the line DC. Wherefore also the line CD is erected
perpendicularly to the line DE. And the line CD is erected perpendicularly to
the line DB. For by the 29. of the first, the angle CDB being equal to the
angle ABD is a right angle. Wherefore the line CD is from the point D erected
perpendicularly to two right lines DE and DB cutting the one the other in the
point D. Wherefore by the 4. of the eleventh, the line CD is erected
perpendiculaaly to the plain superficies, wherein are the lines DE and DB. But
the ground plain superficies is that wherein are the lines DE and DB, to which
superficies also the line AB is supposed to be erected perpendiculerly.
Wherefore the line CD is erected perpendicularly to the ground plain
superficies, whereunto the line AB is erected perpendicularly. If therefore there
be two parallel right lines, of which one is erected perpendicularly to a
ground plain superficies, the other also is erected perpendicularly to the
self same ground plain superficies: which was required to be demonstrated.

This figure will more clearly set forth the former demonstration, if ye erect
perpendicularly the superficies ABD to the superficies BDE, and imagine a line
to be drawn from the point A to the point D, instead whereof, as in the 6.
proposition ye may extend a threede.

The 9. Theoreme. The 9. Pro(...) Right lines which are parallels to one and
the self same right line, and are not in the self same superficies that it is
in: are also parallels the one to the other.
SVppose that either of these right lines AB and CD be a parallel to the line
OF not being in the self same superficies with it. Then I say that the line AB
is a parallel to the line CD. Take in the line OF a point at all adventures,
and let the same be G. Construction.
And from the point G raise up in the superficies wherein are the lines OF and
AB, unto the line OF a perpendiculer line GH, and again in the superficies
wherein are the lines OF and CD, raise up from the same point G to the line OF a
perpendiculer line GK. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the line OF is erected perpendiculerly to either of the lines
GH and GK, therefore (by the 4. of the eleventh) the line OF is erected
perpendicularly to the superficies wherein the lines GH and GK are, but the
line OF is a parallel line to the line AB. Wherefore (by the 8. of the eleventh)
the line AB is erected perpendicularly to the plain superficies, wherein are
the lines GH and GK. And by the same reason also the line CD is erected
perpendicularly to the plain superficies wherein are the lines GH and GK.
Wherefore either of these lines AB and CD is erected perpendicularly to the
plain superficies, wherein the lines GH and GK are. But if two right lines be
erected perpendicularly to one and the self same plain superficies, those
right lines are parallels the one to the other (by the 6. of the eleventh)
Wherefore the line AB is a parallel to the line CD. Wherefore right lines which
are parallels to one and the self same right line, and are not in the self
same superficies with it are also parallels the one to the other: which was
required to be proved.

This figure more clearly manifests the former proposition and
demonstration, if ye eleuate the superficieces ABEF and CDEF that they may
incline and concur in the line OF.

The 10. Theoreme. The 1(...) If two right lines touching the one the other
(...)her right lines touching the one the other, and no(...)lfe same
superficies with the two first: those right lines co^taine equal angles.
SVppose that these two right lines AB and BC touching the one the other, be
parallells to these two lines DE and OF touching also the one the other, and
not being in the self same superficies that the lines AB and BC are. The^ I
say, that the angle ABC is equal to the angle DEF. Construction.
For let the lines BA, BC, ED, OF, be put equal the one to the other: and draw
these right lines AD, CF, BE, AC, and DF. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the line BA is equal to the line ED, and also parallel unto
it, therefore (by the 33. of the first) the line AD is equal and parallel to
the line BE: and by the same reason also the line CF is equal and parallel to
the line BE. Wherefore either of these lines AD and CF is equal and parallel
to the line EB. But right lines which are parallells to one and the self same
right line, and are not in the self same superficies with it, are also (by the
9. of the eleventh) parallells the one to the other. Wherefore the line AD is a
parallel line to the line CF. And the lines AC and DF join them together.
Wherefore (by the 33. of the first) the line AC is equal and parallel to the
line DF. And forasmuch as these two right lines AB and BC are equal to these
two right lines DE and OF, and the base AC also is equal to the base DF:
therefore (by the 8. of the first) the angle ABC is equal to the angle DEF. If
therefore two right lines touching the one the other be parallells to two other
right lines touching the one the other, and not being in one and the self same
superficies with the two first: those righ^ lines contain equal angles: which
was required to be demonstrated.

This figure here set more plainly declares the former Proposition and
demonstration, if ye eleuate the superficieces DABE, and FCBE, till they
concur in the line FE.

The 1. Problem. The 11. Proposition. From a point given on high, to draw
unto a ground plain superficies a perpendicular right line.
Construction.

Two cases in this proposition.

The first case.


SVppose that the point given on high be A, and suppose a ground plain
superficies, namely, BCGH. It is required from the point A to draw unto the
ground superficies a perpendicular line. Draw in the ground superficies a
right line at adventures, and let the same be BC. John Dee.
And (by the 12. of the first) from the point A draw unto the line BC a
perpendicular line AD. This requires the imagination of a plain superficies
passing by the point A, and the straight line BC. And so help your self in
the like cases either Mathematically imagining, or Mechanically practicing.
Now if AD be a perpendicular line to the ground superficies, then is that done
which was sought for. But if not, then (by the 11. of the first) from the point
D raise up in the ground superficies unto the line BC a perpendicular line DE.
And (by the 12. of the first) from the point A draw unto the line DE a
perpendicular line AF. And by the point F draw (by the 31. of the first) unto
the line BC a parallel line FH: And extend the line FH from the point F to the
point G. Second cas^.

Demonst^at^on.


And forasmuch as the line BC is erected perpendicularly to either of these
lines DE and DA, therefore (by the 4. of the eleventh) the line BC is erected
perpe^dicularly to the superficies wherein the lines ED and AD are: and to the
line BC the line GH is a parallel. But i^ there be two parallel right lines,
of which one is erected perpendicularly to a certain plain superficies, the
other also (by the 8. of the eleventh) is erected perpendicularly to the self
same superficies. Wherefore the line GH is erected perpendicularly to the
plain^ superficies wherein the lines ED and DA are. Wherefore also (by the 2.
definition of the eleventh) the line GH is erected perpendicularly to all the
right lines which touch it, and are in the plain superficies wherein the lines
ED and AD are. But the line AF touches it being in the superficies wherein the
lines ED and AD are (by the ^. of this book). Wherefore the line GH is erected
perpendicularly to the line FA. Wherefore also the line FA is erected
perpendicularly to the line GH: and the line AF is also erected perpendicularly
to the line DE. Wherefore AF is erected perpendicularly to either of these
lines HG and DE. But if a right line be erected perpendicularly from the common
section of two right lines cutting the one the other, it shall also be erected
perpendicularly to the plain superficies of the said two lines (by the 4. of
the eleventh). Wherefore the line AF is erected perpendicularly to that
superficies wherein the lines ED and GH are. But the superficies wherein the
lines ED and GH are, is the ground superficies. Wherefore the line AF is
erected perpendicularly to the ground superficies. Wherefore from a point given
on high, namely, from the point A, is drawn to the ground superficies a
perpendicular line: which was required to be done.

In this figure shall ye much more plainly see both the cases of this former
demonstration. For as touching the first case, ye must erecte perpendicularly
to the ground superficies, the superficies wherein is drawn the line AD, and
compare it with the demonstration, and it will be clear unto you. For the
second case ye must erecte perpendicularly unto the ground superficies the
superficies wherein is drawn the line AF, and unto it let the other
superficies wherein is drawn the line AD, incline, so that the point A of the
one may concur with the point A of the other: and so with your figure thus
ordered, compare it with the demonstration, and there will be in it no hardness
at all.

The 2. Problem. The 12. Proposition. Unto a plain superficies given, and
from a point in it given, to raise up a perpendicular line.
SVppose that there be a ground plain superficies given, and let the point in
it given be A. It is required from the point A to raise up unto the ground
plain superficies a perpendicular line. Understand some certain point on
high, and let the same be B. Construction.
And from the point B draw (by the 11. of the eleventh) a perpendicular line to
the ground superficies, and let the same be BC. And (by the 31. of the first)
by the point A draw unto the line BC a parallel line DA. Now forasmuch as
there are two parallel right lines AD and CB, the one of them, namely,
Demonstration.
CB is erected perpendicularly to the (...) superficies: wherefore the other
line also, namely, AD, is (...) perpendicularly to the same ground superficies
(by the eight of (...)leuenth). Wherefore unto a plain superficies given, and
(...) point in it given, namely, A, is raised up a perpendicular lyn^ ^required
to be done.

In this second figure ye may consider plainly the demonstration of the former
proposition if ye erect perpendicularly the superficies wherein are drawn the
lines AD and CB.

The 11. Theoreme. The 13. Pr^position. From one and the self point, and to
one and the self same plain superficies, can not be erected two perpendicular
right lines on one and the self same side.
FOr if it be possible from the point A let there be erected perpendicularly to
one and the self same plain superficies two righ^ lines AB and AC on one and
the self same side. Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
And extend the superficies wherein are the lines AB and AC: Note this manner
of imagination Mathematical.
and it shall make at length a common section in the ground super^icies which
common section shall be a right line, and shall pass by the point A: let that
common section be the line DAE. Wherefore (by the 3. of the eleventh) the lines
AB, AC, and DAE are in one and the self same plain superficies. And forasmuch
as the line CA is erected perpendicularly to the ground superficies, therefore
(by the 2. definition of the eleventh) it makes right angles with all the
right lines that touch it, and are in the ground superficies. But the line DAE
touches it, being in the ground superficies. Wherefore the angle CAE is a
right angle, and by the same reason also the angle BAE is a right angle.
Wherefore (by the 4 petition) the angle CAE is equal to the angle BAE the
less to the more, both angles being in one and the self same plain
superficies: which is impossi^le. Wherefore from one and the self same point,
and to one and the self same plain superficies can not be ^rected two
perpendicular right lines on one and the self same side: which was required to
be demonstrated.

In this figure if ye erect perpendicularly the superficies wherein are drawn
the lines ^A and CA to the ground super^icies wherein is drawn the line DAE,
and so compare it with the the demonstration of the former proposition it will
be clear unto you.

M. Dee his annotation.
Euclides words in this 13. proposition admit two cases: one, if the (...) in
the plain superficies, (as commonly the demonstrations suppose) the other, if
the point assigned be any where without the said plain superficies, to which,
the perpendiculars fall, is considered. Contrary to either of which, if the
adversary affirm, admitting from one point two right lines, perpendiculars to
one and the self same plain superficies, and on one and the same side
thereof, by the 6. of the eleventh he may be bridled: which will ^ore him to
confess his two perpendiculars to be also parallels. But by supposition agreed
one, they concur at one and the same poyn^, which (by the definition of
parallels) i^ impossible. Therefore our adversary must recant and yield to out
proposition.

The 12. Theoreme. The 14. Proposition. To whatsoever plain superficieces one
and the self same right line is erected perpendicularly: those superficieces
are parallels the one to the other.
SVppose that a right line AB be erected perpe^dicularly to either of these
plain superficieces CD and OF. Then I say, that these superficieces CD and OF
are parallels the one to the other. Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
For if not, then if they be extended they will at the length meet. Let them
meet, if it be possible. Now then their common section shall (by the 3. of the
eleventh) be a right line. Let that common section be GH. And in the line GH
take a point at all adventures and let the same be K. And draw a right line
from the point A to the point K, and an other from the point B to the point K.
And forasmuch as the line AB is erected perpendicularly to the plain
superficies OF, therefore the line AB is also erected perpendicularly to the
line BK which is in the extended superficies OF. Wherefore the angle ABK is a
right angle. And by the same reason also the angle BAK is a right angle.
Wherefore in the triangle ABK, these two angles ABK and BAK, are equal to two
right angles: which (by the 17. of the first) is impossible. Wherefore these
superficieces CD and OF being extended meet not together. Wherefore the
superficieces CD and OF are parallells. Wherefore to what soever plain
superficieces one and the self same right line i^ erected perpendicularly:
those superficies are parallells the one to the other: which was required to be
proved.

In this figure may ye plainly see the former demonstration if ye erecte the
three superficieces, GD, GE, and KLM perpe^diculary to the ground plain
super^icies: but yet in such sort that the two superfici^^ (...) may concur
in the common line G (...) the demonstration.

A corollary added by Campane.
If a right line be erected perpendicularly to one of those superficies, it
(...) erected perpendicularly to the other.

For if it should not be erected perpendicularly to the other, then it falling
upon that other shall make with some one line thereof an angle less then a
right angle: which line should (by the 5. petition of the first) concur with
some one line of that super^icies whereunto it is perpendicular. So that those
superficieces should not be parallels: which is contrary to the supposition.
For they are suppsed to be parallels.

The 13. Theoreme. The 15. Proposition. If two right lines touching the one the
other be parallels to two other right lines touching also the one the other and
not being in the self same plain superficies with the two first: the plain
superficieces extended by those right lines, are also parallells the one to the
other.
SVppose that these two right lines AB and BC touching the one the other be
parallells to these two right lines DE and OF touching also the one the other,
and not being in the self same plain super^icies with the right lines AB and
BC. Then I say, that the plain superficieces by the lines AB and BC, and the
lines DE and OF being extended, shall not meet together, that is, they are
equedistant and parallels: Construction.
From the point B draw (by the 11. of the eleventh) a perpendicular line to the
super^icies wherein are the lines DE and OF, and let that perpendicular line be
BG. And by the point G in the plain superficies passing by DE, and OF, draw
(by the 31. of the first) unto the line ED a parallel line GH: and likewise by
that point G draw in the same superficies unto the line OF a parallel line
GK. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the line BG is erected perpendicularly to the superficies
wherein are the lines DE and OF, therefor (by the 2. definition of the
eleventh) it is also erected perpendicularly to all the right lines which touch
it, and are in the self same superficies wherein are the lines DE and OF. But
either of these lines GH and GK touch it, and are also in the superficies
wherein are the lines DE and OF, therefore either of these angles BGH, and BGK,
is a right angle. And forasmuch as the line BA is a parallel to the line GH
(that the lines GH and GK are parallells unto the lines AB and BC it is
manifest by the 9. of this book): therefore (by the 29. of the first) the
angles GBA and BGH are equal to two right angles. But the angle BGH is (by
constructio^) a right angle, therefore also the angle GBA is a right angle:
therefore the line GB is erected perpendicularly to the line BA. And by the
same reason also may it be proved, that the line BG is erected perpendicularly
to the line BC. Now forasmuch as the right line BG is erected perpendicularly
to these two right lines BA and BC touching the one the other, therefore (by
the 4. of the eleventh) the line BG is erected perpendicularly to the
superficies wherein are the lines BA and BC^ And it is also erected
perpendicularly to the superficies wherein are the lines GH and GK. But the
superficies wherein are the lines GH and GK, is that superficies wherein are
the lines DE and OF: wherefore the line BG is erected perpendicularly to the
superficies wherein are the lines DE and OF. Wherefore the line BG is erected
perpendicularly to the superficies wherein are the lines DE and OF, and to the
superficies wherein are the lines AB and BC. But if one and the self same
right line be erected perpendicularly to plain superficieces, those
superficieces are (by the 14. of the eleventh) parallels the one to the other.
Wherefore the superficies wherein are the lines AB and BC is a par^llel to the
superficies wherein are the lines DE and OF. If therefore two right lines
touching the one the other be parallels to two other right lines touching also
the one the other, and not being in the self same plain superficies with the
two first, the plain superficieces extended by those right lines are also
parallels the one to the other which was required to be demonstrated.

By this figure here put, ye may more clearly see both the former 15.
Proposition and also the demonstration thereof: if ye erecte perpendicularly
unto the ground superficies, the three superficieces ABC, KHE, and LHBM, and so
compare it with the demonstration.

A Corollary added by Flussas.
Unto a plain superficies being given, to draw by a point given without it, a
parallel plain superfi^ie^. Suppose as in the former description that the
superficies given be ABC, and let the point given without it be G. Now then by
the point G draw (by the 31. of the first) unto the lines AB and BC parallel
lines GH and HK. And the superficies extended by the lines GH and GK shall be
parallel unto the superficies ABC, by this 15. Proposition.

The 14. Theoreme. The 16. Proposition. If two parallel plain superficieces be
cut by some one plain superficies: their common sections are parallel lines.
SVppose that these two plain superficieces AB and CD be cut by this plain
superficies EFGH, and let their common sections be the right lines OF and GH.
Then I say that the line OF is a parallel to the line GH. For if not, then the
lines OF and GH being produced, shall at the length meet together either on
the side that the points FH, are, or on the side that the points E, G are.
First let them be produced on that side that the points F, H are, and let them
mete in the point K. And forasmuch as the line EFK is in the superficies AB,
therefore all the points which are in the line OF are in the superficies AB (by
the first of this book) But one of the points which are in the right line EFK
is the point K, Demonstration leading to an absurditie^
therefore the point K is in the superficies AB. And by the same reason also the
point K is in the superficies CD. Wherefore the two superficieces AB and CD
being produced do mete together, but by sup^ositio^ they mete not together, for
they are supposed to be parallels. Wherefore the right lines OF and GH produced
shall not meet together on that side that the points F, H are. In like sort
also may we prove that the right lines OF and GH produced meet not together on
that side that the points E, G are. But right lines which being produced on no
side mete together, are parallels (by the last definicion of the first).
Wherefore the line OF is a parallel to the line GH. If therefore two parallel
plain superficieces be cut by some one plain superficies their common
sections are parallel lines: which was required to be proved.

This figure here set more plainl^ (...) demonstration, if ye erect
perpendicu^^^ (...) superficies the three superficieces A^ (...) and so compare
it with the demonstr^ (...)

A Corollary added by Flussas.
If two plain superficieces be parallels to one and the self same plain
(...) also be parallels the one to the other, or they shall make one and the
self same plain sup(...)

For if the plain superficieces DG and GH being parallels to one and the self
same superficies, namely, to AB be not also parallels the one to the other,
then being produced they shall concur (by the converse of the sixth definition
of the eleventh) Let them concur in the right line GE. Then I say that the
superficieces GD and GH are in one and the self same plain superficies. Draw
in the plain superficies AB a right line at all adventures AC. And by that
right line and the point E extend a plain superficies, cutting the two
superficieces DG and GH by the right lines ED and EI. Wherefore the right lines
AC and DE, also AC and EI are parallels by this proposition. But the lines DE
and EI forasmuch as they concur in the point E are not parallels the one to
the other. Wherefore the right lines DE and EI make directly one right line (by
that which is added after the 30. propositon of the first.) And therefore the
plain superficieces DG and GH are in one and the self same plain
superficies. For i^ ^hey be not, then part of the right line DI, namely, the
part DE is in the plain superficies DG, and an other part thereof, namely, EI
is on high in an other superficies GH, which by the first of the eleue^th i^
impossible. Wherefore the superficieces DG and GH are in one and the self same
plain superficies. But i^ the superficieces DG and GH never concur, then are
they parallels by the 6. definition of the ^leuenth.

In this figure here set, ye may more plainly see the form^r demonstration, if
ye eleuate to the ground super^icieces ACDI, the three super^icieces AB, DG,
and GI, and ^o compare it with the demonstration.

The 15. Theoreme. The 17. Proposition. I^ two right lines be cut by plain
superficieces being parallels: the parts o^ the lines divided shall be
proportional.
In t^is ^rono^^^o^^^ must vnd^rs^and the prop^rtio^^ll ^artes or s^^^ions to
be th^se which are c^ntai^ed (...) the parallel super^^cies.

Construction.

Dem^nstration.


S^ppose that these two right lines AB and CD be divided by these plain
superfi^i^ces being parallels, namely, GH, KL, MN in the points A, E, B, C, F,
D. The^ I say that as the right line AE is to the right line EB, so is the
right line CF to the right line FD. Draw these right lines AC, BD and AD. And
let the line AD and the super^icies KL concur in the point X. And draw a
right line from the point E to the point X and an other from the point X to the
point F. And forasmuch as these two parallel superficieces KL and MN are cut by
the super^icies EBDX, ther^ore their common sections which are the lines EX and
BD, are (by the 16. of the eleventh) parallels the one to the other. And by the
same reason also ^orasmuch as the two parallel superficies GH and KL be cut by
the super^icies AXFC, their common sections AC and XF are (by the 16. of the
eleventh) parallels. And ^orasmuch as to one of the sides of the triangle ABD^
namely, to the side BD is drawn a parallel line EX, therefore (by the 2. of the
sixth) proportionally as the line AE is to the line EB, so is the line AX to the
line XD. Again forasmuch as to one of the sides of the triangle ADC, namely,
to the side AC is drawn a parallel line XF, therefore by the 2. of the sixth,
proportionally as the line AX is to the line XD, so is the line CF to the line
FD. And it was proved that as the line AX is to the line XD, so is the line AE
to the line EB, therefore also (by the 11. of the fifth) as the line AE is to
the line EB, so is the line CF to the line FD. If therefore two right lines ^e
divided by plain super^icieces being parallels, the parts of the lines divided
shall be proportional: which was required to be demonstrated.

In this figure it is more easy to see the former demonstration, if ye erect
perpendicularly unto the ground superficies ACBD, the three superficieces, GH,
KL, and MN, or if ye so ^r^ct them that they be equedistant one to the other.

The 16. Theoreme. The 18. Proposition. If a right line be erected
perpe^dicularly to a plain superficies: all the superficieces extended by that
right line, are erected perpendicularly to the self same plain superficies.
SVppose that a right line AB be erected perpendicularly to a ground
superficies. The^ I say, that all the superficieces passing by the line AB, are
erected perpendicularly to the ground superficies. Extend a superficies by the
line AB, and let the same be ED, and let the common section of the plain
superficies and of the ground superficies be the right line CE. And take in the
line CE a point at all adventures, Construction.
and let the same be F: and (by the 11. of the first) from the point F draw
unto the line CE a perpendicular line in the superficies DE, and let the same
be FG. And forasmuch as the line AB is erected perpendicularly to the ground
superficies, therefore (by the 2. definition of the eleventh) the line AB is
erected perpendicularly to all the right lines that are in the ground plain
superficies, Demonstration.
and which touch it. Wherefore it is erected perpendicularly to the line CE.
Wherefore the angle ABE is a right angle. And the angle GFB is also a right
angle (by construction). Wherefore (by the ^8. of the first) the line AB is a
parallel to the line FG. But the line AB is erected perpendicularly to the
ground superficies: wherefore (by the 8. of the eleventh) the line FG is also
erected perpendicularly to the ground superficies. And forasmuch as (by the 3.
definition of the eleventh) a plain superficies is then erected
perpendicularly to a plain superficies, when all the right lines drawn in one
of the plain superficieces unto the common section of those two plain
superficieces making therewith right angles, do also make right angles with the
other plain superficies and it is proved that the line FG drawn in one of the
plain superficieces, namely, in DE, perpendicularly to the common section of
the plain superficieces, namely, to the line CE, is erected perpendicularly to
the ground superficies: wherefore the plain superficies DE is erected
perpendicularly to the ground superficies. In like sort also may we prove, that
all the plain superficieces which pass by the line AB, are erected
perpendicularly to the ground superficies. If therefore a right line be erected
perpendicularly to a plain superficies all the superficieces passing by the
right line, are erected perpendicularly to the self same plain superficies:
which was required to be demonstrated.

In this figure here set ye may erect perpe^dicularly at your pleasure the
superficies wherein are drawn the lines DC, GF, AB, and HE, to the ground
superficies wherein is drawn the line CFBE, and so plainly compare it with the
demonstration before put.

The 17. Theoreme. The 19. Proposition. If two plain superficieces cutting the
one the other be erected perpendicularly to any plain superficies: their
common section is also erected perpendicularly to the self same plain
superficies.
SVppose that these two plain super^icieces AB and BC cutting the one the
other be erected p^rp^ndicularly to a ground superficies, and let their common
section be the line BD. Then I say, that the line BD is erected perpendicularly
to the ground super^icies. Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
For if not, then (by the 11. of the first) from the point D draw in the
superficies AB unto the right line DA a perpendicular line DE. And in the
superficies CB draw unto the line DC a perpendicular line DF. And forasmuch as
the superficies AB is erected perpendicularly to the ground superficies, and in
the plain superficies AB unto the common section of the plain superficies and
of the ground superficies, namely, to the line DA is erected a perpendicular
line DE, therefore (by the converse of the 3. de^inition of this book) the
line DE is erected perpendicularly to the ground super^icies. And in like sort
may we prove, that the line DF is erected perpendicularly to the ground
superficies. Wherefore from one and the self same point, namely, from D, are
erected perpendicularly to the ground superficies two right lines both on one
and the self same side: which is (by the 15. of the eleventh) impossible.
Wherefore from the point D can not be erected perpendicularly to the ground
superficies any other right lines besides BD, which is the common section of
the two superficieces AB and BC. If therefore two plain super^icieces cutting
the one the other be erected perpendicularly to any plain super^icies, their
common section is also erected perpendicularly to the self same plain
super^icies: which was required to be proved.

Here have I set an other figure which will more plainly show unto you the
former demonstration, if ye erecte perpendicularly to the ground superficies AC
the two superficieces AB and BC which cut the one the other in the line BD.

The 18. Theoreme. The 20. ^roposition. If a solid angle be contained under
three plain superficial angles: every two of those three angles, which two so
ever be taken, are greater then the third.
SVppose that the solid angle A be contained under three plain superficial
angles, that is, under BAC, CAD, and DAB. Then I say that two of these
superficial angles how so ever they be taken, are greater then the third. If
the angles BAC, CAD, and DAB be equal the one to the other, then is it
manifest that two of them which two so ever be taken are greater then the
third. But if not, let the angle BAC be the greater of the three angles. And
unto the right line AB and from the point A make in the plain superficies BAC
unto the angle DAB an equal angle BAE. And (by the 2. of the first) make the
line AE equal to the line AD. Now a right line BEC drawn by the point E,
shall cut the right lines AB and AC in the points B and C: draw a right line
from D to B, and an other from D to C. And forasmuch as the line DA is equal
to the line AE, Demonstration.
and the line AB is common to the^ both, therefore these two lines DA and AB
are equal to these two lines AB and AE and the angle DAB is equal to the
angle BAE. Wherefore (by the 4. of the first) the base DB is equal to the base
BE. And forasmuch as these two lines DB and DC are greater then the line BC, of
which the line DB is proved to be equal to the line BE. Wherefore the residue,
namely, the line DC is greater then the residue, namely, then the line EC. And
forasmuch as the line DA is equal to the line AE, and the line AC is common to
them both, and the base DC is greater then the base EC, therefore the angle DAC
is greater then the angle EAC. And it is proved that the angle DAB is equal to
the angle BAE: wherefore the angles DAB and DAC are greater then the angle BAC.
If therefore a solid angle be contained under three plain superficial angles
every two of those three angles, which two so ever be taken are greater then
the third: which was required to be proved.

In this figure ye may plainly behold the former demonstration, if ye eleuate
the three triangles ABD, A^C and ACD in such ^or^that they may all meet
together in the point A.

The 19. Theoreme. The 21. Proposition. Every solid angle is comprehended
under plain angles less then four right angles.
SVppose that A be a solid angle contained under these superficial angles
BAC, DAC and DAB. Then I say that the angles BAC, DAC and DAB are less then
four right angles. Construction
Take in every one of these right lines ACAB and AD a point at all adventures
and let the same be B, C, D. And draw these right lines BC, CD and DB.
Demonstra^ion.
And forasmuch as the angle B is a solid angle, for it is contained under
three superficial angles, that is, under CBA, ABD and CBD, therefore (by the
20. of the eleventh) two of them which two so ever be taken are greater then
the third. Wherefore the angles CBA and ABD are greater then the angle CBD: and
by the same reason the angles BCA and ACD are greater then the angle BCD^ and
moreover the angles CDA and ADB are greater then the angle CDB. Wherefore these
six angles CBA, ABD, BCA, ACD, CDA, and ADB are greater the^ these three
angles, namely, CBD, BCD, and CDB. But the three angles CBD, BDC, and BCD are
equal to two right angles. Wherefore the six angles CBA, ABD, BCA, ACD, CDA,
and ADB are greater the^ two right angles. And forasmuch as in every one of
these triangles ABC, and ABD and ACD three angles are equal two right angles
(by the 32. of the first). Wherefore the nine angles of the three triangles,
that is, the angles CBA, ACB, BAC, ACD, DAC, CDA, ADB, DBA and BAD are equal
to six right angles. Of which angles the six angles ABC, BCA, ACD, CDA, ADB
and DBA are greater then two right angles. Wherefore the angles remaining,
namely, the angles BAC, CAD and DAB which contain the solid angle are less
then sower right angles. Wherefore every solid angle is comprehended under
plain angles less then four right angles: which was required to be proved.

If ye will more fully see this demonstration compare it with the figure which
I put for the better sight of the demonstration of the proposition next going
before. Only here is not required the draught of the line AE.

Although this demonstration of Euclide be here put for solid angles contained
under three superficial angles, yet after the like manner may you proceed if
the solid angle be contained under superficial angles how many so ever. As
for example if it be contained under four superficial angles, if ye follow
the former construction, the base will be a quadrangled figure, whose four
angles are equal to four right angles: but the 8. angles at the bases of the
4. triangles set upon this quadrangled figure may by the 20. proposition of
this book be proved to be greater then those 4. angles of the quadrangled
figure: As we saw by the discourse of the former demonstration. Wherefore
those 8. angles are greater then four right angles: but the 12. angles of
those four triangles are equal to 8. right angles. Wherefore the four angles
remaining at the top which make the solid angle are less then four right
angles. And observing this course ye may proceed infinitely.

The 20. Theoreme. The 22. Proposition. If there be three superficial plain
angles of which two how soever they be taken, be greater then the third, and if
the right lines also which contain those angles be equal: then of the lines
coupling those equal right lines together, it is possible to make a triangle.
SVppose that there be three superficial angles ABC, DEF, and GHK, of which let
two, which two soever be taken, be greater then the third, that is, let the
angles ABC, and DEF be greater then the angle GHK, and let the angles DEF and
GHK be greater then the angle ABC: and moreover let the angles GHK and ABC be
greater then the angle DEF. And let the right lines AB, BC, DE, OF GH, and HK
be equal the one to the other, and draw a right line from the point A to the
point C, and an other from the point D to the point F, and moreover an other
from the point G to the point K. Two cases in this proposition.
Then I say that it is possible of three right lines equal to the lines AC, DF
and GK, to make a triangle, that is, that two of the right lines AC, DF, and
GK, which two soever be taken, are greater then the third. Now if the angles
ABC, DEF, The first case.
and GHK be equal the one to the other, it is manifest that these right lines
AC, DF, and GK being also (by the 4. of the first) equal the one to the other,
it is possible of three right lines equal to the lines AC, DF, and GK to make
a triangle. Second case.
But if they be not equal, let them be unequal. And (by the 23. of the first)
unto the right line HK, Constructi^^^
and at the point in it H, make unto the angle ABC an equal angle KHL. And by
the ^. of the first) to one of the lines AB, BG, DE, OF, GH, Demonstration.
or HK make the line HL equal, and draw these right lines KL and GL. And
forasmuch as these two lines AB and DC, are equal to these two lines KH and
HL, and the angle B is equal to the angle KHL, ther^^^^ (by the 4. of the
first) the base AC is equal to the base KL. And forasmuch as the angles ABC,
and GHK are greater then the angle DEF, but the angle GHL is equal to the
angles ABC, and GHK^ therefore the angle GHL is greater then the angle DEF. And
forasmuch as these two lines GH and HL are equal to these two lines DE and OF,
and the angle GHL is grea^er then the angle DEF, therefore (by the 25. of the
first) the base GD is greater the^ the base DF. But the lines GK and KL are
greater then the line GL. Wherefore then lines GK and KL are much greater then
the line DF. But the line KL is equal to the line AC. Wherefore the lines AC
and GK are greater then the line DF. In like sort also may we pro^^^ tha^ the
lines AC and DF are greater then the line GK, and that the lines GK and DF are
greater then the line AC. Wherefore it is possible to make a triangle of three
lines equal to the lines AC, DF, and GK: which was required to be demonstrated.

An other demonstration.
Suppose that the three superficial angles be ABC, DEF, and GHK, of which
angles, An other demonstration.
two howsoever they be taken, are greater then the third. And let them be
contained under these equal right lines AB, BC, DE, OF, GH, HK, which equal
right lines let th^se lines AC, DF, and GK join together. Then I say that it
is possible of three right lines equal to the lines AC, DF, and GK to make a
triangle, which again is as much to say, as that two of those lines which two
soever be taken, are greater then the third. Now again if the angles B, E, H,
be equal, the lines also AC DF, and GK are equal, and so two of them shall be
greater then the third. But if not, let the angles B, E, H, be unequal, and
let the angle B be greater then ^ither of the angles E and H. Therefore (by the
24. of the first) the right line AC is greater then either of the lines DF and
GK. And it is manifest that the line AC with either of the lines DF or GK is
greater then the third. I say also that the lines DF and GK are greater then
the line AC. Unto the right line AB, Construction.
and to the point in it B, make (by the 22. of the first) unto the angle GHK an
equal angle AB L, and unto one of the lines AB, BC, DE, OF, GH or HK, make by
the 2. of the first) an equal line BL. And draw a right line from the point A
to ye point L, and an other from the point L to the point C. Demonstra^^^n.
And forasmuch as these two lines AB and BL are equal to these two lines GH and
HK the one to the other, and they contain equal angles: therefore (by the 4. of
the first) the base AL is equal to the base GK. And forasmuch as the angles E
and H be greater then the angle ABC, of which the angle GHK is equal to the
angle ABL, therefore the angle remaining, namely, the angle E is greater then
the angle LBC. And forasmuch as these two lines LB and BC, are equal to these
two lines DE and OF the one to the other, and the angle DEF is greater then the
angle LBC, therefore (by the 25. of the first) the base DF is greater then the
base LC: and it is proved that the line GK is equal to the line AL. Wherefore
the lines DF and GK are greater then the lin^s AL and LC. B^t the li^es AL and
LC are greater then the line AC. Wherefore the lines DF and GK are much greater
the^ the line AC. Wherefore two of these right lines AC, DF and GK which two
soever be taken are greater then the third. Wherefore it is possible of three
right lines equal to the lines AC, DF and GK to make a triangle: which was
required to be demonstrated.

The 3. Problem. The 23. Proposition. Of three plain superficial angles, two
of which how soever they be taken, are greater then the third, to make a solid
angle: Now it is necessary that those three superficial angles be less then
four right angles.
SVppose that the superficial angles given be ABC, DEF, GHK: of which let two
how soever they be taken, be greater then the third: and moreover, let those
three angles be l^sse then four right angles. It is required of three
superficial angles equal to the angles ABC, DEF, and GHK, to make a solid or
bodily angle. Let the lines AB, BC, DE, OF, GH, and HK, be made equal:
Construction.
and draw a right line from the point A to the point C, and an other from the
point D to the point F, and an other from the point G to the point K. Now (by
the 22. of the eleventh) it is possible of three right lines equal to the
right lines AC, DF, and GK, to make a triangle. Make such a triangle, and let
the same be LMN, so that let the line AC be equal to the line LM, and the line
DF to the line MN, and the line GK to the line LN. And (by the 5. of the
fourth) about the triangle LMN describe a circle LMN, and take (by the 1. of
the third) the center of the same circle, Three cases in this proposition.

The first case.


which center shall either be within the triangle LMN, or in one of the sides
thereof, or without it. First let it be within the triangle, and let the same be
the point X, and draw these right lines LX, MX, and NX. Now I say, that the
line AB is greater then the line LX. A necessary thing to be proved before he
p^oceede any ^arther in the construction of the Problem^.
For if not, then the line AB is either equal to the line LX, or else it is
less then it. First let it be equal. And forasmuch as the line AB is equal
to the line LX, but the line AB is equal to the line BC, therefore the line LX
is equal to the line BC: and unto the line LX the line XM is (by the 15.
definition of the first) equal: wherefore these two lines AB and BC, are
equal to these two lines LX and XM the one to the other: and the base AC is
supposed to be equal to the base LM. Wherefore (by the 8. of the first) the
angle ABC is equal to the angle LXM. And by the same reason also the angle DEF
is equal to the angle MXN, and moreover the angle GHK to the angle NXL.
Wherefore these three angles ABC, DEF, and GHK, are equal to these three
angles LXM, MXN, and NXL. But the three angles LXM, MXN, and NXL, are equal to
four right angles (as it is manifest to see by the 13. of the first, if any
one of these lines MX, LX, or NX, be extended on the side that the point X is).
Wherefore the three angles ABC, DEF, and GHK, are also equal to four right
angles. But they are supposed to be less then four right angles: which is
impossible. Wherefore the line AB is not equal to the line LX. I say also that
the line AB is not less then the line LX. For if it be possible, let it be
less: and (by the 2. of the first) unto the line AB put an equal line XO: and
to the line BC put an equal line XP, and draw a right line from the point O to
the point P. And forasmuch as the line AB is equal to the line BC, therefore
also the line XO is equal to the line XP. Wherefore the residue OL is equal
to the residue MP. Wherefore (by the 2. of the sixth) the line LM is a parallel
to the line OP^ and the triangle LMX is equiangle to the triangle OPX.
Wherefore as the line XL is to the line LM, so is the line XO to the line OP.
Wherefore alternately (by the 16. of the fifth) as the line LX is to the line
XO, so is the line LM to the line OP. But the line LX is greater then the line
XO. Wherefore also the line LM is greater then the line OP. But the line LM is
put to be equal to the line AC: wherefore also the line AC is greater then the
line OP. Now forasmuch as these two right lines AB and BC are equal to these
two right lines OX and XP, and the base AC is greater then the base OP,
therefore (by the 25. of the first) the angle ABC is greater then the angle
OXP. In like sort also may we prove, that the angle DEF is greater then the
angle MXN, and that the angle GHK is greater then the angle NXL. Wherefore the
three angles ABC, DEF, and GHK, are greater then the three angles LXM, MXN, and
NXL. But the angles ABC, DEF, and GHK, are supposed to be less then four
right angles: wherefore much more are the angles LXM, MXN, and NXL less then
four right angles. But they are also equal to four right angles: which is
impossible. Wherefore the line AB is not less then the line LX: and it is also
proved that it is not equal unto it. Wherefore the line AB is greater then the
line LX.

Now from the point X raise up unto the plain superficies of the circle LMN a
perpendicular line XR (by the 12. of the eleventh). And unto that which the
square of the line AB excedeth the square of the line XL Which how to find out
is taught at the end of this demonstration, and also was taught in the as^umpt
put before the 14. proposition of the tenth book.
let the square of the line XR be equal. And draw a right line from the point
R to the point L, and an other from the point R to the point M, and an other
from the point R to the point N. And forasmuch as the line RX is erected
perpendicularly to the plain superficies of the circle LMN, therefore (by
conversion of the second definition of the eleventh) the line RX is erected
perpendicularly to every one of these lines LX, MX, and NX. Demonstration of
the first case.
And forasmuch as the line LX is equal to the line XM, and the line XR i^
common to them both, and is also erected perpendicularly to them both,
therefore (by the 4. of the first) the base RL is equal to the base RM. And by
the same reason also the line RN is equal to either of these lines RL and RM.
Wherefore these three lines RL, RM, and RN, are equal the one to the other.
And forasmuch as unto that which the square of the line AB excedeth the square
of the line LX, the square of the line RX is supposed to be equal, therefore
the square of the line AB is equal to the squares of the lines LX and RX. But
unto the squares of the lines LX and XR, the square of the line LR is (by the
47. of the first) equal, for the angle LXR is a right angle. Wherefore the
square of the line AB is equal to the square of the line RL. Wherefore also
the line AB is equal to the line RL. But unto the line AB is equal every one
of these lines BC, DE, OF, GH, and HK, and unto the line RL is equal either of
these lines RM and RN. Wherefore every one of these lines AB, BC, DE, OF, GH,
and HK, is equal to every one of these lines RL, RM, and RN. And forasmuch as
these two lines RL and RM are equal to these two lines AB and BC, and the base
LM is supposed to be equal to the base AC, therefore (by the 8. of the first)
the angle LRM is equal to the angle ABC. And by the same reason also the MRN
is equal to the angle DEF, and the angle LRN to the angle GHK. Wherefore of
three superficial angles LRM, MRN, and LRN, which are equal to three
superficial angles given, namely, to the angles ABC, DEF, and GHK, is made a
solid angle R, comprehended under the superficial angles LRM, MRN, and LRN:
which was required to be done.

Second case.
But now let the center of the circle be in one of the sides of the triangle,
let it be in the side MN, and let the center be X. And draw a right line from
the point L to the point X. I say again, that the line AB is greater then the
line LX. For if not, then AB is either equal to LX, or else it is less then
it. First let it be equal. Now the^ these two lines AB and BC, that is, DE and
OF are equal to these two lines MX and XL, that is, to the line MN. But the
line MN is supposed to be equal to the line DF. Wherefore also the lines DE
and OF are equal to the line DF: which (by the 20. of the first) is
impossible. Wherefore the line AB is not equal to the line LX. In like sort
also may we prove, that it is not less. Wherefore the line AB is greater then
the line LX. And now if as before unto the plain superficies of the circle be
erected from the point X a perpendicular line RX whose square let be equal
unto that which the square of the line AB excedeth the square of the line LX,
and if the rest of the construction and demonstration be observed in this that
was in the forme^ case, then shall the Problem be finished.

But now let the center of the circle be without the triangle LMN, and let it
be in the point X. And draw these right lines LX, MX, and NX. Third case.
I say that in this case also the line AB is greater then the line LX. For if
not, then is it either equal or less. First let it be equal. Wherefore these
two lines AB and BC are equal to these two lines MX and XL the one to the
other, and the base AC is equal to the base ML. Wherefore (by the 8. of the
first) the angle ABC is equal to the angle MXL: and by the same reason also
the angle GHK is equal to the angle LXN. Wherefore the whole angle MXN is
equal to these two angles ABC and GHK. But the angles ABC and GHK are greater
then the angle DEF. Wherefore the angle MXN is greater then the angle DEF. And
forasmuch as these two lines DE and OF are equal to these two lines MX and XN,
and the base DF is equal to the base MN, therefore (by the 8. of the first)
the angle MXN is equal to the angle DEF. And it is proved that it is also
greater: which is impossible. Wherefore the line AB is not equal to the line
LX. In like sort also may we prove, that it is not less. Wherefore the line AB
is greater then the line LX. And again if unto the plain superficies of the
circle be erected perpendicularly from the point X a line XR, whose square is
equal to that which the square of the line AB exceeds the square of the line
LX, and the rest of the construction be done in this that was in the former
cases, then shall the Problem be finished.

I say moreover, that the line AB is not less then the line LX. An other
demo^stratio^ to prove that the line AB is not less the^ the line LX.
For if it be possibl^, let it be less. And unto the line AB, put (by the 2.
of the first) the line XO equal: and unto the line BC put the line XP equal:
And draw a right line from the point O to the point P. And forasmuch as the
line AB is equal to the line BC, therefore the line XO is equal to the line
XP. Wherefore the residue OL is equal to the residue MP. Wherefore (by the 2.
of the sixth) the line LM, is a parallel to the line PO. And the triangle LXM is
equiangle to the triangle PXO. Wherefore (by the 6. of the sixth) as the line LX
is to the line LM, so is the line XO to the line PO. Wherefore alternately (by
the 16. of the fifth) as the line LX is to the line XO, so is the line LM to the
line OP. But the line LX is greater then the line XO. Wherefore also the line
LM is greater then the line OP. But the line LM is equal to the line AC.
Wherefore also the line AC is greater then the line OP. Now forasmuch as these
two lines AB and BC are equal to these two lines OX and XP the one to the
other, and the base AC is greater then the base OP, therefore (by the 25. of
the first) the angle ABC is greater then the angle OXP. And in like sort if we
put the line XR equal to either of these lines XO or XP, and draw a right line
from the point O to the point R, we may prove that the angle GHK is greater
then the angle OXR. Unto the right line LX, and unto the point in it X, make
(by the 23. of the first) unto the angle ABC an equal angle LXS: and unto the
angle GHK make an equal angle LXT. And (by the second of the first) let either
of these lines SX, and XT, be equal to the line OX. And draw these lines OS,
OT, and ST. And forasmuch as these two lines AB and BC are equal to these two
lines OX and XS, and the angle ABC is equal to the angle OXS, therefore (by
the 4. of the first) the base AC, that is, LM, is equal to the base OS. And by
the same reason also the line LN is equal to the line OT. And forasmuch as
these two lines LM and LN are equal to these two lines SO and OT, and the
angle MLN is greater then the angle SOT, therefore (by the 25. of the first)
the base MN is greater then the base ST. But the line MN is equal to the line
DF. Wherefore the line DF is greater then the line ST. Now forasmuch as these
two lines DE and OF are equal to these two lines SX and XT, and the base DF is
greater then the base ST, therefore (by the 25. of the first) the angle DEF is
greater then the angle SXT. But the angle SXT is equal to the angles ABC and
GHK. Wher^fore also the angle DEF is greater then the angles ABC and GHK. But
it is also less: which is impossible.

This was before ta^ght in the tenth book in the assumpt put before the 14.
proposition.
But now let us declare how to find out the line XR, whose square shall be
equal ^o that which the square of the line AB exceeds the square of the line
LX. Take the two right lines AB and LX, and let AB be the greater, and upon AB
describe a semicircle ACB, and from the point A apply into the semicircle a
right line AC equal to the right line LX: and draw a right line from the point
C to the point B. And forasmuch as in the semicircle ACB is an angle ACB,
therefore (by the 31. of the third) the angle ACB is a right angle. Wherefore
(by the 47. of the first) the square of the line AB is equal to the squares of
the lines AC and CB: wherefore the square of the line AB is in power more then
the square of the line AC by the square of the line CB: but the line AC is
equal to the line LX, wherefore the square of the line AB is in power more
then the square of the line LX by the square of the line CB. If therefore unto
the line CB we make the line XR equal, then is the square of the line AB
greater then the square of the line LX by the square of the line XR: which was
required to be done.

In this figure may ye more fully s^^ the construction and demonstration of the
^^rst case of the former 23. Proposition, if ye erect perpendicularly the
triangle ^ RN, and unto it bend the triangle LMR, that the angles R of each may
join together in the point R. And so fully understanding this case, the other
cases will not be hard to conceive.

The 21. Theoreme. The 24. Proposition. If a solid or body be contained under
M. Dee (to avoid cauillation) adds to Euclides proposition this word six:
whom I have followed accordingly, and not Zamberts, in this.

This kind of body mentioned in the proposition is called a Parallelipipedo^
according to the di^finition before given thereof.


six parallel plain superficieces, the opposite plain superficieces of the
same body are equal and parallelogrammes.
SVppose that this solid body CDHG be contained under these 6. parallel plain
superficieces, namely, AC, GF, BG, CE, FB, and AE. Then I say that the opposite
superficieces of the same body, are equal and parallelogra^mes, it is to wete,
the two opposites AC and GF, and the two opposites BG and CE, and the two
opposites FB and AE to be equal, and al to be parallelogrammes. Demonstration
that the opposite sides are parallelogrammes.
For forasmuch as two parallel plain superficieces, that is, BG, and CE are
divided by the plain superficies AC, their common sections are (by the 16. of
the eleventh) parallels. Wherefore the line AB is a parallel to the line CD.
Again^ forasmuch as two parallel plain superficieces FB and AE are divided by
the plain superficies AC their common sections are by the same proposition,
parallels. Wherefore the line AD is a parallel to the line BC. And it is also
proved, that the line AB is a parallel to the line DC. Wherefore the superficies
AC is a parallelogramme. In like sort also may we prove, that every one of
these superficices CE, GF, BG, FB, and AE are parallelogrammes. Draw a right
line from the point A, to the point H, and an other from the point D to the
point F. Demonstration that the opposite superficies are equal.
And forasmuch as the line AB is proved a parallel to the line CD, and the line
BH to the line CF, therefore these two right lines AB and BH touching the one
the other, are parallels to these two right lines DC and CF touching also the
one the other, and not being in one and the self same plain superficies.
Wherefore (by the 10. of the eleventh) they comprehend equal angles. Wherefore
the angle ABH is equal to the angle DCF. And forasmuch as these two lines AB
and BH are AB is equal to DC, because the superficies AC is proved a
parallelogra^me, and by the same reason, is BH equal to CF, because the
superficies FB is proved a parallelogramme: therefore the 34. of the first is
our proof.
equal to these two lines DC and CF, and the angle ABH is proved equal to the
angle DCF^ therefore (by the 4. of the first) the base AH is equal to the base
DF, and the triangle ABH is equal to the triangle DCF. And forasmuch as (by
the 41. of the first) the parallelogramme BG is double to the triangle ABH, and
the parallelogramme CE is also double to the triangle DCF, therefore the
parallelogramme BG is equal to the parallelogramme CE. In like sort also may
we prove that the parallelogramme AC is equal to the parallelogramme GF, and
the parallelograme AE to the parallelogramme FB. If therefore a solid or body
be contained under six parallel plain superficieces, the opposite plain
superficieces of the same body are equal and parallelogrammes which was
required to be demonstrated.

I have for the better help of young beginners, described here an other figure
whose form if it be described upon pasted paper with the letters placed in the
same order that it is here, and then if ye cut finely these lines AG, DE and CF
not through the paper, and fold it accordingly, compare it with the
demonstration, and it will shake of all hardenes from it.

The 22. Theoreme. The 25. Proposition. If a Parallelipipedo^ be cut of a
plain superficies being a parallel to the two opposite plain superficieces of
the same body: then, as the base is to the base, so is the one solid to the
other solid.
SVppose that this solid ABCD being contained under parallel plain
superficieces (and therefore called a parallelipipedo^) be cut of the plain
superficies VE, being a parallel to the two opposite superficieces of the same
body, namely, to the superfici^ces AR and DH. The^ I say that as the base AEFW
is to the base EHCF, so is the solid ABFV to the solid EGGD. Construction.
Exte^d the line AH on either side, and put unto ye line EH as many equal lines
as you will, namely, HM, and MN: and likewise unto the line AE, put as many
equal lines as you will, namely, AK and KL, and make perfect these
parallelogra^mes LO, KW, HZ, and MS, and likewise make perfect these solides or
bodies LP, KR, DM, and MT. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as these right lines, LK, KA, and AE are equal the one to the
other, therefore these parallelogrammes LO, KW, and AF, are also (by the first
of the sixth) equal the one to the other: and so also (by the same) are these
parallelogrammes KX, KB, and AG equal the one to the other. And likewise (by
the 24. of the eleventh) are the parallelogrammes LY, KP, and AR, equal, for
they are opposite the one to the other. And by the same reason also the
parallelogrammes EC, HZ, and MS are equal the one to the other, and the
parallelogrammes HG, HI, and IN are equal the one to the other. And moreuer the
parallelogrammes DH, MQ, and NT are (by the 24. of the eleventh) equal the one
to the other, for they are opposite: wherefore three plain superficies of the
solides LP, RK, and AV are equal to three plain superficies: but unto each of
these three superficieces are equal the three opposite superficieces (by the
24. of the eleue^th) Wherefore these three solides or bodies LP, KR, and AV, are
equal the one to the other, by the 8. definition of the eleue^th. And by the
same reason also the three solides, ED, DM and MT are equal the one to the
other. Wherefore how multiple x the base LF is, to the base AF, so multiplex is
the solid LV to the solid AV. And by the same reason also how multiplex the
base NF is to the base FH, so multiplex is the solid NV to the solid HV: so
that if the base LF be equal to the base NF, the solid also LV shall be
equal to the solid UN, and if the base LF exceed the base NF, the solid
also LV shall exceed the solid UN, and if the base LF be less then the base
NF, the solid also LV shall be less then the solid UN (by the 1. and 14. of
the fifth.) Now then there are four magnitudes, namely, the two bases AF and
FH, and the two solides or bodies AV and VH, of which are taken their
equemultiplices, namely, the equemultiplices of the base AF, and of the solid
AV, or the base LF, and the solid LV, and the equemultiplices of the base HF,
and of the solid HV are the base NF, and the solid NV. And it is proved that
if the base LF excede the base NF, the solid also LV excedeth the solid NV,
and if it be equal, it is equal, and if it be less, it is less. Wherefore (by
the 6. definition of the fifth) as the base AF is to the base FH, so is the
solid AV to the solid HV. If therefore a parallelipipedon be cut of a plain
superficies being a parallel to the two opposite plain superficieces of the
same body, then, as the base is to the base, so is the one solid to the other
solid: which was required to be proved.

I have for the better sight of the co^structio^ and demo^stration of the
former 25. proposition, here set another figure, whose form if ye describe
upon pasted paper, and finely cut the three lines XI, BS, and TY, not through
the paper but half way, and then fold it accordingly, and compare it with the
construction and demo^stration, you shall see that it will give great light
thereunto.

Here Flussas adds three Corollaries.

First Corollary.
If a Prisme be cut of a plain superficies parallel to the opposite
superficieces, F^^^^ Corollary.
the se^^ions of the Prisme shall be the one to the other in that proportion,
that the sections of the base are the one to the other.

For the sections of the bases, which bases (by the 11. definition of this
book) are parallelogrammes, shall likewise be parallelogrammes, by the 16. of
this book (when as the superficies which cutteth is parallelel to the opposite
super^icieces) and shall also be equiangle. Wherefore if unto the bases (by
producing the right lines) be added like and equal bases, as was before showed
in a parallelipipedon, of those sections shall be made as many like Prismes as ye
will. And so by the same reason, namely, by the common excess, equality, or
want of the multiplices of the bases and of the sections by the 5. definition
of the fifth may be proved, that every section of the Prisme multiplied by any
multiplycation whatsoever, shall have to any other section that proportion that
the sections of the bases have.

Second Corollary.
Solides whose two opposite superficie^es are poligonon figures like equal and
parallels, the other superficies, which of necessity are parallelogrammes,
Second Corolry.

These solides which he speaks of in this Corollary are of some called sid^d
column^s.


being cut of a plain superficies parallel to the two opposite superficies:
the sections of the base are the one to the other, as the sections of the
solid are the one to the other.

Which thing is manifest, for such solides are divided into Prismes, which have
one common side, namely, the axe or right line, which is drawn by the centers
of the opposite bases. Wherefore how many pa^allelogra^mes or bases are set
upon the opposite poligonon figures, of so many Prismes shall the whole solid
be composed. For those poligonon figures are divided into so many like
triangles by the 20. of the sixth, which describe Prismes. Which Prismes being
cut by a superficies parallel to the opposite superficieces, the sectio^s of
the bases shall (by the former Corollary) be proportional with the sectio^s of
the Prismes. Wherefore by the ^^ of the fifth, as the sections of the one are
the one to the other, so are the sections of the whole the one to the other.

Of these solides there are infinite kinds, according to the variety of the
opposite and parallel poligonon figures, which poligonon figures do alter the
angles of the parallelogrammes set upon them according to the diversity o^
their situation. But this is no let at all to this corollary, for that which we
have proved will always follow. When as the superficieces which are set upon
the opposite like and equal poligonon and parallel superficieces are always
parallelogrammes.

Third Corollary.
Third Corollary.
The foresaid solides ^omposed of Prismes, being cut by a plain superficies
parallel to the opposit^ superficieces, are the one to the other as the heads
or higher parts cut are.

For it is proved that they are the one to the other as the bases are. Which
bases forasmuch as they are par^llelogrammes, are the one to the other as the
right lines are upon which they are set by, the first of the sixth, which right
lines are the heddes or higher parts of the Prismes.

The 4. Problem. The 26. Proposition. Upon a right line given, and at a point
in it given, to make a solid angle equal to a solid angle given.
SVppose that the right line given be AB, and let the point in it given be A,
and let the solid or bodily angle given be D being contained under these
superficial angles EDC, EDF and FDC. It is required upon the right line AB,
and at the point in it given A to make a solid angle equal to the solid
angle D. Take in the line DF a point at all adventures, and let the same be F.
Co^struc^ion.
And (by the 11. of the eleventh) from the point F. Draw unto the superficies
wherein are the lines ED and DC a perpendicular line FG, and let it fall upon
the plain superficies in the point G, and draw a right line from the point D
to the point G. And (by the 23. of the first) unto the line AB, and at the
point A make unto the angle EDC an equal angle BAL, and unto the angle EDG put
the angle BAK equal: and by the 2. of the first, put the line AK equal to the
line DG, and (by the 12. of the eleventh) from the point K raise up unto the
plain superficies BAL a perpendicular line KH, and put the line KH equal to
the line GF, and draw a right line from the point H to the point A. Now I say
that the so^ide angle A contained under the superficial angles BAL, BAH, and
HAL is equal to the solid angle D contained under the superficial angles
EDCEDF, and FD^. Le^ the the li^es AB and DE be put equal, and draw these
right lines. HB, BK, FE, and EG. And forasmuch as the line FG is erected
perpendicularly to the ground superficies, Demonstra^ion.
therefore by the 2. definition of the eleventh, the lin^ FG is also erected
perpendicularly to all the right lines that are in the ground superficies and
touch it. Wherefore either of these angles FGD and FGE is a right angle, and by
the same reason also either of the angles HKA and HKB is a right angle. And
forasmuch as these two lines KA and AB are equal to these two lines GD and DE,
the one to the other, and they contain equal angles (by construction).
Wherefore (by the 4. of the first) the base KB is equal to the base EG, and the
line KH is equal to the line GF, and they co^prehe^d right angles. Wherefore
the line BH is equal to the line FE. Again, forasmuch as these two lines AK
and KH are equal to these two lines DG and GF, and they contain right angles.
Wherefore ye base AH is (by the 4. of the first) equal to the base DF. And the
line AB is equal to the line DE. Wherefore these two lines AB and AH are equal
to these two lines FD and DE, and the base BH is equal to the base FE.
Wherefore (by the 8. of the first) the angle BAH is equal to the angle EDF. And
by the same reason also the angle HKL is equal to the angle FGC. Wherefore if
we put these lines AL and DC equal, and draw these right lines KL, HL, GC, and
FC: forasmuch as the whole angle BAL is equal to the whole angle EDC, of which
the angle BAK is supposed to be equal to the angle EDG, therefore the angle
remaining, namely, KAL is equal to the angle remaining GDC. And forasmuch as
these two lines KA and AL are equal to these two lines GD and DC, and they
contain equal angles, therefore by the 4. of the first, the base KL is equal
to the base GC, and the line KH is equal to the line GF, wherefore these ^wo
lines LK and KH are equal to these two lines CG and GF, and they co^taine
right angles. Wherefore the base HL is (by the 4. of the first) equal to the
base FC. And forasmuch as these two lines HA and AL are equal to these two FD
and DC, and the base HL is equal to the base FC, therefore (by the 8. of the
first) the angle HAL is equal to the angle FDC, and by construction, the angle
BAL is equal to the angle EDC. Wherefore unto the right line given, and at the
point in it given, namely, A, is made a solid angle equal to the solid angle
given D: which was required to be done.

In these two (...) here put, you may in (...) clearly concern the ^^^^mer
construction and d^^monstratio^, if ye erect pe^^pendicularly unto the ground
superficies the triangles ALB and DCE, and eleuate the triangles ALH and DCF
that the lines LA and CD of them may exactly agree with the line^ LA and CD of
the ^riangles erec^ed^ For so ordering them, if ye compare the former
construction and demonstration with them, they will be playn^ unto you.

Although Euclides demo^stration be touching solid angles which are contained
only under three superficial angles, that is, whose bases are triangles: yet
by it may ye perform the Problem touching solid angles contained under
superficial angles how many soever, that is, having to their bases any kind
of Poligonon figures. For every Poligonon figure may by the 20. of the sixth, be
resolved into like tringles. And so also shall the solid angle be divided into
so many solid angles as there be triangles in the base. Unto every one of
which solid angles you may by this proposition describe (...) equal solid
angle upon a line given, and at a point in it given. And so at the length the
whole solid angle after this manner described shall be equal to the solid
angle given.

The 5. Theoreme. The 27. Proposition. Upon a right line given to describe a
parallelipipedon like and in like sort situate to a parallelipipedon given.
^Vppose that the right line given be AB, and let the parallelipipedon given be
CD. It is required upon the right line given AB to describe a parallelipipedon
like and in like sort situate to the parallelipipedon given, namely, to CD.
Constr^ction.
Unto the right line AB and at the point in it A describe (by the 26. of the
ele^enth (a solid angle equal to the solid angle C, and let it be contained
under these superficial angles BAH, HAK, and KAB, so that let the angle BAH be
equal to the angle ECF, and the angle BAK to the angle ECG, and moreover the
angle KAH to the angle GCF. And as the line EC is to the line CG, so let the AB
be to the line AK (by the 12. of the sixth) and as the line GC is to the line
CF, so let the KA be (...) the line AH. Wherefore of equality (by the 22. of
the fifth) as the line EC is to the line CF, so is the line BA to the line AH.
Demonstr^tion.
Make perfect the parallelogramme BH, and also the solid AL. Now for that as
the line EC is to the line CG, so is the line BA to the line AK, therefore the
sides which contain the equal angles, namely, the angles ECG and BAK are
proportional: wherefore (by the first definition of the sixth) the
parallelogramme GE is like to the parallelogramme KB. And by the same reason
the parallelogramme KH is like to the parallelogramme GF, and moreover the
parallelogramme FE to the parallelogramme HB^ Wherefore there are three
parallelogrammes of the solid CD like to the three parallelogrammes of the
solid AL. But the three other sides in each of these solides are equal and
like to their opposite sides. Wherefore the whole solid CD is like to the
whole solid AL. Wherefore upon the right line given AB is described the solid
AL contained under parallel plain superficieces like and in like sort situate
to the solid given CD contained also under parall^l plain superficieces:
which was required to be done.

This demonstration is not hard to conceive by the former figure as it is
described in a plain, if ye that imagination of parallelipipedons described in
a plain which we before taught in the diffinition of a cube. Howbeit I have
here for the more ease of such as are not yet acquainted with solides,
de^cribed two figures, whose forms first describe upon pasted paper with the
like letters noted in them, and then finely cut the three middle lines of each
figure, and so fold them accordingly, and that done compare them with the
construction and demonstration of this 27. proposition, and they will be very
easy to conceive.

The 23. Theoreme. The 28. Proposition. If a parallelipipedo^ be cut by a
plain superficies drawn by the diagonall lines of those plain superficieces
which are opposite: that solid is by this plain superficies cut into two
equal parts.
SVppose that the parallelipipedon AB be cut by the plain superficies CDEF
drawn by the diagonal lines of ye plain superficieces which are opposite,
namely, of the superficieces CF and DE. Then I say that the parallelipipedon AB
is cut into two equal parts by the superficies CDEF. For forasmuch as (by
the 34. of the first) the triangle CGF is equal to the triangle CBF,
Demonstration.
and the triangle ADE to the triangle DEH, and the parallelograme CA is equal
to the parallelogramme BE, for they are opposite, and the parallelogramme GE is
also equal to the parallelogramme CH, and the parallelogramme CE, is the
common section by supposition: Wherefore the prisme contained under the two
triangles CGF, and DAE, and under the three parallelogrammes GE, AC, and CE is
(by the 8. definition of the eleventh) equal to the prisme contained under the
two triangles CFB and DEH and under the three parallelogrammes CH, BE, and CE.
For they are contained under plain superficieces equal both in multitude and
in magnitude. Wherefore the whole parallelipipedon AB is cut into two equal
parts by the plain superficies CDEF: which was required to be demonstrated.

A diagonall line is a right line which in angular figures is drawn from one
angle and extended to his contrary angle as you see in the figure AB.

Describe for the better sight of this demonstration a figure upon pasted paper
like unto that which you described for the 24. proposition only altering the
letters: namely, in stead of the letter A put the letter F, and in stead of
the letter H the letter C: moreover in stead of the letter C put the letter H,
and the letter E for the letter D, and the letter A for the letter E, and
finally put the letter D for the letter F. And your figure thus ordered compare
it with the demonstration, only imagining a superficies to pass through the
body by the diagonall lines CF and DE.

The 24. Theoreme. The 29. Proposition. Parallelipipedons consisting upon one
and the self same base, and under one and the self same altitude, whose Look
at the end of the demonstration what is understood by standing lines.
standing lines are in the self same right lines, are equal the one to the
other.
SVppose that that these parallelipipedons CM and CN do consist upon one and
the self same base, namely AB, and let them be under one and the self same
altitude, whose standing lines, that is, the four sides of each solid which
fall upon the base, as the lines AF, CD, BH, LM of the solid CM, and the lines
CE, BK, AG, and LN of the solid CN, let be in the self same right lines or
parallel lines FN, DK. John Dee his figure.

By this figure it app^ar^th why ^uch Prismes were called ^^edges: of (...)
v^ry shape of a wedge, as is the solid DEFGAC. etc.


Then I say that the solid CM is equal to the solid CN. For forasmuch as
either of these superficieces CBDH, CBEK is a parallelogramme, therefore (by
the 34. of the first) the line CB is equal to either of these lines DH and EK.
Wherefore also the line DH is equal to the line EK. Take away EH which is
common to them both, wherefore the residue namely DE is equal to the residue
HK. Wherefore also the triangle DCE is equal to the triangle HKB. And the
parallelogramme DG is equal to the parallelogramme HN. And by the same reason
the triangle AGF is equal to the triangle MLN, and the parallelogramme CF is
equal to the parallelogramme BM. But the parallelogra^me CG is equal to the
parallelogramme BN, by the 24. of the tenth for they are opposite the one to
the other. Wherefore the prisme contained under the two triangles FAG and DCE
and under the three parrallelogra^mes AD, DG, and CG is equal to the prisme
contained under the two triangles MLN and HBK, and under the three
parallelogra^mes, that is, BM, NH, and BN. Put that solid common to them both,
whose base is the parallelogra^me AB, and the opposite side unto the base is
the superficies GEHM. Wherefore the whole parallelipipedon CM is equal to the
whole parallelipipedon CN: Wherefore parallelipipedons consisting upon one and
the self same base, and under one and the self same altitude, whose standing
lines are in the self same right lines, are equal the one to the other: which
was requi^ed to be demonstrated.

Although this demonstration be not hard to a good imagination to conceive by
the former figure (which yet by M. Dee^ reforming is much better then the
figure of this proposition commonly described in other copyes both greake and
lattin): yet for the ease of those which are young beginners in this matter of
solides, I have here set an other figure whose form if it be described upon
pasted paper, with the like letters to every line as they be here put, and then
if ye finely cut not thorough but as it were half way the three lines LA,
NMGF, and KHED, and so fold it accordingly, and compare it with the
demonstration, it will give great light thereunto.

Standing lines are called those four right lines of every parallelipipedon
which join together the angles of the upper and nether bases of the same body.
Standing lines.
Which according to the diversity of the angles of the solides, may either be
perpendicular upon the base, or fall obliquely. And forasmuch as in this
proposition and in the next proposition following, the solides compared
together are supposed to have one and the self same base, it is manifest that
the standing lines are in respect of the lower base in the self same parallel
lines, namely, in the two sides of the lower base. But because there are put
two solides upon one and the self same base, and under one and the self same
altitude, the two upper bases of the solides may be diversely placed. For
forasmuch as they are equal and like (by the 24. of this book) either they
may be placed between the self same parallel lines: and the^ the standing
lines are in either solid said to be in the self same parallel lines, or
right lines: namely, when the two sides of each of the upper bases are
contained in the self same parallel lines: but contrariwise if those two sides
of the upper bases be not contained in the self same parallel or right lines,
neither shall the standing lines which are joined to those sides be said to be
in the self same parallel or right lines. And therefore the standing lines are
said to be in the self same right lines, when the sides of the upper bases, at
the least two of the sides are contained in the self same right lines: which
thing is required in the supposition of this 29, proposition. But the standing
lines are said not to be in the self same right lines, when none of the two
sides of the upper bases are contained in the self same right lines, which
thing the next proposition following supposes.

The 25. Theoreme. The 30. Proposition. Parallelipipedons consisting upon one
and the self same base, and under the self same altitude, whose standing
lines are not in the self same right lines, are equal the one to the other.
SVppose that these Parallelipipedons CM and CN, do consist upon one and the
self same base, namely, AB, and under one and the self same altitude, whose
standing lines, namely, the lines AF, CD, BH, and LM, of the Parallelipipedon
CM, and the standing lines AG, CH, BK, and LN, of the Parallelipipedon CN, let
not be in the self same right lines. Then I say, that the Parallelipipedon CM,
is equal to the Parallelipipedon CN. Forasmuch as the upper superficieces FH
and ^K, of the former Parallelipipedons, are in one and the self same
superficies (by reason they are supposed to be of one and the self same
altitude): Construction.
Extend the lines FD and MH, till they concur with the lines N^ and KE
(sufficiently both ways extended: for in diverse cases their concurse is
diverse). Let ^D extended, meet with NG, and cut it in the point X: and with KE
in the point P. Let likewise MH extended, meet with NG (sufficiently produced)
in the point O, and with KE in the point R. And draw these right lines AX, LO,
CP, and BR. Now (by the 29. of the eleventh) the solid CM, whose base is the
parallelogramme ACBL, and the parallelogramme opposite unto it is FDHM, is
equal to the solid CO, whose base is ACBL and the opposite side the
parallelogramme XPRO, Demonstration.
for they consiste upon one and the self same base, namely, upon the
parallelogra^me ACBL, whose standing lines AF, AX, LM, LO, CD, CP, BH, and ^K,
I. Dees figure.
are in the self same right lines FP and MR. But the solid CO, whose base is
the parallelogramme ACBL, and the opposite superficies unto it is XPRO, is
equal to the solid CN, whose base is the parallelogramme ACBL, and the
opposite superficies unto it is the superficies G^KN, for they are upon one and
the self same base, namely, ACBL, and their standing lines AG, AX, CF, CP, LN,
LO, BK, and BR, are in the self same right lines NX, and PK. Wherefore also
the solid CM, is equal to the solid CN. Wherefore Parallelipipedons
consisting upon one and the self same base, and under the self same altitude,
whose standing lines are not in the self same right lines, are equal the one
to the other: which was required to be proved.

This demonstration is somewhat harder then the former to conceive by the figure
described in the plain (and yet before M. Dee invented that figure which is
placed for it, it was much harder) by reason one solid is contained in an
other. And therefore for the clerer light thereof, describe upon pasted paper
this figure here put with the like letters and finely cut the lines AC, CB, EG,
BL, EPK, ROHM, and fold it accordingly that every line may exactly agree with
his correspondent line (which observing the letters of every line ye shall
easily do) and so compare your figure with the demonstration, and it will make
it very plain unto you.

The 26. Theoreme. The 31. Proposit. Parallelipipedons consisting upon equal
bases, and being under one and the self same altitude, are equal the one to
the other.
SVppose that upon these equal bases AB and CD do consiste these
parallelipipedons AE and CF, being under one and the self same altitude. Two
cases in this proposition.

The first case.

Construction.


The^ I say, that the solid AE is equal to the solid CF. First let the
standing lines, namely, HK, BE, AG, LM, OP, DF, CX, and RS, be erected
perpendicularly to the bases AB and CD, and let the angle ALB not be equal to
the angle CRD. Extend the line CR to the point T. And (by the 23. of the first)
upon the right line RT, and at the point in it R, describe unto We are
beholding to M. Dee for inuenting this figure, with other, which till his
reforming were as much mishappen as this was, and so both in the Greek and
Latin copies remain.
the angle ALB an equal angle TRV. And (by the third of the first) put the
line RT equal to the line LB, and the line RV equal to the line AL. And (by
the 31. of the first) by the point V draw unto the line RT a parallel line VW:
Demonstration.
and make perfect the base RW, and the solid YV. Now forasmuch as these two
lines TR and RV are equal to these two lines BL and LA, and they contain
equal angles, therefore the parallelogramme RW is equal and like to the
parallelogramme AB. Again, forasmuch as the line LB is equal to the line RT,
and the line LM to the line RS (for the lines LM and RS are the altitudes of
the Parallelipipedons AE and CF, which altitudes are supposed to be equal) and
they contain right angles by supposition, therefore the parallelogramme RY is
equal and like to the parallelogramme BM. And by the same reason also the
parallelogramme LG is equal and like to the parallelogra^me SV. Wherefore
three parallelogrammes of the solid AE are equal and like to the three
parallelogrammes of the solid YV. But these three parallelogrammes are equal
and like to the three opposite sides. Wherefore the whole Parallelipipedon AE
is equal and like to the whole Parallelipipedon YV. Extend (by the second
petition) the lines DR and WV, until they concur, and let them concur in
the point Q. And (by the 31. of the first) by the point T draw unto the line
RQ a parallel line T 4, and extend duly the lines Ta and DO until they
concur, and let them concur in the point. And make perfect the solides QY
and RI. Now the solid QY, whose Note now, how the base respectively is taken^
for so may alteration of respects alter the name of the bowndes either of
solides or playnes.
base is the parallelogramme RY, and the opposite side unto the base the
parallelogramme Qb, is equal to the solid YV, whose base is the
parallelogramme RY, and the opposite side unto the base the parallelogramme VZ.
For they consiste upon one and the self fame base, namely, RY, and are under
one and the self same altitude, and their standing lines, namely, RQ, RV, Ta,
TW, SN, Sd, Yb, and YZ, are in the self same right lines, namely, QW, and NZ.
But the solid YV is proved equal to the solid AE. Wherefore also the solid
YQ is equal to the solid AE. Now forasmuch as the parallelogramme RVWT is
equal to the parallelogramme QT (by the 35. of the first) and the
parallelogramme AB is equal to the parallelogramme RW: therefore the
parallelogramme QT is equal to the parallelogramme AB, and the parallelogramme
CD is equal to the parallelogramme AB (by supposition). Wherefore the
parallelogramme CD is equal to the parallelogramme QT. And there is a certain
other superficies, namely, DT. Wherefore (by the 7. of the fifth) as the base CD
is to the base DT, so is the base QT to the base DT. And forasmuch as the whole
Parallelipipedon CI is cut by the plain superfi^^es RF, which is a parallel to
either of the opposite plain superficieces, therefore as the base CD is to the
base DT, so is the solid CF to the solid RI (by the 25. of the eleventh). And
by the same reason also, forasmuch as the whole Parallelipipedon QI is cut by
the plain superficies RY, which is a parallel to either of the opposite plain
superficieces, therefore as the base QT is to the base DT, so is the solid QY
to the solid RI. But as the base CD is to the base DT, so is the base QT to
the base TD. Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as the solid CF is to the
solid RI, so is the solid QY to the solid RI. Wherefore either of these
solides CF and QY, have to the solid RI one and the same proportion. Wherefore
the solid CF is equal to the solid QY. But it is proved that the solid QY
is equal to the solid AE. Wherefore also the solid CF is equal to the
solid AE.

But now suppose that the standing lines, namely, AG, HK, Second case.
BE, LM, CX, OP, DF, and RS, be not erected perpendicularly to the bases AB and
CD. Then also I say, that the solid AE is equal to the solid CF. Draw (by
the 11. of the eleue^th) unto the ground plain superficieces AB and CD from
these points K, E, C, M, P, F, X, S, these perpendicular lines KN, ET, GV, MZ,
PW, FIE, XQ, and SI. And draw these right lines NT, NV, ZV, ZT, WY, WQ, IQ, and
IY. Now (by that which has before been proved in this 31. Proposition) the
solid KZ is equal to the solid PI, for they consist upon equal There you
perceive how the base is diversely considered and chosen: as before we
advertised you.
bases, namely, KM, and PS, and are under one and the self same altitude,
whose standing lines also are erected perpendicularly to the bases. But the
solid KZ is equal to the solid AE (by the 29. of the eleventh): and the
solid PI is (by the same) equal to the solid CF, for they consist upon one
and the self same base, and are under one and the self same altitude, whose
standing lines are upon the self same right lines. Wherefore also the solid
AE is equal to the solid CE. Wherefore Parallelipipedons consisting upon
equal bases and being under one and the self same altitude, are equal the
one to the other: which was required to be demonstrated.

The demonstration of the first case of this proposition is very hard to
conceive by the figure described for it in a plain. And yet before M. Dee
invented that figure which we have there placed for it, it was much harder. For
both in the Greek and Lattin Euclide, it is very ill made, and it is in a manner
impossible to conceive by it the construction and demonstration thereto
appertayning. Wherefore I have here described other figures, which first
describe upon pasted paper, or such like matter and then order them in manner
following.



As touching the solid AE in the first case, I need not to make any new
description. For it is plain enough to conceive as it is there drawn.
Although you may for your more ease of imagination describe of pasted paper a
parallelipipedo^ having his sides equal with the sides of the parallelipipedon
AE before described, and having also the six parallelogrammes thereof
(contained under those sides) equiangle with the six parallelogrammes of that
figure, each side and each angle equal to his correspondent side, and to his
correspondent angle.

But concerning the other solid. When ye have described these three figures
upon pasted paper: Where note for the proportion of each line, to make your
figure of pasted paper equal with the figure before described upon the plain,
let your lines OP, CX, RS, DF, etc. namely, the rest of the standing lines, of
these figures, be equal to the standing lines OP, CX, RS, DF, etc. of that
figure. Likewise let the lines OC, CR, RD, DO, etc. namely, the sides which
co^tayne the bases of these figures be equal to the lines OC, CR, RD, DO, etc.
namely, to the sids which co^tayne the bases of that figure. Moreover let the
lines PX, X^, SF, FP, etc. namely, the rest of the lines which co^taine the
upper superficieces of these figures, be equal to the lines PX, XS, SF, F^,
etc. namely, to the rest of the lines which co^taine the upper superficieces of
that figure (to have described all those foresaid lines of these figures equal
to all the lines of that figure, would have required much more space then here
can be spared: I have made them equal only to the halues of those lines, but
by the example of these ye may, if ye will describe the like figures having
their lines equal to the whole lines of the figure in the plain, each line to
his correspondent line). When I say ye have as before is taught described these
three figures, cut finely the lines XC, SR, FD of the first figure, and the
lines SR, YT, and I of the second figure: likewise the lines ^R, NQ, ZVV, and
YT, of the third figure, and fold these figures accordingly, which ye can not
choose but do if ye mark well the letters of every line.

The three former figures being after this sort described, set them upon this
figure here described upon a plain, as upon their bases, namely, the lines OC,
CR, RD, DO: RT, T, D, DR: VR, RT, TW, Wa, VQ, and QR of these three figures
upon the lines correspondent unto them in this figure. And they so standing
compare them with the construction and demonstration of the first case, and
they will give great light unto it. This also ye must note, Construction.
that if ye make the lines of the fore said three figures equal to the lines
of the figure of the plain described before in the demo^stration of the first
case: then must ye make a new base for them like unto this, which is easy to
do, if ye draw a pallelogramme equal and like to the parallelogramme OCT, and
the^ cut of from the same a parallelogramme DRT equal and in like sort situate
to the parallelogramme DRT of that figure: and upon the line RT describe two
parallelogrammes, the one equal like, and in like sort situate to the
parallelogramme RTQa of that figure, and the other equal, like and in like
sort situate to the parallelogramme RTVW of the same figure. The lines of this
base which I have here put are equal only to the halues of the lines of that
figure in the demonstration.

As touching the second case ye need no new figures, for it is plain to see
by the figures (now reformed by M. Dee) described for it in the plain,
especially if ye remember the form of the figure of the 29. proposition of
this book. Only that which there ye conceive to be the base, imagine here in
both the figures of this second case to be the upper superficies opposite to
the base, and that which was there supposed to be the upper superficies
conceive here to be the base. Ye may describe them upon pasted paper for your
better sight, taking head ye note the letters rightly according as the
construction requires.

Flussas demonstrateth this proposition an otherway taking only the bases of
the solides, and that after this manner.
Take equal bases (which yet for the surer understanding let be utterly
unlike) namely, AEBF and ADCH, and let one of the sides of each concur in one
and the same right line AED, and the bases being upon one and the self same
plain let there be supposed to be set upon the^ parallelipipedons under one
and the self same altitude. Then I say that the solid set upon the base AB is
equal to the solid set upon the base AH. By the point E draw unto the line AC
a parallel line EG, which if it fall without the base AB, produce the right
line HC to the point I. Now forasmuch as AB and AH are parallelogrmaes,
therefore by the 24. of this book, the triangles ACI and EGL shall be
equaliter the one to the other: and by the 4. of the first, they shall be
equiangle and equal: and by the first definition of the sixth, and fourth
Proposition of the same, they shall be like. Wherefore Prismes erected upon
those triangles and under the same altitude that the solides AB and AH a^e,
shall be equal and like, by the 8. definition of this book. For they are
contained under like plain superficieces equal both in multitude and
magnitude. Add the solid set upon the base ACLE common to them both.
Wherefore the solid set upon the base AEGC, is equal to the solid set upon
the base AELI. And forasmuch as the superficieces AEBF, and ADHC are equal (by
supposition): and the part taken away AG is equal to the part taken away AL:
therefore the residue BY shall be equal to the residue GD. Wherefore as AG is
to GD as AL is to BY (namely, equals to equals). But as AG is to GD, so i^
the solid set upon AG to the solid set upon GD by the 25. of this book, for
it is cut by a plain superficies set upon the line GE, which superficies is
parallel to the opposite superficieces. Wherefore as AL is to BY, so is the
solid set upon AL to the solid set upon BY. Wherefore (by the 11. of the
fifth) as the solid set upon AG (or upon AL which is equal unto it) is to the
solid set upon GD, so is the same solid set upon AG or AL to the solid set
upon BY. Wherefore (by the 2. part of the 9. of the fifth) the solides set upon
GD and BY shall be equal. Unto which solides if ye add equal solides,
namely, the solid set upon AG to the solid set upon GD, and the solid set
upon AL to the solid set upon BY: the whole solides set upon the base AH and
upon the base AB shall be equal. Wherefore Parallelipedons consisting upon
equal bases and being under one and the self same altitude are equal the one
to the other: which was required to be proved.

The 27. Theoreme. The 32. Proposition. Parallelipipedons being under one and
the self same altitude, are in that proportion the one to the other that their
bases are.
SVppose that these parallelipipedons AB and CD be under one and the self same
altitude. Then I say that those parallelipipedons AB and CD are in that
proportion the one to the other, that their bases are, that is, that as the
base AE is to the base CF, so is the parallelipipedon AB to the
parallelipipedon CD. Construction.
Upon the line FG describe (by the 45. of the first) the parallelogramme FH
equal to the parallelogramme AE and equiangle with the parallelogramme CF. And
upon the base FH describe a parallelipipedo^ of the self same altitude that
the parallelipipedo^ CD is, and let ye same be GK. Demonstration.
Now (by the 31. of the eleventh) the parallelipipedon AB is equal to the
parallelipipedon GK, for they consist upon equal bases, namely, AE and FH, and
are under one and the self same altitude. And forasmuch as the
parallelipipedon CK is cut by a plain superficies DG, being parallel to either
of the opposite plain super^icieces, therefore (by the 25. of the eleventh) as
the base HF is to the base FC, so is the parallelipipedon GK to
parallelipipedon CD: but the base HF is equal to the base AE, and the
parallelipipedon GK is proved equal to the parallelipipedon AB. Wherefore as
the base A^E is to the base CF, so is the parallelipedon AB, to the
parallelipipedon CD. Wherefore parallelipipedons being under one and the self
same altitude, are in that proportion the one to the other that their bases
are: which was required to be demonstrated.

I need not to put any other figure for the declaration of this demonstration,
for it is easy to see by the figure there described. Howbeit ye may for the
more full sight thereof, describe solides of pasted paper according to the
construction there set forth, which will not be hard for you to do, if ye
remember the descriptions of such bodies before taught.

A Corollary added by Flussas.
Equal parallelipipedons contained under one and the self same altitude, have
also their bases equal. For if the bases should be unequal, the
parallelipipedons also should be unequal by this 32 proposition. And equal
parallelipipedons having equal bases, have also one and the self same
altitude. For if they should have a greater altitude, they should exceed the
equal parallelipipedons which have the self same altitude: But if they should
have a less they should want so much of those self same equal
parallelipipedons.

The 28. Theoreme. The 33. Proposition. Like parallelipipedons are in treble
proportion the one to the other of that in which their sides of like proportion
are.
SVppose that these parallelipipedons AB and CD be like, and let the sides AE
and CF be sides of like proportion. Then I say, the parallelipipedon AB is unto
the parallelipipedon CD in treble proportion of that in which the side AE is to
the side CF. Extend the right lines AE, GE and HE to the points K, L, M.
Construction.
And (by the 2. of the first) unto the line CF put the line EK equal, and unto
the line FN put the line EL equal, and moreover unto the line FR put the line
EM equal, and make perfect the parallelogramme KL, and the parallelipipedon
KO. Demonstration.
Now forasmuch as these two lines EK and EL are equal to these two lines CF
and FN, but the angle KEL is equal to the angle CFN (for the angle AEG is
equal to the angle CFM by reason that the solides AB and CD are like).
Wherefore the parallelogramme KL is equal and like to the parallelogramme CN,
and by the same reason also the parallelogramme KM is equal and like to the
parallelogramme CR, and moreover the parallelogramme OE to the parallelogramme
FD. Wherefore three parallelogrammes of the parallelipipedon KO are like and
equal to three parallelogrammes of the parallelipipedon CD: but those three
sides are equal and like to the three opposite sides: wherefore the whole
parallelipipedon KO is equal and like to the whole parallelipipedon CD. Make
perfect the parallelogramme GK. And upon the bases GK and KL make perfect to
the altitude of the parallelipipedon AB, the parallelipipedons EX and LP. And
forasmuch as by reason that the parallelipipedons AB and CD are like, as the
line AE is to the line CF, so is the line EG, to the line FN, and the line EH
to the line FR. But the line CF is equal to the line EK, and the line FN to
the line EL, and the line FR to the line EM, therefore as the line AE is to the
line EK, so is the line GE to the line EL, and the line HE to the line EM (by
construction). But as the line AE is to the line EK, so is the parallelogramme
AG to the parallelogramme GK (by the first of the sixth). And as the line GE is
to the line EL, so is the parallelogramme GK to the parallelogra^me KL. And
moreover as the line HE is to the line EM, so is the parallelogramm^ PE to the
parallelogramme KM. Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as the parallelogramme
AG is to the parallelogramme GK, so is the parallelogramme GK to the
parallelogramme KL, and the parallelograme PE to the parallelogramme KM. But as
the parallelogramme AG is to the parallelogramme GK, so is the parallelipipedon
AB to the parallellpipedon EX, by the former proposition, and as the
parallelogramme GK is to the parallelogramme KL, so by the same is the
parallelipipedon XE to the parallelipipedon PL: and again by the same, as the
parallelogramme PE is to the parallelogramme KM, so is the parallelipipedon PL
to the parallelipipedon KO. Wherefore as the parallelipipedo^ AB is to the
parallelipipedon EX, so is the parallelipipedon EX to the parallelipipedon PL,
and the parallelipipedon PL to the parallelipipedon KO. But if there be four
magnitudes in* continual proportion, the first shall be unto the fourth in
treble proportion that it is to the second (by the 10. definition of the fifth).
Wherefore the parallelipipedon AB is unto the parallelipedon KO in treble
proportion that the parallelipipedon AB is to the parallelipipedon EX. But as
the parallelipipedon AB is to the parallelipipedo^ EX, so is the
parallelogramme AG to the parallelogramme GK, and the right line AE to the
right line EK. Wherefore also the parallelipipedon AB is to the
parallelipipedon KO in treble proportion of that which the line AE has to the
line EK. But the parallelipipedon KO is equal to the parallelipipedon CD, and
the right line EK to the right line CF. Wherefore the parallelipipedon AB is to
the parallelipipedon CD in treble proportion that the side of like proportion,
namely, AE is to the side of like proportion, namely, to CF. Wherefore like
parallelipipedons are in treble proportion the one to the other of that in
which their sides of like proportion are: which was required to be demonstrated.

Corellary.
Hereby it is manifest, that if there be four right lines in *
continual proportion, as the first is to the fourth, so shall the
Parallelipipedon described of the first line, be to the Parallelipipedon
described of the second, both the Parallelipipedons being like and in like sort
described. For the first line is to the fourth in t^eble proportion that it is
to the second: and it has before been proved that the Parallelipipedon
described of the first, is to the Parallelipipedon described of the second, in
the same proportion that the first line is to the fourth.

Because the one of the figures before, described in a plain, pertaining to
the demonstration of this 33. Proposition, is not altogether so easy to a
young beginner to conceive, I have here for the same described an other
figure, which if ye first draw upon pasted paper, and afterward cut the lines
and fold the sides accordingly, will agree with the construction and
demonstration of the said Proposition. Howbeit this ye must note that ye must
cut the lines OQ and MR on the contrary side ^o that which ye cut the other
lines. For the solides which have to their base the parallelogramme LK are set
on upward and the other downward: Ye may if ye think good describe after the
some manner of pasted paper a body equal to the solid CD: though that be easy
enough to conceive by the figure thereof described in the plain.

Certain most profitable Corollaries, Annotations, Theoremes, and Problemes,
with other practices, Logisticall, and Mechanical, partly upon this 33. and
partly upon the 34. 36. and other following, added by Master John Dee. A
Corollary. 1.
1. Hereby it is manifest, that two right lines may be found, which shall have
that proportion, the one to the other, that any two like Parallelipipedons, and
in like sort described, given, have the one to the other.

Suppose Q and X to be two like Parallelipipedons, and in like sort described.
Of Q take any of the three lines, of which it is produced: as namely, RG. Of X,
take that right line of his production, which line ^s aunswerable to R G in
proportion (which most aptly, after the Greek name, may be called Omologall to
RG) and let that be TV. By the 11. of the sixth, to RG and TV, let the third
line in proportion with them be found, and let that be Y. By the same 11. of
the sixth, to TV and Y, let the third right line be found, in the said
proportion of TV to Y: and let that be Z. I say now that RG has that
proportion to Z, which Q has to X. For by construction, we have four right
lines in continual propiotion, namely, RG, TV, Y, and Z. Wherefore by Euclides
Corollary, here before, RG is to Z, as Q is to X. Wherefore we have found two
right lines having that proportion the one to the other, which any two like
Parallelipipedons of like description, given, have the one to the other: which
was required to be done.

A Corollary.
As a Converse, of my ^ormer Corollary, does it follow: To find two like
Parallelipipedons of like description, which shall have that proportion the one
to the other, that any two right lines, given, have the one to the other.

Suppose the two right lines given to be A and B: Imagine of four right lines
in continual proportion, A. to be the first, and B to be the fourth: (or
contrariwise, B to be first, and A to be the fourth). The second and third are
to be found, which may, between A and B, be two means in continual
propo^tion: as now, Note this famous L^mma.
suppose such two lines, found: and let them be C and D. Wherefore by Euclides
Corollary, as A is to B (if A were taken as first) so shall the
Parallelipipedon described of A, be to the like Parallelipipedon and in like
sort described of C: being the second of the four lines in continual
proportion: it is to we^e, A, C, D, and B. Or, if B shall be taken as first,
(and that thus they are orderly in continual proportion, B, D, C, A,) then, by
the said Corollary, as B is to A, so shall the Parallelipipedon described of B,
be unto the like Parallelipipedon and in like sort described o^ D. And unto a
Parallelipipedon of A or B, at pleasure described, may an other of C or D be
made like, and in like sort situated or described, by the 27. of this eleventh
book. Wherefore any two right lines being given, etc: which was required to be
done.

Thus have I most briefly brought to your understanding, if (first) B were
double to A, then what Parallelipipedon soever, were described of A, the like
Parallelipipedon and in like sort described of C, shall be double to the
Parallelipipedon described of A. And so likewise (secondly) if A were double to
B, the Parallelipipedon of D, should be double to the like, of B described,
both being like situated. Wherefore if of A or B, were Cubes made, the Cubes of
C and D are proved double to them: The doubling o^ ^he Cube.
as that of C, to the Cube of A: and the Cube of D to the Cube of B: in the
second case. Note.
And so of any proportion else between A and B.

Now also do you most clearly perceive the Mathematical occasion, whereby
(first of all men) Hippocrates, to double any Cube given, was led to the former
Lemma: Between any two right lines given, to find two other right lines, which
shall be with the two first lines, in continual proportion: After whose time
(many years) divine Plato, Heron, Philo, Appollonius, Di^^l^^, Pappus, Sporus,
Menech^us, Archytas Tarentinus (who made the wodden dove to slye) Erato^^hene,
Nicomedes, with many other (to their immortal fame and renown) published,
(...) Lemma.
diverse their witty devises, methods, and engines (which yet are extant)
whereby to execute this Problematicall Lemma. But not withstanding all the
travails of the ^oresayd Philosophers and Mathematiciens, yea and all others
doings and contriuinges (unto this day) about the said Lemma, yet there
remains sufficient matter, Mathematically so to demonstrate the same, that
most exactly and readily, it may also be Mechanically practis^d: that who
soever shall achieue that feate, shall not be counted a second Archimedes, but
rather a per^les Mathematicien, and Mathematicorum Princeps. I will sundry
ways (in my brief additions and annotations upon Euclide) excite you thereto,
Note what i^ yet lacking requisite to the doubling of the Cube.
yea and bring before your eyes sundry new ways, by meinuented: and in this
book so placed, as matter thereof, to my inventions appertayning, may give
occasion: Leaving the farther, full, and absolute my concluding of the Lemma,
to an other place and time: which will, now, more co^pendiously be done: so
great a part thereof, being before hand in this book published.

A Corollary added by Flussas.
Parallelipipedons consisting upon equal bases, are in proportion the one to
the other as their altitudes are. For if those altitudes be cut by a plain
superficies parallel to the bases: the sections shall be in proportion the one
to the other as the sections of the bases cut, by the 25. of this book. Which
sections of the bases are the one to the other in that proportion that their
sides or the altitudes of the solides are, by the first of the sixth. Wherefore
the solides are the one to the other as their altitudes are. But if the bases
be unlike, the self same thing may be proved by the Corollary of the 25. of
this book, which by the 25. Proposition was proved in like bases.

The 29. Theoreme. The 34. Proposition. In equal Parallelipipedons the bases
are reciprokall to their altitudes. And Parallelipipedons whose bases are
reciprokall to their altitudes, are equal the one to the other.
SVppose that these Parallelipipedons AB and CD be equal the one to the other.
Two cases in the first part of this propotion.
Then I say, that the bases of the Parallelipipedons AB and CD are reciprokall
to their altitudes, that is, as the base EH is to the base NP, so is the
altitude of the solid CD to the altitude of the solid AB. First let the
standing lines AG, OF, LB, HK, of the solid AB, and the standing lines CM, NX,
OD, and PR, of the solid CD, be erectedperpe^dicularly to the bases EH and NP.
First case, which also may be two ways.
The^ I say, that as the base EH is to the base NP, so is the line CM to the
line AG. First way.
Now if the base EH be equal to the base NP, and the solid AB is equal to the
solid CD, wherefore the line CM is equal to the line AG This follows also
of the Corollary added of F^us^as after the 3^. proposition of this book.
. For if the bases EH and NP being equal, the altitudes AG and CM be not
equal, neither also shall the solid AB be equal to the solid CD, but they
are supposed to be equal. Wherefore the altitude CM is not unequal to the
altitude AG. Wherefore it is equal. And therefore as the base EH is to the
base PN, so is the altitude CM to the altitude AG. Wherefore it is manifest,
that the bases of the Parallelipipedons AB and CD are reciprokall to their
altitudes.

But now suppose that the base EH be not equal to the base NP. Second way.
But let the base EH be the greater. Now the solid AB is equal to the solid
CD. Wherefore also the altitude CM is greater then the altitude AG This also
follows of the former Corollary.
. For if not, then again are not the solides AB and CD equal: but they are by
supposition equal. Wherefore (by the 2. of the first) put unto the line AG an
equal line CT. And upon the base NP and the altitude being CT, make perfect a
solid contained under parallel plain superficieces, and let the same be CZ.
And forasmuch as the solid AB is equal to the solid CD, and there is a
certain other solid, namely, CZ, but unto one and the self same magnitude
equal magnitudes have one and the self same proportion (by the 7. of the
fifth). Wherefore as the solid AB is to the solid CZ, so is the solid CD to
the solid CZ. But as the solid AB is to the solid CZ, so is the base EH to
the base NP (by the 32. of the eleventh)^ for the solides AB and CZ are under
equal altitudes. And as the solid CD is to the solid CZ, so is the base MP
to the base PT, and the line MC to the line CT. Wherefore (by the 11. of the
fifth) as the base EH is to the base NP, so is the line CM to the line CT. But
the line CT is equal to the line AG. Wherefore (by the 7. of the fifth) as the
base EH is to the base NP, so is the altitude CM to the altitude AG. Wherefore
in these Parallelipipedons AB and CD the bases are reciprokall to their
altitudes.

But now again suppose that the bases of the Parallelipipedons AB and CD be
reciprokall to their altitudes, The converse of both the parts of the first
case.
that is, as the base EH is to the base NP, so let the altitude of the solid
CD be to the altitude of the solid AB. Then I say, that the solid AB is
equal to the solid CD. For again let the standing lines be erected
perpendicularly to their bases.

And now if the base EH be equal to the base NP: but as the base EH is to the
base



Second case.
But now suppose that the standing lines, namely, FE, BL, GA, KH: XN, DO, MC,
and RP, be not erected perpendicularly to their bases. And (by the 11. of the
eleventh) from the points F, G, B, K^ X, M, D, R, Construction.
draw unto the plain superficies of the bases EH and NP perpendicular lines,
and let those perpendicular lines light upon the points S, T, V, Z: W, Y, d,
and Q, and make perfect the Parallelipipedons FZ, and XQI say that even in
this case also, if the solides AB and CD be equal, their bases are reciprokall
to their altitudes, that is, as the base EH is to the base NP, so is the
altitude of the solid CD to the altitude of the solid AB. For forasmuch as
the solid AB is equal to the solid CD, but the solid AB is equal to the
solid BT (by the 20. of the eleventh) for they are upon one and the self same
base, Demonstration.
namely, the parallelogramme KF, and under one and the self same altitude,
whose standing lines are in the self same right lines, namely, HZAT, and LVES:
and the solid CD is by the same reason equal to the solid DIE, for they both
consist upon one and the self same base, namely, the parallelogramme XR, are
under one and the self same altitude, whose standing lines are in the self
same right lines, namely, PQCY, and OhNW. Wherefore the solid BT is equal to
the solid DIE. But in equal Parallelipipedons, whose altitudes are erected
perpendicularly to their bases, their bases are reciprokall to their altitudes
(by the first part of this Proposition). Wherefore as the base FK is to the
base XR, so is the altitude of the solid DIE to the altitude of the solid BT.
But the base FK is equal to the base EH, and the base XR to the base NP.
Wherefore as the base EH is to the base NP, so is the altitude of the solid DIE
to the altitude of the solid BT. But the altitudes of the solides DIE and BT,
and of the solides DC and BA are one and the self same. Wherefore as the base
EH is to the base NP, so is the altitude of the solid CD to the altitude of
the solid AB. Wherefore the bases of the Parallelipipedons AB and CD are
reciprokall to their altitudes.

Again suppose that the bases of the Parallelipipedons AB and CD be
reciprokall to their altitudes, The converse of the second case.
that is, as the base EH is to the base NP, so let the altitude of the solid
CD be to the altitude of the solid AB. Then I say, that the solid AB is
equal to the solid CD. For the same order of construction remaining, for that
as the base EH is to the base NP, so is the altitude of the solid CD to the
altitude of the solid AB: but the base EH is equal to the parallelogramme FK,
and the base NP to the parallelogramme XR: wherefore as the base FK is to the
base XR, so is the altitude of the solid CD to the altitude of the solid AB
But the altitudes of the solides AB and BT are equal, and so also are the
altitudes of the solides DC and DIE. Wherefore as the base FK is to the base XR,
so is the altitude of the solid DIE to the altitude of the solid BT. Wherefore
the bases of the Parallelipipedons BT and DIE are reciprokall to their
altitudes. But Parallelipipedons whose altitudes are erected perpendicularly to
their bases, and whose bases are reciprokall to their altitudes, are equal the
one to the other (by this Proposition). Wherefore the solid BT is equal to
the solid DIE. But the solid BT is equal to the solid BA (by the 29. of the
eleventh) for they consist upon one and the self same base, namely, FK, and
are under one and the self same altitude, whose standing lines are in the self
same right lines. And the solid DIE is equal to the solid DC, for they
consiste upon one and the self same base, namely, XR, and are under one and
the self same altitude, whose standing lines are in the self same right
lines. Wherefore also the solid AB is equal to the solid CD. The general
conclusion.
Wherefore in equal Parallelipipedons the bases are reciprokall to their
altitudes. And Parallelipipedons whose bases are reciprokall with their
altitudes, are equal the one to the other: which was required to be proved.

The demonstration of the first case of this Proposition is easy to conceive
by the figure as it is described in the plain. But ye may for your more full
sight describe Parallelipipedons of pasted paper, according as the construction
teaches you.

And for the second case, if ye remember well the form of the figure^ which
you made for the second case of the 31. Proposition: and describe the like for
this, taking ^eede to the letters that ye place them like as the co^struction
in this case requires, ye shall most easily by them come to the full
understanding of the construction and demonstration of the said case.

M. John Dee, his sundry Inventions and Annotacions, very necessary, here to be
added and considered.
A The^reme.
If four right lines be in continual proportion, and upon the squar^ of the
first, as a base, be erected a rectangle parallelipipedon, whose heith is the
fourth line: that rectangle parallelipipedon is equal to the Cube made of the
second line. And if upon the square of the fourth line, as a base, be erected a
rectangle parallelipipedon, whose heith is the first line, that
parallelipipedon is equal to the Cube made of the third line.

Suppose AB, CD, E^, and ^H to be four right lines in continual proportion:
Construction.
and upon the square of AB (which let be AI) as a base, let be erected a
recta^gle parallelipipedo^, having his heith IK, equal to GH, the fourth line.
And let that parallelipipedon be AK. Of the second line CD, let a Cube be made:
whose square base, let be noted wi^h CQ: and let his heith b^ noted by QL: and
let the whole Cube be signified by CL. I say that AK is equal to CL. Let the
like co^struction be for the cube of the third line: that is, upon the square
of ^H (which suppose to be GN) let a rectangle parallelipipedon be erected,
having his heith NO, equal to A^, the first line: which parallelipipedon let
be noted with GO. And suppose the cube of the third line (^F) to be ^M^ whose
square base, let be noted by ^^^ and his heith by RM. I say now (secondly) that
GO is equal to ^M. For the first part consider, Demonstration of the first part.
that AI (the square base of AK) is to CQ, the square base of CL, as A^ is to
the third line OF, by the ^. Corollary of the 20. of the sixth. But as A^, is
to OF, so (by alternate proportion) is CD to GH, to CD. The cubes root, is QL,
the same cubes heith equal: and to GH is IK (by construction) equal:
wherefore, as AI is to CQ, so is QL to IK. The bases therefore and heithes of
AK and CL, are reciprocally in proportion: wherefore by the second part of this
34. proposition, AK and CL are equal. Demonstration of the second part.
For proof of the second part of my theoreme, I say, that as AB, CD, ^F, and
GH, are in continual proportion forward, so are they backward in continual
proportion, as by the fourth of the fifth may be proved. Wherefore now
considering GH to be as first, and so A^ to be the fourth: the square base GN,
is to the square base ^K, as GH is to CD, by the 2. corollary of the 20. of the
sixth: But as GH is to CD, so is ^^ to A^, by alternate proportion: to the
Cubik root ^F, is RM (the heith of the same Cube ^M) equal. And to AB, is the
heith NO equal, by construction: wherefore as GN is to ^R, so is RM to NO.
Therefore by the second part of this 34. proposition, GO is equal to EN. If
four right lines (therefore) be in continual proportion etc. as in the
proposition: which was required to be demonstrated.

A Corollary logisticall.
Of my former Theoreme it follows: Any two numbers being given, between which
two we would have two other numbers, middle, in continual proportion: To find
two midd^e proportionals between two numbers given.
That if we multiply the square of the first number given, by the other given
number (as if it were the fourth): the root Cubik of that of come or product,
shall be the second number sought: And farther, if we multiply the square of
the other number given, by the first given number, the root Cubike of that of
come shall be the third number sought.

For (by my Theoreme) those rectangle parallelipipedo^s made of the squares of
the first and fourth, multiplied by the fourth and the first, accordingly, are
equal to the Cubes made of the second and third numbers: which we make our two
^iddl^ proportionals^ Wherefore of those parallelipipedo^s (as Cubes) the Cubik
roots, by good and usual art sought and found, give the very two middle
numbers desired. And where those numbers, are not by logisticall consideration
accounted Cubik numbers, ye may use the logistical secret of approaching nere to
the precise verytye: Note the practice of app^oching to precie^es in Cubik
roots.
so that thereof most easily you shall p^rc^aue, that your fail is of the since
never to be perceived: it is to wete, as in a line of an inch long, not to want
or exceed the thousand thousand part: or farther you may (infinitely approach
at pleasure. O Mechanical friend, be of good comfort, put to thy hand: Labor
improbus, omnia vincit.

A Problem. 1.
Upon a right lined plain superficies given, to apply a rectangle
parallelipipedon given.

Or we may thus express the same thing.
Upon a right lined plain superficies given, to erect a rectangle
parallelipipedon, equal to a rectangle parallelipipedon given.

Suppose the right lined plain superficies given to be ^: and the rectangle
parallelipipedon given to be AM. Upon ^, as a base must AM be applied: that
is, a rectangle par^llipipedon must be erected upon ^, as a base, which shall
be equal to AM. By the last of the second, to the right lyned figure ^, let
an equal square be made: which suppose to be FRX. This is the way to apply any
square given, to a line also given, sufficienty extended.
produce one side of the base of the parallelipipedo^ AM, which let be AC,
extended to the point P. Let the other side of the said base, concurring with
AC, be CG. As CG is to FR (the side of the square FRX) so let the same FR be to
a line cut of from CP sufficiently extended: by the 11. of the sixth: and let
that third proportional line be CP. Let the rectangle parallelogramme be made
perfect, as CD. It is evident, that CD, is equal to the square FRX by the 17.
of the sixth: and by construction FRX, is equal to B. Wherefore CD, is equal
to ^. By the 12. of the sixth, as CP, is to AC, so let AN (the heith of AM) be
to the right line O. I say that a solid perpendicularly erected upon the base
^, having the heith of the line O, is equal to the parallelipipedon AM. For
CD is to AG, as CP is to A^ by the first of the sixth, and ^ is proved equal
to CD: Wherefore by the 7. of the fifth, B is to AG as CP is to AC: But as CP is
to AC, so is AN to O, by construction: Wherefore B is to AG as AN is to O. So
than the bases ^ and AG are reciprocally in proportion with the heithes AN and
O. By this 34 therefore, a solid erected perpendicularly upon ^ as a base,
having the height O, is equal to AM. Wherefore upon a right lyned plain
superficies given, we have applied a rectangle parallelipipedon given: Which
was requisite to be done.

A Problem 2.
A rectangle parallelipipedon being given to make an other equal to it of any
heith assigned.

Suppose the rectangle parallelipipedon given to be A, and the heith assigned
to be the right line ^: Now must we make a rectangle parallelipipedon, equal to
A: Whose heith must be equal to ^. According to the manner before used, we
must frame our co^struction to a reciprokall proportion between the bases and
heithes. Which will be done if, as the heith assigned bears it self in
proportion to the heith of the parallelipipedon given: so, one of the sides of
the base of the parallelipipedon given, be to a fourth line, by the 12. of the
sixth found. For that line found, and the other side of the base of the given
parallelipipedon, contain a parallelogramme, which does serve for the base,
(which only, we wanted) to use with our given heith: and so is the Problem to
be executed.

Note.
Euclide in the 27. of this eleventh has taught, how, of a right line given,
to describe a parallepipedo^, like, and likewise situated, to a
parallelipipedo^ given: I have also added, How, to a parallepipedon given, an
other may be made equal, upon any right lined base given, or of any heith
assigned: But if either Euclide, or any other before our time (answerably to
the 25. of the sixth, in playns) had among solids invented this proposition: A
problem worth the searching for.
Two unequal and unlike parallelipipedons being given, to describe a
parallelipipedon equal to the one, and like to the other, we would have given
them their deserved praise: and I would also have been right glad to have been
eased of my great trauayles and discourses about the inuenting thereof.

Here end I. Dee his additions upon this 34. Proposition.
The 30. Theoreme. The 35. Proposition. If there be two superficial angles
equal, and from the points of those angles be elevated on high right lines,
comprehending together with those right lines which contain the superficial
angles, equal angles, each to his corespo^dent angle, and if in each of the
elevated lines be taken a point at all auentures, and from those points be
drawn perpendicular lines to the ground plain superficieces in which are the
angles given at the beginning, and from the points which are by those
perpendicular lines made in the two plain superficieces be joined to those
angles which were put at the beginning right lines: those right lines together
with the lines elevated on high shall contain equal angles.
SVppose that these two rectiline superficial angles BAC, and EDF be equal
the one to the other: Construction.
and from the points A and D let there be elevated upward these right lines AG
and DM, comprehendinge together with the lines put at the beginning equal
angles, each to his correspondent angle, that is, the angle MDE to the angle
GAB, and the angle MDF to the angle GAC, and take in the lines AG and DM
points at all aue^tures and let the same be G and M. And (by the 11. of the
eleue^th) from the points G and M draw unto the ground plain superficieces
wherein are the angles BAC and E DF perpendicular lines GL and MN and let them
fall in the said plain super^icieces in the points N and L, and draw a right
line from the point L to the point A and an other from the point N to the
point D. Then I say that the angle GAL is equal to the angle MDN. From the
greater of the two lines AG and DM, (which let be AG) cut of by the 3. of the
first the line AH equal unto the line DM. And (by the 31. of the first) by the
point H, draw unto the line GL a parallel line, and let the same be HK. Now
the line GL is erected perpendicularly to the ground plain superficies BAL:
Wherefore also (by the 8. of the eleventh) the line HK is erected
perpe^dicularly to the same ground plain superficies BAC. Draw (by the 12.
of the first) from the points K and N unto the right lines AB, AC, DF, and DE
perpe^dicular right lines, and let the same be KC, NF, KB, NE. And draw these
right lines HC, CB, MF, FE. Now forasmuch a^ (by the 47. of the first) the
square of the line HA is equal to the squares of the lines HK and KA,
Demonstration.
but unto the square of the line KA are equal the squares of the lines KC and
CA: Wherefore the square of the line HA is equal to the squares of the lines
HK, KC and CA. But by the same unto the squares of the lines HK and KC is
equal the square of the line HC: Wherefore the square of the line HA is equal
to the squares of the lines HC and CA: wherefore the angle HCA is (by the 48. of
the first) a right angle. And by the same reason also the angle MFD is a right
angle. Wherefore the angle HCA is equal to the angle MFD. But the angle HAC is
(by suppositio^) equal to the angle MDF. Wherefore there are two triangles MDF
and HAC having two angles of the one equal to two angles of the other, each
to his correspondent angle, and one side of the one equal to one side of the
other, namely, that side which subtendeth one of the equal angles, that is,
the side HA is equal to the side DM by construction. Wherefore the sides
remaining are (by the 26. of the first) equal to the sides remaining.
Wherefore the side AC is equal to the side DF. In like sort may we prove that
the side AB is equal to the side DE, if ye draw a right line from the point H
to the point B, and an other from the point M to the point E. For forasmuch as
the square of the line AH is (by the 47. of the first) equal to the squares
of the lines AK and KH, and (by the same) unto the square of the line AK are
equal the squares of the lines AB and BK. Wherefore the squares of the lines
AB, BK, and KH are equal to the square of the line AH. But unto the squares of
the lines BK and KH is equal the square of the line BH (by the 47. of the
first) for the angle HKB is a right angle, for that the line HK is erected
perpe^dicularly to the ground plain superficies: Wherefore the square of the
line AH is equal to the squares of the lines AB and BH. Wherefore (by the 48.
of the first) the angle ABH is a right angle. And by the same reason the angle
THEM is a right angle. Now the angle BAH is equal to the angle EDM, for it is
so supposed, and the line AH is equal to the line DM. Wherefore (by the 26. of
the first) the line AB is equal to the line DE. Now forasmuch as the line AC
is equal to the line DF, and the line AB to the line DE, therefore these two
lines AC and AB are equal to these two lines FD and DE. But the angle also CAB
is by supposition equal to the angle FDE. Wherefore (by the 4. of the first)
the base BC is equal to the base OF, and the triangle to the triangle, and the
rest of the angles to the rest of the angles. Wherefore the angle ACB is
equal to the angle DFE. And the right angle ACK is equal to the right angle
DFN. Wherefore the angle remaining, namely, BCK, is equal to the angle
remaining, namely, to EFN. And by the same reason also the angle CBK is equal
to the angle FEN. Wherefore there are two triangles BCK, and EFN, having two
angles of the one equal to two angles of the other, each to his correspondent
angle, and one side of the one equal to one side of the other, namely, that
side that lies between the equal angles, that is the side BC is equal to the
side OF: Wherefore (by the 26. of the first) the sides remaininge are equal to
the sides remaining. Wherefore the side CK is equal to the side FN: but the
side AC is equal to the side DF. Wherefore these two sides AC and CK are
equal to these two sides DF and FN, and they contain equal angles: Wherefore
(by the 4. of the first) the base AK is equal to the base DN. And forasmuch as
the line AH is equal to the line DM, therefore the square of the line AH is
equal to the square of the line DM. But unto the square of the line AH are
equal the squares of the lines AK and KH (by the 47. of the first) for the
angle AKH is a right angle. And to the square of the line DM are equal the
squares of the lines DN and NM, for the angle DNM is a right angle. Wherefore
the squares of the lines AK and KH are equal to the squares of the lines DN
and NM: of which two, the square of the line AK is equal to the square of the
line DN (for the line AK is proved equal to the line AN). Wherefore the
residue, namely, the square of the line KH is equal to the residue, namely, to
the square of the line NM. Wherefore the line HK is equal to the line MN. And
forasmuch as these two lines HA and AK are equal to these two lines MD and DN,
the one to the other, and the base HK is equal to the base MN: therefore (by
the 8. of the first) the angle HAK is equal to the angle MDN. If therefore
there be two superficial angles equal, and from the points of those angles
be elevated on high right lines, comprehending together with those right lines
which were put at the beginning, equal angles, each to his corespondent angle,
and if in each of the erected lines be taken a point at all adventures, and from
those points be drawn perpendicular lines to the plain superficieces in
which are the angles given at the beginning, and fr^^ the points which are by
the perpendicular lines made in the two plain superficieces be joined right
lines to those angles which were put at the beginning, those right lines shall
together with the lines elevated on high make equal angles which was required
to be proved.

Because the figures of the former demonstration are somewhat hard to conceive
as they are there drawn in a plain, by reason of the lines that are imagined
to be elevated on high, I have here set other figures, wherein you must erecte
perpendicularly to the ground superficieces the two triangles BHK, and EMN, and
then eleuate the triangles DFM, and ACH, in such sort that the angles M and H
of these triangles, may concur with the angles M and H of the other erected
triangles. And then imagining only a line to be drawn from the point G of the
line AG to the point L in the ground superficies, compare it with the former
construction and demonstration, and it will make it very easy to conceive.

Corollary.
By this it is manifest, that if there be two rectiline superficial angles
equal, and upon those angles be elevated on high equal right lines containing
together with the right lines put at the b^ginning equal angles: perpendicular
lines drawn from those elevated lines to the ground plain superficieces
wherein are the angles put at the beginning, are equal the one to the other.
For it is manifest, that the perpendicular lines HK, and MN, which are drawn
from the ends of the equal elevated lines AH, and DM, to the ground
superficieces, are equal.

The 31. Theoreme. The 36. Proposition. If there be three right lines
proportional: a Parallelipipedon described of those three right lines, is
equal to the Parallelipipedon described of the middle line, so that it
consiste of equal sides, and also be equiangle to the foresaid
Parallelipipedon.
SVppose that these three lines A, B, C, be proportional, as A is to B, so let
B be to C. Then I say, that the Parallelipipedon made of the lines A, B, C, is
equal to the Parallelipipedon made of the line B, so that the solid made of
the line B consist of equal sides, and be also equiangle to the solid made of
the lines A, B, C. Describe (by the 23. of the eleventh) a solid angle E
contained under three superficial angles, Construction.
that is, DEGREES, GEF, and FED: and (by the 3. of the first) put unto the line B
every one of these lines DE, GE, and OF, equal: and make perfect the solid
EK. And unto the line A let the line LM be equal. And (by the 26. of the
eleue^th) unto the right line LM, and at the point in it L, describe unto the
solid angle E an equal solid angle, contained under these plain
superficial angles NLX, XLM, and NLM, and unto the line B put the line LX
equal, and the line LN to the line C. Now for that as the line A is to the
line B, Demonstration.
so is the line B to the line C: but the line A is equal to the line LM, and
the line B to every one of these lines LX, OF, EG, and ED, and the line C to
the line LN. Wherefore as LM is to OF, so is DE to LN: So then the sides about
the equal angles MLN, and DEF, are reciprokall: Wherefore (by the 14. of the
sixth) the parallelogra^me MN is equal to the parallelogramme DF. And forasmuch
as two plain superficial angles, namely, DEF and NLM are equal the one to
the other, and upon them are erected upward equal right lines, LX and EG;
comprehending with the right lines put at the beginning equal angles the one
to the other. Wherefore It is evident that those perpendiculars are all one
with the standing lines of the solides, if their solid angles be made of
super^ic^^il right angles only.
perpendicular lines drawn from the points X and G to the plain
super^icieces wherein are the angles NLM, and DEF, are (by the Corollary of the
former Proposition) equal the one to the other: and those perpendiculars are
the altitudes of the Parallelipipedons LH and EK, by the 4. definition of the
sixth. Wherefore the solides LH and EK, are under one and the self same
altitude. But Parallelipipedons consisting upon equal bases, and being under
one and the self altitude, are (by the 31. of the eleventh) equal the one to
the other. Wherefore the solid LH is equal to the solid EK. But the solid
LH is described of the lines A, B, C, and the solid EK is described of the
line B. Wherefore the Parallelipipedon described of the lines A, B, C, is
equal to the Parallelipipedon made of the line B, which consists of equal
sides, and is also equiangle to the foresaid Parallelipipedon. If therefore
there be three right lines proportional, a Parallelipipedo^ described of those
three lines is equal to the Parallelipipedo^ described of the middle line, so
that is consist of equal sides, and also be equiangle to the foresaid
Parallelipipedon: which was required to be proved.

The construction and demonstration of this Proposition, and of the next
Proposition following, may easily be conceived and understood by the figures
described in the plain belonging to them. But ye may for the more full sight
of them, describe such bodies of pasted paper, having their sides
proportional, as is required in the Propositions.

New inventions (coincident) added by Master John Dee.
A Corollary. 1.
Hereby it is evident, that if three right lines be proportional: the Cube
produced of the middle line, is equal to the rectangle Parallelipipedon made
of those three lines.

For a Cube is a Parallelipipedon of equal sides: and also rectangled: as we
suppose the Parallelipipedon, made of the three lines to be likewise rectangled.

A Problem. 1.
A Cube being given, to find three right lines proportional, in any
proportion given between two right lines: of which three lines, the rectangle
Parallelipipedon produced, shall be equal to the Cube given.

Suppose AC to be the Cube given: whose root, suppose to be AB. Let the
proportion given, be that which in between the two right lines D and E, I say
now, three right lines are to be found, proportional, in the proportion of D
to E, of which, the rectangle Parallelipipedon produced, shall be equal to AC.
By the 12. of the sixth let a line be found, which to AB have that proportion
that D has to E. Let that line be F: and by the same 12. of the sixth, let an
other line be found, to which, AB, has that proportion that D has to E: and
let that line found be H. Let a rectangle Parallelipipedon mathematically be
produced of the three right lines F, AB, and H, which suppose to be K: I say
now, that F, AB, and H, are three right lines found proportional in the
proportion of D to E, of which, the rectangle Parallelipipedon K, produced, is
equal to AC the Cube given. First it is evident that F, AB, and H, are
proportional in the proportion of D to E. For, by construction, as D is to E,
so is F to AB: and by construction likewise, as D is to E, so is AB to H.
Wherefore F is to AB, and AB is to H, as D is to E. So then it is manifest, F,
AB, and H, to be proportional in the proportion of D to E, and AB to be the
middle line. By my former Corollary, therefore, the rectangle parallelipipedon
made of F, AB, and H, is equal to the Cnbe made of AB. But AC, is (by
supposi^ion) the Cube made of AB^ and of the three lines F, AB, and H, the
rectangle parallelipipedon produced, is K, by construction: Wherefore, K, is
equal to AC: A Cube being given, therefore, three right lines are found,
proportional in any prop^^^ion given be^wene two right lines, of which three
right lines the rectangle parallelipipedon p^oduced, is equal to the Cube
given. Which ought to be done.

A Problem. 2.
A re^^angle Parallelipipedon being given, to find three right lines
proportional: of the which, the rectangle Parallelipipedon produced, is equal
to the rectangle Parallelipipedon given.

D^u^ling of the (...). etc.
Listen to this new devise, you courageous Mathematiciens: consider, how nere
this crepeth to the famous Problem of doubling the Cube. What hope may (in
manner) any young beginner conceive, by one means or other, at one time or
other, to execute this Problem? D^m^^^^ratio^ ^f p^s^ibilitie in the ^^oblem.
Seeing to a Cube may infinitely in^inite Parallelipipedons be found equal: all
which Parallelipipedons shall be produced of three right lines proportional,
by the fo^me^ P^obleme: but to any ^ectangle Parallelipipedon given, some one
Cube is equal ^ as is ^asie to demonst^at^: We can not doubt, but unto our
rectangle Parallelipipedon given, many other ^ectangle Parallelipipedons are
also equal, having their three lines of p^oduction, proportional. An other
argument to com^o^t the studious.
In the former Probleme^ in^ini^^ly in^inite Parallelipipedons may be found of
three proportional lines p^oduced, equal to the Cube g^uen: it is to wete,
the three lines to be of all proportions, that a man can devise between two
right lines: and here any one will serve: where also i^ infinite variety:
though all of one quantity: as before in the Cube. I leave as now, with this
mark here set up to shoot at. Hit it who can.

The 32. Theoreme. The 37. Proposition. If there be four right lines
proportional: the Parallelipipedons described of those lines, being like and
in like sort described, shall be proportional. And i^ the Parallelipipedons
described of them, being like and in like sort described, be proportional:
those right lines also shall be proportional.
SVppose that these four right lines AB, CD, OF, and GH, be proportional, as
AB is to CD, so let OF be to GH, and upon the lines AB, CD, OF, and GH,
describe these Parallelipipedons KA, LC, ME, and NG, being like and in like
sort desc^^bed. Then I say, that as the solid KA is ^o the solid LC, so is
the solid ME to the solid NG. Demonstration of the first part.
For forasmuch as the Parallelipipedon KA is like to the Parallelipipedon LC:
therefore (by the 33. of the eleventh) the solid KA is to the solid LC in
treble proportion of that which the side AB is to the side CD^: and by the same
reason the Parallelipipedon ME is to the Parallelipipedon NG in treble
proportion of that which the side OF is to the side GH. Wherefore (by the 11. of
the fifth) as the Parallelipipedon KA is to the Parallelipipedon LC, so is the
Parallelipipedon ME t^ the Parallelipipedon NG.

But now suppose, that as the Parallelipipedon KA is to the Parallelipipedon
LC, so is the Parallelipipedon ME to the Parallelipipedon NG. Then I say,
Demonstration of the second part, which is the converse of the first part.
that as the right line AB is to the right line CD, so is the right li^^ OF to
the right line GH. For again forasmuch as the solid KA is to the solid LC in
treble proportion of that which the side AB is to the side CD, and the solid
ME also is to the solid NG in treble proportion of that which the line OF is
to the line GH, and as the solid KA is to the solid LC, so is the solid ME
to the solid NG. Wherefore also as the line AB is to the line CD, so is the
line OF to the line GH. If therefore there be four right lines proportional:
the Parallelipipedons described of those lines, being like and in like sort
described, shall be proportional. And if the Parallelipipedons described of
them, and being like and in like sort described, be proportional: those right
lines also shall be proportionall^ which was required to be proved.

The 33. Theoreme. The 38. Proposition. If a plain superficies be erected
perpendicularly to a plain superficies, and from a point taken in one of the
plain superficieces be drawn to the other plain superficies, a perpendicular
line: that perpendicular line shall fall upon the common section of those
plain superficieces.
SVppose that the plain superficies CD be erected perpe^dicularly to the
plain superficies AB, and let their common section be the line DA: and in the
superficies CD take a point at all adventures, and let the same be E. Then I
say, that a perpendicular line drawn from the point E to the plain
superficies AB, shall fall upon the right line DA. For if not, then let it fall
without the line DA, as the line OF does, and let it fall upon the plain
superficies AB in the point F. Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
And (by the 12. of the first) from the point F draw unto the line DA, being in
the superficies AB a perpendicular line FG, which line also is erected
perpendicularly to the plain superficies CD: by the third diffinitio^: by
reason we presuppose CD and AB to be perpendicularly erected each to other. Draw
a right line from the point E to the point G. And forasmuch as the line FG is
erected perpendicularly to the plain superficies CD, and the line EG touches
it being in the superficies CD. Wherefore the angle FGE is (by the 2.
definition of the eleventh) a right angle. But the line OF is also erected
perpe^dicularly to the superficies AB: wherefore the angle EFG is a right
angle. Now therefore two angles of the triangle EFG, are equal to two right
angles: which (by the 17. of the first) is impossible. Wherefore a perpendicular
line drawn from the point E to the s^^erficies AB, falls not without the
line DA. Wherefore it falls upon the line DA: which was required to be proved.

Note.
Campane makes this as a Corollary, following upon the 13: and very well, with
small aid of other Propositions, he proves it^ whose demonstration there,
Flussas has in this place, and none other: though he says that Campane of
such a Proposition, as of Euclides, makes no mention.

In this figure ye may more fully see the former Proposition and demonstration
if ye erecte perpendicularly unto the ground plain superficies AB the
superficies CD, and imagine a line to be extended from the point E to the point
F, instede whereof ye may extend if ye will a thread.

The 34. Theoreme. The 39. Proposition. If the opposite sides of a
Parallelipipedon be divided into two equal parts, and by their common
sections be extended plain superficieces: the common section of those plain
superficieces, and the diameter of the Parallelipipedon shall divide the one
the other into two equal parts.
SVppose that AF be a Parallelipipedon, and let the opposite sides thereof CF
and AH be divided into two equal parts in the points K, L, M, N, and
likewise let the opposite sides AD and GF be divided into two equal parts in
the point^s X, P, O, R, and by those sections extend these two plain
superficieces KN and XR, and let the common section of those plain
superficieces be the line US, and let the diagonall line of the solid AB be
the line DG. Then I say, that the lines US and DG do divide the one the other
into two equal parts, Construction.
that is, that the line VT is equal to the line TS, and the line DT to the
line TG. Draw these right lines DV, VE, BS, and SG. Demonstration.
Now forasmuch as the line DX is a parallel to the line OE, therefore (by the
29. of the first) the angles DXV and VOE being alternate angles, are equal the
one to the other. And forasmuch as the line DX is equal to the line OE, and
the line XV to the line VO, and they comprehend equal angles: Wherefore the
base DV is equal to the base VE (by the 4. of the first) and the triangle DXV
is equal to the triangle VOE, and the rest of the angles to the rest of the
angles. Wherefore the angle XVD is equal to the angle OVE. Wherefore DVE is
one right line, and by the same reason BSG is also one right line, and the line
BS is equal to the line SG. And forasmuch as the line CA is equal to the line
DB, and is unto it a parallel, but the line CA is equal to the line GE, and is
unto it also a parallel: wherefore (by the first common sentence) the line DB is
equal to the line GE, and is also a parallel unto it: but the right lines DE
and BG do join these parallel lines together: Wherefore (by the 33. of the
first) the line DE is a parallel unto the line BG. And in either of these lines
are taken points at all adventures, namely, D, V, G, S, and a right line is
drawn from the point D to the point G, and an other from the point V to the
point S. Wherefore (by the 7. of the eleventh) the lines DG and US are in one
and the self same plain superficies. And forasmuch as the line DE is a
parallel to the line BG, therefore (by the 24. of the first) the angle EDT is
equal to the angle BGT, for they are alternate angles, and likewise the angle
DTV is equal to the angle GTS. Now then there are two triangles, that is, DTV
and GTS, having two angles of the one equal to two angles of the other, and
one side of the one equal to one side of the other, namely, the side which
subtendeth the equal angles, that is, the side DV to the side GS, for they are
the halfes of the lines DE and BG: Wherefore the sides remaining are equal to
the sides remaining. Wherefore the line DT is equal to the line TG, and the
line VT to the line TS. If therefore the opposite sides of a Parallelipipedon
be divided into two equal parts, and by their sections be extended plain
superficieces, the common section of those plain superficieces, and the
diameter of the Parallelipipedon, do divide the one the other into two equal
parts: which was required to be demonstrated.

A Corollary added by Flussas.
Every plain superficies extended by the center of a parallelipipedon,
divides that solid into two equal parts: and so does not any other plain
superficies not extended by the center.

For every plain extended by the center, cutteth the diameter of the
parallelipipedon in the center into two equal parts. For it is proved, that
plain superficieces which cut the solid into two equal parts, do cut the
dimetient into two equal parts in the center. Wherefore all the lines drawn
by the center in that plain superficies shall make angles with the dimetient.
And forasmuch as the diameter falls upon the parallel right lines of the
solid, which describe the opposite sides of the said solid, or upon the
parallel plain superficieces of the solid, which make angels at the ends of
the diameter: the triangles contained under the diameter, and the right line
extended in that plain by the center, and the right line, which being drawn
in the opposite superficieces of the solid, joins together the ends of the
foresaid right lines, namely, the end of the diameter, and the end of the
line drawn by the center in the superficies extended by the center, shall
always be equal, and equiangle, by the 26. of the first. For the opposite
right lines drawn by the opposite plain superficieces of the solid do make
equal angles with the diameter, forasmuch as they are parallel lines, by the
16. of this book. But the angles at the ce^ter are equal, by the 15. of the
first, for they are head angles: and one side is equal to one side, namely,
half the dimetient. Wherefore the triangles contained under every right line
drawn by the center of the parallelipipedon in the superficies, which is
extended also by the said center, and the diameter thereof, whose ends are the
angles of the solid, are equal, equilater, and equiangle (by the 26. of the
first). Wherefore it follows that the plain superficies which cutteth the
parallelipipedon, does make the parts of the bases on the opposite side,
equal, and equiangle, and therefore like, and equal both in multitude, and in
magnitude: wherefore the two solid sections of that solid, shall be equal and
like, by the 8. diffinition of this book. And now that no other plain
superficies, besides that which is extended by the center, deuideth the
parallelipipedon into two equal parts, it is manifest: if unto the plain
superficies which is not extended by the center, we extend by the center a
parallel plain superficies (by the Corollary of the 15. of this book). For
forasmuch as that superficies which is extended by the center, does divide the
parallelipipedo^ into two equal par^^: it is manifest, that the other plain
superficies (which is parallel to the superficies which deuideth the solid
into two equal parts) is in one of the equal parts of the solid: wherefore
seeing that the whole is ever greater then his parts, it must needs be that one
of these sections is less then the half of the solid, and therefore the
other is greater.

For the better understanding of this former proposition, and also of this
Corollary added by Flussas, it shall be very needful for you to describe of
pasted paper or such like matter a parallelipipedo^ or a Cube, and to divide
all the parallelogra^mes thereof into two equal parts, by drawing by the
c^^ters of the said parallelogrammes (which centers are the points made by the
cutting of diagonall lines drawn from the opposite angles of the said
parallelogra^mes) lines parallels to the sides of the parallelogra^mes: as in
the former figure described in a plain ye may see, are the six
parallelogra^mes DE, EH, HA, AD, DH, and CG, whom these parallel lines drawn
by the ce^ters of the said parallelogra^mes, namely, XO, OR, PR, and PX, do
divide into two equal parts: by which four lines ye must imagine a plain
superficies to be extended, also these parallel lines KL, LN, NM, and M^, by
which four lines likewise y^ must imagine a plain superficies to be extended
ye: may if ye will put within your body made thus of pasted paper, two
superficieces made also of the said paper, having to their limits lines equal
to the foresaid parallel lines: which superficieces must also be divided into
two equal parts by parallel lines drawn by their centers, and must cut the
one the other by these parallel lines. And for the diameter of this body,
exte^d a thread from one angle in the base of the solid to his opposite angle,
which shall pass by the center of the parallelipipedon, as does the line DG in
the figure before described in the plain. And draw in the base and the
opposite superficies unto it, Diagonall lines, from the angles from which is
extended the diameter of the solid: as in the former description are the lines
BG and DE. And when you have thus described this body, compare it with the
former demonstration, and it will make it very plain unto you, so your letters
agree with the letters of the figure described in the book. And this
description will plainly set forth unto you the corollary following that
proposition. For where as to the understanding of the demonstration of the
proposition the superficieces put within the body were extended by parallel
lines drawn by the ce^ters of the bases of the parallelipipedon: to the
understanding of the said Corollary, ye may extend a superficies by any other
lines drawn in the said bases, so that yet it pass through the midst of the
thread, which is supposed to be the center of the parallelipipedon.

The 35. Theoreme. The 40. Proposition. If there be two Prismes under equal
altitudes, and the one have to his base a parallelogramme, and the other a
triangle, and if the parallelogramme be double to the triangle: those Prismes
are equal the one to the other.
SVppose that these two Prismes ABCDEF, GHKMON, be under equal altitudes, and
let the one have to his base the parallelogramme AC, and the other the triangle
GHK, and let the parallelogramme AC be double to the triangle GHK. Then I say,
that the Prisme ABCDEF is equal to the Prisme GHKMON. Construction.
Make perfect the Parallelipipedons AX and GO. And forasmuch as the
parallelogramme AC is double to the triangle GHK, Demonstration.
but the parallelogramme GH is also (by the 41. of the first) double to the
triangle GHK, wherefore the parallelogramme AC is equal to the parallelogramme
GH. But Parallelipipedons consisting upon equal bases and under one and the
self same altitude, are equal the one to the other (by the 31. of the
eleventh). Wherefore the solid AX is equal to the solid GO. But the half of
the solid AX is the Prisme ABCDEF, and the half of the solid GO is the
Prisme GHKMON. Wherefore the Prisme ABCDEF is equal to the Prisme GHKMON. If
therefore there be two Prismes under equal altitudes, and the one have to his
base a parallelogramme, and the other a triangle, and if the parallelogramme be
double to the triangle: those Prismes are equal the one to the other: which
was required to be proved.

This Proposition and the demonstration thereof are not hard to conceive by the
former figures: but ye may for your fuller understanding of the^ take two
equal Parallelipipedons equilate^ and equiangle the one to the other described
of pasted paper or such like matter, and in the base of the one
Parallelipipedon draw a diagonall line, and draw an other diagonall line in the
upper superficies opposite unto the said diagonall line drawn in the base. And
in one of the parallelogrammes which are set upon the base of the other
Parallelipipedon draw a diagonall line, and draw an other diagonall line in
the parallelogramme opposite to the same. For so if ye extend plain
superficieces by those diagonall lines there will be made two Prismes in each
body. Ye must take heed that ye put for the bases of each of these
Parallelipipedons equal parallelogra^mes. And then note the^ with letters
according to the letters of the figures before described in the plain. And
compare the^ with the demonstration, and they will make both it and the
Proposition very clear unto you. They will also give great light to the
Corollary following added by Flussas.

A Corollary added by Flussas.
By this and the former propo^itions it is manifest, that Prismes and solides
Which of some are called sided Columns.
contained under two poligo^on figures equal, like, and parallels, and the
rest parallelogrammes: may be compared the one to the other after the self
same manner that parallelipipedons are.

For forasmuch as (by this proposition and by the second Corollary of the 2^.
of this book) it is manifest, that every parallelipipedon may be resolved into
two like, and equal Prismes, of one and the same altitude, whose base shall be
one and the self same with the base of the parallelipipedon or the half
thereof, which Pris^es also shall be cont^yned under the self same side^ with
the parallelipipedo^, the said side^ being also sides of like proportion: I
say that Prisme^ may be compared together after the like manner that their
Parallelipipedon^ are^ For if we would divide a Prisme like unto his foli^e by
the 25. of this book, ye shall find in the Corollaryes of the 25.
propo^^tio^, that that which is set forth touching a parallelipipedon,
follows not only in a Prisme, but also in any sided column whose opposite
bases are equal, and like, and his sides parallelogrammes.

If it be required by the 27. proposition upon a right line given to describe a
Prisme like and in like sort situate to a Prisme given: describe ^^^st the
whole parallelipipedon whereof the prisme given is the half (which thing ye
see by this 40. proposition may be done). And unto that parallelipipedo^
describe upon the right line given by the said 27. proposition an other
parallelipipedon like: and the half thereof shall be the prisme which ye seek
for, namely, shall be a prisme described upon the right line given, and like unto
the prisme given.

In deed Prismes can not be cut according to the 28. proposition. For that in
their opposite sides can be drawn no diagonall lines: howbeit by that 28.
proposition those Prismes are manifestly confirmed to be equal and like, which
are the halues of one and the self same parallelipipedon.

And as touching the 29. proposition, and the three following it, which proves
that parallelipipedons under one and the self same altitude, and upon equal
bases, or the self same bases, are equal: or if they be under one and the
self same alti^^d^ they are in proportion the one to the other, as their bases
are^ to apply these comparisons unto (...) it is to (...) required, that the
bases of the Prismes compared together, be either all parallelogrammes, or all
tria^gles. For so one and the self altitude remaining, the comparison of
things equal (...) one and th^^ self same, and the halfes of the bases are
ever the one to the other in the same proportion, that their wholes are.
Wherefore Prismes which are the halues of the parallelipipedons, and which have
the same proportion the one to the other that the whole parallelipipedons have,
which are under one and the self ^ame altitude: must needs cause that their
bases being the halues of the base^ of the parallelip^p^^^^ ^^e in the same
proportion the one to the other, that their whole parallelipip^don^ are. If
there^o^^ the w^ole parallelipipedons be in the proportion of the whole bases,
their h^l^^^ also (which are Prismes) shall be in the (proportion either of the
wholes if their bases be parallel^gr^mm^^^ or of the hal^^^ ^f they be
triangles, which is ever all one by the 15. of the fiueth.

And forasmuch as by the 33. proposition, like parallelipipedons which are the
doubles of their Prismes are in treble proportion the one to the other that
their sides of like proportion are, it is manifest, that Prismes being their
halues (which have the one to the other the same proportion that their wholes
have, by the 15 of the fiueth) and having the self same sides that their
parallelipipedons have, are the one to the other in treble proportion of that
which the sides of like proportion are.

And for that Prismes are the one to the other in the same proportion that
their parallelipipedons are, and the bases of the Prismes (being all either
triangles or parallelogra^mes) are the one to the other in the same proportion
that the bases of the parallelipipedons are, whose altitudes also are always
equal, we may by the 34. proposition conclude, that the bases of the prismes
and the bases of the parallelipipedons their doubles (being each the one to the
other in one and the self same proportion) are to the altitudes, in the same
proportion that the bases of the double solides, namely, of the
parallelipipedons are. For if the bases of the equal parallelipipedo^s be
reciprokall with their altitudes, then their halues which are Prismes shall
have their bases reciprokall with their altitudes.

By the 36. proposition we may conclude, that if there be three right lines
proportional, the angle of a Prisme made of these three lines (being common
with the angle of his parallelipipedon which is double) does make a prisme,
which is equal to the Prisme described of the middle line, and containing the
like angle, consisting also of equal sides. For a^ in the parallelipipedon, so
also in the Prisme, this one thing is required, namely, that the three
dimensions of the proportional lines do make an angle like unto the angle
contained of the middle line taken three times. Now then if the solid angle of
the Prisme be made of those three right lines, there shall of them be made an
angle like to the angle of the parallelipipedon which is double unto it.
Wherefore it follows of necessity, that the Prismes which are always the
halues of the Parallelipipedons, are equiangle the one to the other, as also
are their doubles, although they be not equilater: and therefore those halues
of equal solides are equal the one to the other: namely, that which is
described of the middle proportional line is equal to that which is described
of the three proportional lines.

By the 37. proposition also we may conclude the same touching Prismes which
was concluded touching Parallelipipedons. For forasmuch as Prismes, described
like and in like sort of the lines given, are the halues of the
Parallelipipedons which are like and in like sort described, it follows that
these Prismes have the one to the other the same proportion that the solides
which are their doubles have. And therefore if the lines which describe them be
porportionall, they shall be proportional, and so conuersedly according to the
rule of the said 37. proposition.

But forasmuch as the 39. proposition supposes the opposite superficial sides
of the solid to be parallelogrammes, and the same solid to have one diameter,
which things a Prisme can not have, therefore this proposition can by ^o
means by applied to Prismes.

But as touching solides whose bases are two like, equal, and parallel
poligonon figures, and their sides are parallelogrammes, Sided Columns.
forasmuch as by the second Corollary of the 25. of this book it has been
declared, that such solides are composed of Prismes, it may easily be proved
that their nature is such, as is the nature of the Prismes, whereof they are
composed. Wherefore a parallelipipedon being by the 27. proposition of this
book described, there may also be described the half thereof, which is a
Prisme: and by the description of Prismes, there may be composed a solid like
unto a solid given composed of Prismes. So that it is manifest, that that
which the 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34. and 37. propositions set forth touching
parallelipipedons, may well be applied also to these kinds of solides.

The end of the eleventh book of Euclides Elements.
The twelueth book of Euclides Elements.
IN THIS TVVELVETH BOOK, EVCLIDE sets forth the passions and proprieties of
Pyramids, Prismes, Cones, Cylinders, and Spheres. And compares Pyramids, first
to Pyramids, then to Prismes: so likewise does he Cones, and Cylinders. And
lastly he compares Spheres the one to the other. But before he goes to the
treaty of those bodies, he proves that, like Poligonon figures inscribed in
circles, and also the circles the^ selves are in proportion the one to the
other, as the squares of the diameters of those circles are. Because that was
necessary to be proved, for the confirmation of certain passions and
proprieties of those bodies.

The 1. Theoreme. The 1. Proposition. Like Poligonon figures described in
circles: are in that proportion the one to the other, that the squares of their
diameters are.
SVppose that there be two circles ABCDE, and FGHKL, and in them let there be
described like Poligonon figures, namely, ABCDE, and FGHKL, and let the
diameters of the circles be BM, and GN. Then I say, that as the square of the
line BM is to the square of the line GN, so is the Poligonon figure ABCDE to
the Poligonon figure FGHKL. Construction.
Draw these right lines BE, AM, GL, and FN. And forasmuch as the Poligonon
figure ABCDE is like to the Poligonon figure FGHKL, Demonstration.
therefore the angle BAE is equal to the angle GFL, and as the line BA is to
the line AE, so is the line GF to the line FL (by the definition of like
Poligonon figures). Now therefore there are two triangles BAE and GFL, having
one angle of the one equal to one angle of the other, namely, the angle BAE
equal to the angle GFL, and the sides about the equal angles are
proportional. Wherefore (by the first definition of the sixth) the triangle ABE
is equiangle to the triangle FGL. Wherefore the angle AEB is equal to the
angle FLG. But (by the 21. of the third) the angle AEB is equal to the angle
AMB, for they consiste upon one and the self same circumference: and by the
same reason the angle FLG is equal to the angle FNG. Wherefore the angle AMB is
equal to the angle FNG. And the right angle BAM, is (by the 4. petition)
equal to the right angle GFN. Wherefore the angle remaining, is equal to the
angle remaining. Wherefore the triangle AMB is equiangle to the triangle FNG.
Wherefore proportionally as the line BM is to the line GN, so is the line BA to
the line GF. But the square of the line BM is to the square of the line GN in
double proportion of that which the line BM is to the line GN (by the Corollary
of the 20. of the sixth). And the Poligonon figure ABCDE is to the Poligonon
figure FGHKL in double proportion of that which the line BA is to the line GF
(by the ^0. of the sixth). Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as the square of
the line BM is to the square of the line GN, so is the Poligonon figure ABCDE,
to the Poligonon figure FGHKL. Wherefore like Poligonon figures described in
circles, are in that proportion the one to the other, that the squares of the
diameters are: which was required to be demonstrated.

John Dee his fruitful instructions, with certain Corollaries, and their
great use.
WHo can not easily perceive, what occasion and aid, Archimedes had, by these
first and second Propositions, to ^inde the nere Area, or Content of a circle:
between a Poligonon figure within the circle, and the like about the same
circle, described? Whose precise quantities are most easily known: being
comprehended of right lines. Where also (to avoid all occasions of error) it
is good in numbers, not having precise square roots, to use the Logisticall
process, according to the rules, with ^ 12, ^ 19, and so, of such like. Who
can not readily fall into Archimedes reckoning and account, Archimedes used a
Poligonon figure of 96. sides: he that, for exercise sake, or for earnest
desire of a more nerenes, will use Polygonon figures of 384. sides (or more)
may well travail therein, till either wearines cause him stay, or else he find
his labor fruitles. In deed Archimedes concluded proportion, of the
circumference to the diameter, has hitherto served the vulgar and^
Mechanical wor^ men: wherewith, who so is not concented, let his own
Methodicall travail satisfy his desire: or let him procure other thereto. For,
narrower terms (of greater and less) found, and appointed to the
circumference, will also win to the Area of the circle a nearer quantity:
seeing, it is well dem^^^rated of Archimed^s, that a triangle rectangle, The
squaring of the circle.
and from that point which ends the eleventh part, draw to the opposite
side, a line, parallel to the other sid^s, and so make pe^fecte the
parallelogramme. Then, by the last Proposition of the second book, unto that
parallelogramme (whose one side has those 11. equal parts), make a square
equal. Then is it evident, that square to be equal to the circle, about which
the first square is described. As ye may here behold in these figures.



Gentle friend, the great desire, which I have, that both with pleasure and also
profit, thou may spend thy time in these excellent studies, does cause me
here to furnishe thee somewhat (extraordinarily) about the circle: not only by
pointing unto thee, the welspring of Archimedes, his so much wondre^ at; and
justly commended travail (in the former 3. Theoremes, here repeated), but also
to make thee more apt, to understand and practice this and other books
following, where, use of the circle may be had in any consideration: as in
Cones, Cylinders, and Spheres, etc.

A Corollary. 1.
By Archimedes second Theoreme (as I have here alleged them) it is manifest,
that a parallelogramme contained, either under the semidiameter and half the
circumference, or under the half semidiameter and whole circumference of any
circle, is equal to the circle: by the 41. of the first: and first of the six^.

A Corollary. 2.
Likewise it is evident, that the parallelogramme contained under the
semidiameter, and half of any portion of the circumference of a circle given,
is equal to that sector of the same circle, to which the whole portion of the
circumference given, does belong. Or you may use the half semidiameter, and
the whole portion of the circumference as sides of the said parallelogramme.

The farther winning, and inferring, I commi^^^ to your skill, care, and
^^udy^. But in an other sort will I give you new aid, and instruction here.

A Theoreme.
Of all circles, the circumferences to their own diameters, have one and the
same proportion: in what one circle soever, they are assigned.

That is (as Archimedes has demonstrated) almost, as 22. to 7: or nearer, if
nearer be found: until the very precise proportion be demonstrated. Which,
what soever it be, in all circumferences to their proper diameters, will be
demonstrated one and the same.

A Corollary. 1.
Wherefore if two circles be propounded, which suppose to be A and B, as the
circumference of A is to the circumference of B, so is the diameter of A to the
diameter of B.

For by the former Theoreme, as the circumference of A, is to his own diameter,
so is the circumference of B, to his own diameter: Wherefore, alternately, as
the circumference of A, is to the circumference of B, so is the diameter of A,
to the diameter of B: Which was required to be demonstrated.

A Corollary. 2.
It is now then evident, that we can give two circles whose circumferences one
to the other, shall have any proportion given in two right lines.

The great Mechanical use (besides Mathematical considerations) which, these
two Corollaryes may have in Wheels of Milles, Clockes, Cranes, and other
engines for water works, and for wars, and many other purposes, the earnest
and witty Mechanicien will soon boult out, and gladly practice.

^ John Dee.

The 2. Theoreme. The 2. Proposition. Circles are in that proportion the one to
the other, that the squares of their diameters are.
SVppose that there be two circles ABCD, and EFGH, and let their diameters be
BD and FH. Then I say, that as the square of the line DB is to the square of
the line FH, Demonstrati^n ^eading to an impossibi^itie.

Two cases in this proposition.

The first case.


so is the circle ABCD to the circle EFGH. For if the circle ABCD be not unto
the circle EFGH, as the square of the line BD is to the square of the line FH:
then the square of the line BD shall be to the square of the line FH, as the
circle ABCD is to a superficies, either less then the circle EFGH, or greater.
First let the square of the line BD be to the square of the line FH, as the
circle ABCD is to a superficies less then the circle EFGH, namely, to the
superficies S. Describe (by the 6. of the fourth) in the circle EFGH a square
EFGH. Now this square thus described is greater then the half of the circle
EFGH. For if by the points E, F, G, H, we draw right lines touching the
circle, That a square within any circle described is bigger than half the
circle.

That the Isosceles triangles, without the square, are greater then half the
segments wherein they are.


the square EFGH, is the half of the square described about the circle, but
the square described about the circle, is greater then the circle. Wherefore
the square EFGH, which is inscribed in the circle, is greater then the half of
the circle EFGH. Divide the circumferences OF, FG, GH, and HE, into two equal
parts in the points K, L, M, N. And draw these right lines EK, KF, FL, LG,
GM, MH, HN, and NE. Wherefore every one of these triangles EKF, FLG, GMH, and
HNE, is greater then the half of the segme^t of the circle which is described
about it. For if by the points K, L, M, N, be drawn lines touching the
circle, and then be made perfect the parallelogra^mes made of the right lines
OF, FG, GH, and HE, every one of the triangles EKF, FLG, GMH, and HNE, is the
half of the parallelogragra^me which is described about it (by the 41. of the
first): but the segme^t described about it is less then the parallelogramme.
Wherefore every one of these triangles EKF, FLG, GMH, and HNE, is greater then
the half of the segment of the circle which is described about it. Now then
dividing the circumferences remaining into two equal parts, and drawing right
lines from the points where those divisions are made, and so continually doing
this, we shall at the length (by the 1. of the tenth) leave certain segmentes
of the circle, which shall be less then the excess, whereby the circle EFGH
excedeth the superficies S. For it has been proved in the first Proposition of
the tenth book, that two unequal magnitudes being given, if from the greater
be taken away more then the half, and likewise again from the residue more
then the hal^e, and so continually, there shall at the length be left a
certain magnitude which shall be less then the less magnitude given. Let
there be such segmentes left, and let the segmentes of the circle EFGH, namely,
which are made by the lines EK, KF, FL, LG, GM, MH, HN, and NE, be less then
the excess, whereby the circle EFGH excedeth the superficies S. Wherefore the
residue, namely, the Poligonon figure EKFLGMHN, is greater then the superficies
S. Inscribe in the circle ABCD a Poligonon figure like to the Poligonon figure
EKFLGMHN, and let the same be AXBOCPDR. Wherefore (by the Proposition next
going before) as the square of the line BD is to the square of the line FH, so
is the Poligonon figure AXBOCPDR to the Poligonon figure EKFLGMHN. But as the
square of the line BD is to the square of the line FG, so is the circle ABCD
supposed to be to the superficies S. Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as the
circle ABCD is to the superficies S, so is the Poligonon figure AXBOCPDR to the
Poligonon figure EKFLGMHN. Wherefore alternately (by the 16. of the fifth) as
the circle ABCD is to the Poligonon figure described in it, so is the
superficies S to the Poligonon figure EKFLGMHN. But the circle ABCD is greater
then the Poligonon figure described in it. Wherefore also the superficies S is
greater then the Poligonon figure EKFLGHMN: but it is also less: which is
impossible. Wherefore as the square of the line BD is to the square of the line
FH, so is not the circle ABCD to any superficies less then the circles EFGH.

Second case.
In like sort also may wproue, that as the square of the line FH is to the
square of the line BD, so is not the circle EFGH to any superficies less then
the circle ABCD. I say, namely, that as the square of the line BD is to the
square of the line FH, so is not the circle ABCD to any superficies greater
the^ then the circle EFGH. For if it be possible, let it be to a greater,
namely, to the superficies S. Wherefore by conversion, as the square of the line
FH is to the square of the line BD, so is the superficies S to the circle ABCD.
This As(...) afte^ward at the end of the dem^stra^ion proved.
But as the s^perficies S is to the circle ABCD, so is the circle EFGH to some
supe^ficies l^sse the^ the circle ABCD. Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as
the square of the line FH is to the square of the line BD, so is the circle
EFGH, to some superficies less then the circle ABCD: which is in the first
case proved to be impossible. Wherefore as the square of the line BD is to the
square of the line FH, so is not the circle ABCD to any superficies greater
then the circle EFGH. And it is also proved that it is not, to any less.
Wherefore as the square of the l^ne BD is to the square of the line FH, so is
the circle ABCD to the circle EFGH. Wherefore circles are in that proportion
the one to the other, that the squares of their diameters are: which was
required to be proved.

An Assumpt.
I say now, that the superficies S being greater then the circle EFGH, as the
superficies S is to the circle ABCD, so is the circle EFGH to some superficies
less then the circle ABCD. For, as the superficies S is to the circle ABCD, so
let the circle EFGH be to the superficies T. Now I say, that the superficies T
is less then the circle ABCD. For for that as the superficies S is to the
circle ABCD, so is the circle EFGH to the superficies T, therefore alternately
(by the 16. of the fifth) as the superficies S is to the circle EFGH, so is the
circle ABCD to the superficies T. But the superficies S is greater then the
circle EFGH (by supposition). Wherefore also the circle ABCD is greater then
the superficies T (by the 14. of the fifth). Wherefore as the superficies S is
to the circle ABCD, so is the circle EFGH to some superficies less then the
circle ABCD: which was required to be demonstrated.

A Corollary added by Flussas.
Circles have the one to the other, that proportion, that like Poligonon
figures and in like sort described in them have. For, it was by the first
Proposition proved, that the Poligonon figures have that proportion the one to
the other, that the squares of the diameters have, which proportion likewise,
by this Proposition^ the circles have.

Very needful Problemes and Corollaryes by Master Ihon Dee invented: whose
wonderful use also, be partly declares.
A Problem. 1.
Two circles being given: to find two right lines, which have the same
proportion, one to the other, that the given circles have, o^e to the other^

Suppose A and B, to be the diameters of two circles given: I say that two
right lines are to be found, having that proportion, that the circle of A has
to the circle of B. Let to A and B (by the 11 of the sixth) a third
proportional line be found, which suppose to be C. Construction.
I say now that A has to C, that proportion which the circle of A has to the
circle of B. For forasmuch as A, B, and C, are (by construction) three
proportional lines, Demonstration.
the square of A is to the square of B, as A is to C, (by the Corollary of the
20. of the sixth)^ but as the square of the line A is to the square of the line
B, so is the circle whose diameter is the line A, to the circle whose diameter
is the line B, by this second of the eleue^th. Wherefore the circles of the
line^ A and B, are in the proportion of the right lines A and C. Therefore two
circles being given, we have found two right lines having the same proportion
between the^, that the circles given, have one to the other: which ought to be
done.

A Problem. 2.
Two circles being given, and a right line: to find an other right line, to
which the line given shall have that proportion, which the one circle has to
the other.

Suppose two circles given: which let be A and B, and a right line given, which
let be C: I say that an other right line is to be ^ounde, to which the line C
shall have that proportion that the circle A, Construction
has to the circle B. As the diameter of the circle A, is to the diameter of
the circle B, so let the line C be to a fourth line, (by the 12. of the (...)
line be D. And, by the 11. of the sixth, let a third line proportional be
found, to the lines C and D, which let be E^ I say now, that the line C has to
the line E, that proportion which the circle A, has to the circle B. For (by
construction) the line^ C, D, and E, Demonstration.
are proportional: therefore the square of C^ is to the square of D, as C is
to E, by the Corollary of the 10. of the sixth. But by construction, as the
diameter of the circle A, is to the diameter of the circle B, so is C, to D:
wherefore as the square of the diameter of the circle A, is to the square of
the diameter of the circle B, so is the square of the line C to the square of
the line D, by the 22. of the sixth. But as the square of the diameter of A,
the circle, is to the square of the diameter of the circle D, so is the circle
A, to the circle B, by the second of the twelfth: wherefore by 11. of the
fiueth, as the circle A, is to the circle B, so is the square of the line C, to
the square of the li^e D. But it is proved, that ^s the square of the line C,
is to the square of the line D, so is the line C to the line E. Wherefore by
the 11. of the fiueth, as the circle A, is to the circle B, so is the line C to
the line E. Two circles being given therefor, and a right line, we have found
a right line, to which the right line geu^n, has that proportion, which the
one circle has to the other. Which ought to be done.

Note.
The difference between this Problem, and that next before, is this: there,
although we had two circles given, Di^^reence between the first problem and
the second.
and two lines were found in that proportion the one to the other, in which the
given circles were,: and here likewise are two circles given, and two line^
also are had in the same proportion, that the given circles are: yet there we
took at pleasure the first of the two lines, whereunto we framed the second
proportionally, to the circles given. But here the first of the two lines, is
assigned, poynted, and determined to us: and not our choice to be had therein,
as was in the former Problem.

A Problem. 3.
A circle being given, to find an other circle, to which the geu^n c^rcle is
in any proportion given in two right lines.

Suppose the circle A^C given, and therefore his semidiameter is given: whereby
his diameter also is given: which diameter let be AC. Let the proportion given,
be that which is between ^, F, two right lines. I say, a circle is to be found,
unto which A^C has that proportion that ^ has to ^. As ^ is to ^,
Construction.
so let AC the diameter, be to an other right line, by the 12. of the sixth.
Which line suppose to be 11. Between AC and ^^ find a middle proportional
line, by the 13. of the sixth: which let be LN. By the 10. of the first, divide
^N, into two equal pa^tes: and let that be done in the point ^. Now upon ^^,
(o being made the center) describe a circle: which let be ^N^. Demonstration.
I say that ABC, is to LMN, as ^ is to F. For seeing that AC, LN, and H, are
three right lines in continual proportion (by construction) therefore (by the
Corollary of the 20. of the sixth) as AC is to H, so is the square of A^ to the
square of LN. But AC is to H, as ^ is to ^, by construction. Wherefore the
square of AC is to the square of LN, as E is F: but as the square of the
diameter AC, is to the square of the diameter LN, so is the circle ABC to the
circle ^MN, by this 2. of the twelueth, wherefore by the 11. of the fiueth, the
circle ABC is to the circle LMN, as ^ is to F. A circle being given (therefore)
an other circle is found, to which the given circle is in any proportion given
between two right lines: which ought to be done.

A Problem. 4.
Two circles being given, to find one circle equal to them both.

Suppose the two circles given, have their diameters A^ and CD. I say that a
circle must be ^ound equal to the two circles whose diameters are A^ and CD:
unto the line A^, Cons^ruction.
at the point A, erect a perpendicular line A^: from which (sufficiently
produced) cut a line equal to CD, which let be AF. By the first peticion draw
from F to ^ a right line: so is FA^ made a triangle rectangle. I say now that a
circle whose diameter is F^, is equal to the two circles whose diameters are A^
and ^D. Demonstration.
For by the 47. of the first, the square of F^ is equal to the squares of A^
and AF. Which AF is (by construction) equal to CD^ wherefore the square of F^
is equal to the squares of AB and CD. But circles are one to an other, as the
squares of their diameters are one to the other, by this second of the
twelueth. Therefore the circle whose diameter is ^^ is equal to the circles
whose diameters are A^ and CD. Therefore two circles being given we have found
a circle equal to them both. Which was required to be done.

A Corollary. 1.
Hereby it is made evident, that in all triangles rectangle, the circles,
semicircles, quadrants, o^ any other portions of circles described upon the
subtendent line, is equal to the two circles, semicircles, quadrants, or any
two other like portions of circles, described on the two lines comprehending
the right angle, like to like being compared.

For like parts have that proportion between them selves, that their whole
magnitudes have, of which they are like parts, by the 15. of the fifth. But of
the whole circles, in the former problem it is evident: and therefore in the
fornamed like portions of circl^s, it is a true consequent.

A Corollary. 2.
By the former problem, it is also manifest, unto circles three, four, five,
or to how many so ever one will give, one circle may be given equal.

For if first, to any two, by the former problem, you find one equal, and
then unto your found circle and the third of the given circles, as two given
circles, find one other circle equal, and then to that second found circle,
and to the fourth of the first given circles^ as two circles, one new circle be
found equal, and so proceed till you have once cuppled orderly, every one of
your propounded circles (except the first and second already done) with the
new circle thus found for so the last found circle is equal to all the first
given circles. If ye doubt, or sufficiently understand me not: help your self
by the discourse and demonstration of the last proposition in the second book,
and also of the 31. in the sixth book.

A Problem 5.
Two unequal circles being given, to find a circle equal to the excess of
the greater to the less.

Suppose the two unequal circles given, to be ABC and DEF, and let ABC be the
greater: Cons^ruction.
whose diameter suppose to be AC: and the diameter of DEF suppose to be DF. I
say a circle must be found equal to that excess in magnitude, by which ABC is
greater the DEF. By the first of the fourth, in the circle ABC. Apply a right
line equal to DF: whose one end let be at C, and the other let be at B. From B
to A draw a right line. By the 30. of the third, it may appear, Demonstration.
that ABC is a right angle: and thereby ABC, the triangle is rectangled:
wherefore by the first of the two corollaries, here before, the circle ABC is
equal to the circle DEF, (For BC by construction is equal to DF) and more
over to the circle whose diameter is AB. That circle therefore whose diameter
is AB, is the circle containing the magnitude, by which ABC is greater then
DEF. Wherefore two unequal circles being given, we have found a circle equal
to the excess of the greater to the less: which ought to be done.

A Problem. 6.
A Circle being given to find two Circles equal to the same: which found
Circles, shall have the one to the other, any proportion given in two right
lines.

Suppose ABC, a circle given: and the proportion given, let it be that, which
is between the two right lines D and E. I say, that two circles are to be found
equal to ABC: and with all, one to the other, Cons^^uction.
in the proportion of D to E. Let the diameter of ABC be AC. As D is to E, so
let AC be divided, by the 10. of the sixth, in the point F. At F, to the line
AC let a perpe^dicular be drawn FB, and let it mete the circu^fere^ce at the
point B. From the point B to the points A and C, let right lines be drawn: BA
and BC. I say that the circles whose diamete^ are the lines BA and BC are
equal to the circle ABC: and that those circles having to their diameters the
lines BA and BC are one to the other in the proportion of the line D to the
line E. For, first that they are equal, it is evident: by reason that ABC is a
triangle rectangle: wherefore by the 47. of the first the squares of BA and BC
are equal to the square of AC: And so by this second it is mani^est, the two
circles to be equal to the circle ABC. Secondly as D is to ^, so is AF to FC:
by construction. And as the line AF is to the line FC, so is the square of the
line ^A to the square of the line BC. [Which thing, we will briefly p^oue
thus. The parallelogramme contained under AC and AF, Note this well: for it i^
of great use.
is equal to the square of BA: by the Lemma after the 32. of the tenth book:
and by the same Lemma or Assumpt, the parallelogramme contained under AC and
^C, is equal to the square of the line BC. Wherefore as the first
parallelogramme has it self to the second^ so has the square of BA (equal
to the first parallelogramme) it self, to the square of BC, equal to the
second parallelogramme. But both the parallelogra^mes have one height, namely,
the line AC: and bases, the lines AF and FC: wherefore as AF is to FC, so is
the parallelog^amme contained under AC, AF, to the parallelogramme contained
under AC, FC, by the first of the sixth. And therefore as AF is to FC, so is
the square of BA to the square of BC.] And as the square of BA is to the square
of BC: so is the circle whose diameter is BA, to the circle whose diameter is
BC, by this second of the twelfth. Wherefore the circle whose diameter is BA,
is to the circle whose diameter is BC, as D is to E. And before we proved them
equal to the circle ABC. Wher^fore a circle being given, we have found two
circles equal to the same: which have the one to the other any proportion
given in two right lines. Which ought to be done.

Note.
An other way of demonst^at^o^ of the f^^st ^robleme of th^^ addition.
He^e may you per^eiue an other way how to execute my first problem, for if you
make a right angle contained of the diameters given, as in this figure suppose
them BA and BC: and then subtend the right angle with the line AC: and from the
right angle, let fall a line perpendicular to the base AC: that perp^ndicular
at the point of his fall, deuideth AC into AF and FC, of the proportion
required.

A Corollary.
It follows of things manifestly proved in the demonstration of this
problem, that in a triangle rectangle, if from the right angle to the base, a
perpendicular be let fall: the same perpendicular cutteth the base into two
parts, Note this proper^ie of a triangle rectangle.
in that proportion, one to the other, that the squares of the righ^ lines,
containing the right angle, are in, one to the other: those on the one side the
perpendicular, being compared to those on the other, both square and segment.

A Problem 7.
Between two circles given, to find a circle middell proportional.

Let the two circles given, be ACD and BEF: I say, that a circle is to be
found, which between ACD and BEF is middell proportional. Construction.
Let the diameter of ACD, be AD, and of BEF, let B^ be the diameter: between AD
and BF, find a line middell proportional, by the 13. of the sixth: which let
be HK: I say that a circle, whose diameter is HK is middell proportional
between ACD and BEF. To AD, HK, and BF, (three right lines in continual
proportion, by construction) let a fourth line be found: to which BF shall have
that proportion, that AD has to HK: by the 12. of the sixth, and let that line
be ^. Demonstration.
It is manifest that the ^ower lines AD, HK, BF, and L, are in continual
proportion. [For by co^struction, as AD is to HK, so is B^ to L. And by
construction, on, as AD is to HK, so is HK to BF: wherefore HK is to BF, as BF
is to L: by the 11. of the fifth, wherefore the 4. lines are in continual
proportion.] Wherefore as the first is to the third, that is AD to BF, so is
the square of the first to the square of the second: that is, the square of AD,
to the square of HK: by the corollary of the 20. of the sixth. And by the same
corollary, as HK is to L, so is the square of HK to the square of BF. But by
alternate proportion, the line AD is to BF, as HK is to L: wherefore the square
of AD is to the square of HK, as the square of HK is to the square of BF.
Wherefore the square of HK, is middell proportional, between the square of AD
and the square of BF. But as the squares are one to the other, so are the
circles (whose diameters produce the same squares) one to the other, by this
second of the twelfth: wherefore the circle whose diameter is the line HK, is
middel proportional, between the circles whose diameters are the line a AD and
BF. Wherefore between two circles given, we have found a circle middell
proportional: which was requisite to be done.

A Corollary.
Hereby it is manifest, three lines or more, being in continual proportion,
that the circles having those lines to their diameters, are also in continual
proportion.

As of three, our demonstration has already proved: so of four, will the
proof go forward^ if you add a fifth line in continual proportion to the
four given: as we did to the three, add the fourth: namely, the line L. And
so, if you have 6, by putting to one more, the demonstration will be ^asie and
plain. And so of as many as you will.

A Problem. 8.
To a circle being given, to find three circles equal: Which three circles
shall be in continual proportion, in any proportion given between two right
lines.

Suppose the circle given to be ABC: and the proportion given to be that which
is between the lines X and Y. I say, that three circles are to be given, which
three, together, shall be equal to the circle ABC: and withal in continual
proportion, in the same proportion which is between the right lines X and Y.
Let the diameter of ABC, be AC. Of AC, make a square: by the 46. of the first:
which which let be ACDE. From the point D draw a line, sufficiently long (any
way, Though I say, without the square, yet you must think, that it may be also
within the square: and that diversely. Wherefore this Problem may have diverse
cases, so, but briefly, to a^^yde all, may thus be said: cut any side of that
square into 3. parts^ in the proportion of X to Y.

Note the manner of the drift in this demonstration and construction, mixtly and
with no determination to the constructio^^ as commonly i^ in probleme^^ which
is here of me so vsed^ for an example to young stude^tes of variety in art.


without the square): which let be DO. At the point D, and from the line DO,
cut a line equal to X: which let be DM. At the point M, and from the line MO,
cut a line equal to ^^ which let be MN. At the point N, to the two lines DM
and MN, set a third line proportional, by the 12. of the sixth: which let be
NO. From E (one of the angles of the square ACDE, next to D) draw a right line
to O: making perfect the triangle DEO. Now from the points M and N, draw
lines, to the ^ide DE, parallel to the side EO: by the 31. of the first: which
let be MF and NG. Wherefore, by the 2. of the sixth, the side DE, is
proportionally cut in the points F and G, as DO is cut in the points M and N:
therefore, as DM is to MN, so is DF, to FG: and as MN is to NO, so is FG to GE.
Wherefore, seeing DM, MN, and NO, are, by construction, continually
proportioned, in the proportion of X to Y: So likewise, are DF, FG, and GE, in
continual proportion, in the proportion of X to Y, by the 11. of the fifth.
From the points F and G, to the opposite ^ide AC, let right lines be drawn
parallel to the other sides: which lines, suppose to be FI, and GK: making
thereby, three parallelogrammes DI, ^K, and GC, equal to the whole square
ACDE. Which three parallelogrammes, by the first of the sixth, are one to an
other, as their bases, DF, FG, and GE, are. But DF, FG, and GE, were proved to
be in continual proportion, in the proportion of X to Y: Wherefore, the three
parallelogrammes DI, FK, and GC, by the 11. of the fifth, are also in
continual proportion, and in the same, which X is in, to Y. Let three squares
be made, equal to the three parallelogrammes DI, FK, and GC: by the last of
the second: Let the sides of those squares be, orderly, S, T, and V. Forasmuch
as, it was last concluded that the three parallelogrammes, DI, FK, and GC
(which are equal to the square ACDE) are also in continual proportion, in the
proportion of X to Y, therefore their equals, namely, the three squares of S,
T, and V, are also equal to the whole square ACDE, and in continual
proportion, in the proportion of X to Y. Wherefore the three circles, whose
diameters are S, T, and V, are equal to the circle, whose diameter is AC, the
side of the square ACDE, and also in continual proportion, in the proportion
of X to Y: by this second of the twelfth. But, by construction, AC is the
diameter of the circle ABC. Wherefore we have found three circles, equal to
ABC: namely, the circle, whose diameter is S: and the circle, whose diameter is
T: and the circle, whose diameter is V: which three circles, also, are in
continual propo^tion, in the proportion of X to Y. Wherefore to a circle being
given, we have found three cir^les equal in any proportion, given, between two
right lines: which was requisite to be done.

A Corollary.
Hereby, it is evident, that a circle given, we may find circles 4, 5, 6, 10,
20, 100, 1000, or how many soever shall be appointed, being in continual
proportion, in any proportion, given between two right lines: which circles,
all together, shall be equal to the circle given.

For, evermore dividing the one side of the chief square (which is made of the
diameter of the circle given) into so many parts, as circles are to be made:
so that between those parts be continued the proportion given between two
right lines^ and from the points of those divisions, draw parallels,
perpendiculars to the other side of the said chief square: making so many
parallelogrammes of the chief square, as are circles to be made: and to those
parallelogrammes (orderly) making equal squares: it is manifest that the sides
of those squares, are the diameters of the circles required to be made.

A Problem. 9.
Three circles being given, to find three equal to them: which three found
circles shall be in continual proportion, in any proportion given between two
right lines.

Suppose the three circles given to be A, B, and C, and let the proportion
given, be that which is between the right lines X and Y. I say, three other
circles are to be found, equal to A, B, and C, and with all, in continual
proportion, in the proportion of X to Y. By the 2. Corollary of my 4. Problem,
Construction.
make one circle equal to the three circles A, B, and C. Which one circle
suppose to be D: And by the problem next before, let three circles be ^ound,
equal to D, and with all, in continual proportion, in the same proportion
which is between X and Y. Which three circles, suppose to be E, F, and G. I
say, that E, F, G, are equal to A, B, C: and with all, in continual
proportion, in the propo^tio^ of X to Y. Demonstration.
For, by co^struction, the circle D is equal to the circles A, B, and C: and
by construction likewise, the circles E, F, and G, are equal to the same
circle D: Wherefore the three circles E, F, and G, are equal to the three
circles A, B, and C: and by construction E, F, and G, are in conti^uall
proportion, in the proportion of the line ^ to the line Y. Wherefore E, F, and
G, are equal to A, B, and C: and in continual proportion, in the proportion
of X to Y. Three circles, therefore, being given, we have found three circles,
equal to them, and also in continual proportion, in any proportion given,
between two right lines. Which was requisite to be done.

A Corollary. 1.
It is hereby very manifest, that unto 4.5.6.10.20. 100. or how many circles
soever, shall be given, we may find 3.4.5.8.10. or how many soever, shall be
appointed: which, all together, shall be equal to the circles given, how many
soever they are: and with all, our found circles, to be in continual
proportion, in any proportion assigned between two right lines given.

For, evermore, by the Corollary of the 4. Problem, reduce all your circles to
one: and by the Corollary of my 8. Problem, make as many circles as you are
appointed, equal to the circles given, and continual in proportion, in the
same, wherein, the two right lines given, are^ And so have you performed, the
thing required.

Note.
What incredible fruit in the Science of proportions may hereby grow, no man's
tongue can sufficiently express. And sorry I am, that utterly l^ysure is taken
from me, somewhat to specify in particular hereof.

The key of one of the chief treasure houses, belonging to the State
Mathematical.
THat^ which in these 9. Problemes, is said of circles^ is much more said of
squares, by whose means, circles, are thus handled. And therefore seeing to all
Polygonon right lined figures, equal squares Note and remember one ^e^th in
these solids.
all of one height, shall have that proportion, one to the other, that their
bases have, one to the other. And fifthly, seeing Spheres, Cones, and Cylinders
are one to other in (...) known proportions: and so may be made, one to the
other in any proportion assigned.

Fa^^h^^^ore, to speak of plain superficial figures, in respect of the
con^^r, or Area of the circle, Opportunity, and S^ff^ci^^ty, best are to be
allowed.

The 3. Theoreme. The 3. Proposition. Every Pyramid having a triangle to his
base: may be divided into two Pyramids equal and like the one to the other,
and also like to the whole, having also triangles to their bases, and into two
equal prismes: and those two prismes are greater then the half of the whole
Pyramid.
SVppose that there be a Pyramid, whose base let be the triangle ABC, and his
top the point D. Then I say, that the Pyramid ABCD may be divided into two
Pyramids equal and like the one to the other, and also like to the whole,
having also triangles to their bases, and into two equal prismes, and those
two prismes are greater then the half of the whole Pyramis^ Divide (by the 10.
of the first) the lines AB, BC, CA, AD, BD, and CD, into two equal parts in
the points E, F, G, H, K, and L. Cons^ruction.
And draw these right lines EH, EG, GH, HK, KL, LH, EK, KF, and FG. Now
forasmuch as the line AE is equal to the line EB, and the line AH to the line
HD: Demonstration of the first part, namely, that the whole Pyramids is de^ided
into two Pyramid equal and like the one to the other, and also to the whole,
and having triangles to their bases.
therefore (by the 2. of the sixth) the line EH is a parallel to the line DB. And
by the same reason, the line HK is a parallel to the line AB: Wherefore HEKB is
a parallelogramme. Wherefore the line HK is equal to the line EB. But the line
EB is equal to the line AE: Wherefore the line AE is equal to the line HK.
And the line AH is equal to the line HD. Now therefore there are two lines AE
and AH, equal to two lines KH and HD, the one to the other, and the angle EAH
is (by the 29. of the first) equal to the angle KHD: Wherefore (by the 4. of
the first) the ^ase EH is equal to the base KD. Wherefore the triangle AEH, is
equal and like to the triangle HKD. And by the same reason also the triangle
AHG, is equal and like to the triangle HLD. And forasmuch as two right lines
EH and HG touching the one the other, are parallels to two right lines KD and
DL touching also the one the other, and not being in one and the self same
plain superficies with the two first: those lines (by the 10. of the eleventh)
contain equal angles. Wherefore the angle EHG is equal to the angle KDL. And
forasmuch as two right lines EH and HG, are equal to two right lines KD and
DL, the one to the other, and the angle EHG is (by the 10. of the eleventh)
equal to the angle ^DL, therefore (by the 4. of the first) the base EG is
equal to the base LK. Wherefore the triangle EHG is equal and like to the
triangle KDL. And by the same reason also the triangle AEG is equal and like
to the triangle HKL. Wherefore the Pyramid, whose ba^e is the triangle AEG, and
top the point H, is equal and like to the Pyramid, whose base is the
triangle HKL, and top the point D.

And forasmuch as to one of the sides of the triangle ADB, namely, to the side
AB, is drawn ^ parallel line HK, therefore the whole triangle A^DB is
equiangle to the triangle DHK, and their sides are proportional (by the
Corollary of the ^. of the sixth). Wherefore the triangle ADB is like to the
triangle DHK. And by the same reason also the triangle DBC is like to the
triangle DKL, and the triangle ADC to the triangle DHL. And forasmuch as two
right lines BA and AC touching the one the other, are parallels to two right
lines KH and HL, touching also the one the other, but not being in one and the
self same super^icies with the two first lines, therefore (by the 10. of the
eleventh) they contain equal angles. Wherefore the angle BAC is equal to the
angle KHL. And as the line BA is to the line AC, so is the line KH to the line
HE. Wherefore the triangle ABC is like to the triangle KHL. Wherefore the whole
Pyramid whose base is the triangle ABC and top the point D, is like to the
pyramid whose base is the triangle HKL, and top the point D. But the pryamis
whose base is the triangle HKL and top the point D, is proved to be like to
the pyramid whose base is the triangle AEG and top the point H. Wherefore
also the pyramid whose base is the triangle ABC, and top the point D, is like
to the pyramid whose base is the triangle AEG and top the point H (by the 21.
of the sixth). The conclusion of the first part.
Wherefore either of these pyramids AEGH and HKLD is like to the whole pyramid
ABCD.

Demonstration of the second part, namely, that it is divided moreover into two
equal Prismes.
[And forasmuch as the lines BE, KH, are parallel lines and equal, as it has
been proved, therefore the right lines BK and EH, which join them together,
are equal and parallels, by the 33. of the first. Again fo^asmuch as the
lines BE and FG are parallel lines and equal, therefore lines EG and BF, which
join them together, are also equal and parallels: and by the same reason
forasmuch as the lines FG and KH are equal parallels, the lines FK and GH,
which join them together, are also equal parallels. Wherefore BEHK, DEGF, and
KHGF, are parallelogrammes. And forasmuch as their opposite sides are equal,
by the 34. of the first^ therefore the triangles FHG, and BKF, are equiangle,
by the 8. of the first: and therefore, by the 4. of the same, they are equal:
and moreover, by the 15. of the eleventh, their superficiec^s are parallels.
Wherefore the solid BKFEHG is a Prisme, by the 11. definition of the eleventh.
Likewise forasmuch as the sides of the triangle HKL are equal and parallels to
the sides of the triangle GFC, as it has before been proved: It is manifest,
that CFKL, FKHG, and CLHG, are parallelogrammes, by the 33. of the first.
Wherefor^ the whole solid KLHFCG, is a Prisme, by the 11. de^inition of the
eleventh, and is contained under the said parallelogrammes CFKL, FKHG, and
CLHG, and the two triangles HKL and GFC, which are opposite and parallels.]

And forasmuch as the line BF is equal to the line FC, therefore (by the 41.
of the first) the parallelogramme EBFG is double to the triangle GFC. And
forasmuch as if there be two Prismes of equal altitudes, and the one have to
his base a parallelogramme, and the other a triangle, and if the
parallelogramme be double to the triangle, those Prismes are (by the 40. of the
eleventh) equal the one to the other: therefore the Prisme contained under the
two triangles BKF and EHG, and under the three parallelogrammes EBFG, EBKH, and
KHFG, Conclusion of the second part.
is equal to the Prisme contained under the two triangles GFC, and HKL, and
under the three parallelogrammes KFCL, LCGH, and HKFG.

And it is manifest, that both these Prismes, of which the base of one is the
parallelogramme EBFG, Demonstration of the last part that the two Prismes are
greater then the half of the whole Pyramid.
and the opposi^e unto it the line KH, and the base of the other is the
triangle GFC, and the opposite side unto it the triangle KLH, are greater then
both these Pyramids, whose bases are the triangles AGE, and HKL, and tops the
points H and D. For if we draw these right lines OF and EK, the Prisme whose
base is the parallelogramme EBFG, and the opposite unto it the right line HK,
is greater then the Pyramid whose base is the triangle EBF, and top the point
K. But the Pyramid whose base is the triangle EBF, and top the point K, is
equal to the Pyramid whose base is the triangle AEG and top the point H, for
they are contained under equal and like plain superficieces. Wherefore also
the Prisme whose base is the parallelogramme EBFG and the opposite unto it the
right line HK, is greater then the Pyramid, whose base is the triangle AEG, and
top the point H. But the prisme whose base is the parallelogramme EBFG, and
the opposite unto it the right line HK, is equal to the prisme, whose base is
the triangle GFC, and the opposite side unto it the triangle HKL: And the
Pyramid whose base is the triangle AEG, and top the point H, is equal to the
Pyramid, whose base is the triangle HKL, and top the point D. Conclusion of
the last part.
Wherefore the foresaid two prismes are greater then the foresaid two Pyramids,
whose bases are the triangles AEG, HKL, and tops the points H and D.
Wherefore the whole Pyramid whose base is the triangle ABC, Conclusion of the
whole proposition.
and top the point D, is divided into two Pyramids equal and like the one to
the other, and like also unto the whole Pyramid, having also triangles to their
bases, and into two equal prismes, and the two prismes are greater then half
of the whole Pyramid: which was required to be demonstrated.

If ye will with diligence read these four books following of Euclide, which
concern bodies, and clearly see the demonstrations in them contained, it
shall be requisite for you when you come to any proposition, which concerns a
body or bodies, whether they be regular or not, first to describe of p^s^ed
paper (according as I taught you in the end of the definitions of the eleventh
book) such a body or bodies, as are there required, and having your body, or
bodies thus described, when you have noted it with letters according to the
figure set forth upon a plain in the proposition, follow the construction
required in the proposition. As for example, in this third proposition it is
said that, Every pyramid having a triangle to ^is base, may be divided into two
pyramids. etc. Here first describe a pyramid of pasted paper ha^ing his base
triangled (it skilleth not whether it be equilater, or equiangled, or not, only
in this proposition is required that the base be a triangle. Then for that the
proposition supposes the base of the pyramid to be the triangle ABC, note the
base of your pyramid which you have described with the letters ABC, and the
top of your pyramid with the letter D: For so is required in the proposition.
And thus have you your body ordered ready to the construction. Now in the
construction it is required that ye divide the lines, AB, BC, CA. etc, namely,
the six lines which are the sids of the four triangles containing the
piramis, into two equal parts in the poyntet ^, F, G, etc. That is, ye must
divide the line AB of your pyramid into two equal parts, and note the point
of the division with the letter E, and so the line BC being divided into two
equal parts, note the point of the division with the letter F. And so the
rest, and this order follow ye as touching the rest of the construction there
put, and when ye have finished the construction, compare your body thus
described with the demonstration: and it will make it very plain and easy to
be understood. Whereas without such a body described of matter, it is hard
for young beginners (unless they have a very deep imagination) fully to
conceive the demonstration by the sig^e as it is described in a plain. Here
for the better declaration of that which I have said, have I set a figure,
whose form if ye describe upon pasted paper noted with the like letters, and
cut the lines ^A, DA, DC, and fold it accordingly, it will make a Pyramid
described according to the construction required in the proposition. And this
order follow ye as touching all other propositions which concern bodies.

An other demonstration after Campane of the 3. proposition.
Suppose that there be a Pyramid ABCD having to his base the triangle BCD, and
let his top be the solid angle A: from which let there be drawn three
subtended lines AB, AC, and AD to the three angles of the base, and divide all
the sides of the base into two equal parts in the three points E, F, G:
divide also the three subte^ded lines AB, AC, and AD in two equal parts in
the three points H, K, L. And draw in the base these two lines OF and EG: So
shall the base of the pyramid be divided into three superficieces: whereof two
are the two triangles BEF, and EGD, which are like both the one to the other,
and also to the whole base, by the 2 part of the second of the sixth, and by
the definition of like super^iciec^s, and they are equal the one to the other,
by the 8. of the first: the third superficies is a quadrangled parallelogramme,
namely, EFGC: which is double to the triangle EGD, by the 40. and 41. of the
first. Now then again from the point H draw unto the points E and F these two
subtendent lines HE and HF: draw also a subtended line from the point K to the
point G. And draw these lines HK, KL, and LH. Wherefore the whole pyramid ABCD
is divided into two pyramids, which are HBEF, and AHKL, and into two prismes of
which the one is EHFGKC, and is set upon the quadrangled base CFGE: the other
is EGDHKL, and has to his base the triangle EGD. Now as touching the two
pyramids HBEF and AHKL, that they are equal the one to the other, and also
that they are like both the one to the other and also to the whole, it is
manifest by the definition of equal and like bodies, and by the 10. of the
eleventh, and by 2. part of the second of the sixth. And that the two Prismes
are equal it is manifest by the last of the eleventh. And now that both the
prismes taken together are greater then the half of the whole pyramid, hereby
it is manifest, for that either of them may be divided into two pyramids, of
which the one is a triangular pyramid equal to one of the two pyramids into
which together with the two prismes is divided the whole pyramid, and the other
is a quadrangled pyramid double to the other pyramid. Wherefore it is plain
that the two prismes taken together are three quarters of the whole pyramid
divided. But if ye are desirous to know the proportion between them, read the
^, of this book. But now here to this purpose it shall be sufficient to know,
that the two prismes taken together do exceed in quantity the two partial
pyramids taken together, into which together with the two prismes the whole
pyramid was divided.

The 4. Theoreme. The 4. Proposition. If there be two Pyramids under equal
altitudes, having triangles to their bases, and either of those Pyramids be
divided into two Pyramids equal the one to the other, and like unto the whole,
and into two ^quall Prismes, and again if in either of the Pyramids made of
the two first Pyramids be still observed the same order and manner: then as the
base of the one Pyramid is to the base of the other Pyramid, so are all the
Prismes which are in the one Pyramid to all the Prismes which are in the other,
being equal in multitude with them.
SVppose that there be two Pyramids under equal altitudes, having triangles to
their bases, namely, ABC, and DEF, and having to their tops the points G and
H. And let either of these pyramids be divided into two pyramids equal the one
to the other, and like unto the whole, and into two equal prismes (according
to the method of the former Proposition). And again, let either of those
pyramids so^ made of the two first pyramids, be imagined to be after the same
order divided, and so do continually. Then I say, that as the base ABC is to
the base DEF, so are all the prismes which are in the pyramid ABCG, to all the
prismes which are in the pyramid DEFH being equal in multitude with them. For
forasmuch as the line BX is equal to the line XC, and the line AL to the line
LC: (For as we saw in the construction pertaining to the former Proposition, all the six sides of the whole pyramids, are each divided into two equal parts,
the like of which construction is in this proposition also supposed): therefore
the line XL is a parallel to the line AB, and the triangle ABC, is like to the
triangle LXC, (by the Corollary of the second of the sixth): and by the same
reason the triangle DEF is like to the triangle RWF. And forasmuch as the line
BC is double to the line CX, and the line FE to the line FW: therefore as the
line BC is to the line CX, so is the line OF to the line FW. And upon the lines
BC and CX are described rectiline figures like and in like sort set, namely,
the triangles ABC and LXC, and upon the lines OF and FW are also described
rectiline figures, like and in like sort set, namely, the triangles DEF and
RWF^ But if there be four right lines proportional, the rectiline figures
described of them being like und in like sort set, shall also be proportional
(by the 22. of the sixth). Wherefore as the triangle ABC is to the triangle LXC,
so is the triangle DEF to the triangle RWF. Wherefore alternately (by the 16.
of the fifth) as the triangle ABC is to the triangle DEF, so is the triangle LXC
to the triangle RWF. An Assu^pt.
But as the triangle LXC is to the triangle RWF, so is the prisme whose base is
the triangle LXC, and the opposite side unto it the triangle OMN, to the prisme
whose base is the triangle RWF, and the opposite side unto it the triangle STV
(by the Corollary of the 40. of the eleventh). For these prismes are under one
and the self same altitude, namely, under the half of the altitude of the
whole Pyramids, which Pyramids are supposed to be under one and the self same
altitude: this is also proved in the Assumpt following). Wherefore (by the 11.
of the fifth) as the triangle ABC is to the triangle DEF, so is the prisme whose
base is the triangle LXC, and the opposite side unto it the triangle OMN, to
the prisme whose base is the triangle RWF, and the opposite side unto it the
triangle STV. And forasmuch as there are two prismes in the pyramid ABCG equal
the one to the other, and two prismes also in the pyramid DEFH equal the one
to the other: therefore as the prisme, whose base is the parallelogra^me BKLX,
and the opposite side unto it the line MO, is to the prisme, whose base is the
triangle LXC, and the opposite side unto it the triangle OMN, so is the prisme,
whose base is the parallelogramme PERW, and the opposite unto it the line ST,
to the prisme, whose base is the triangle RWF, and the opposite side unto it
the triangle STV. Wherefore by composition (by the 18. of the fifth) as the
prismes KBXLMO, and LXCMNO, are to the prisme LXCMNO, so are the prismes
PEWRST, and RWFSTV, to the prisme RWFSTV. Wherefore alternately (by the 16. of
the fifth) as the two prismes KBXLMO, and LXCMNO, are to the two prismes PEWRST,
and RWFSTV, so is the prisme LXCMNO to the prisme RWFSTV. But as the prisme
LXCMNO is to the prisme RWFSTV, so have we proved that the base LXC is to the
base RWF, and the base ABC to the base DEF. Wherefore (by the 16. of the fifth)
as the triangle ABC is to the triangle DEF, so are both the prismes which are
in the pyramid ABCG, to both the prismes which are in the pyramid DEFH. And in
like sort if we divide the other pyramids after the self same manner, namely,
the pyramid OMNG, and the pyramid STVH: as the base OMN is to the base STV, so
shall both the prismes that are in the pyramid OMNG, be to both the prismes
which are in the pyramid STVH. But as the base OMN is to the base STV, so is
the base ABC to the base DEF. Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as the base
ABC is to the base DEF, so are the two prismes that are in the pyramid ABCG, to
the two prismes that are in the pyramid DEFH, and the two prismes that are in
the pyramid OMNG, to the two prismes that are in the pyramid STVH, and the
four prismes to the four prismes. And so also shall it follow in the prismes
made by dividing the two pyramids AKLO, and DPRS, and of all the other pyramids
in general, being equal in multitude.

[And that as the triangle LXC is to the triangle RWF, so is the prisme whose
base is the triangle LXC and the opposite side OMN, An Assumpt.
to the prisme whose base is the triangle RWF and the opposite side the
triangle STV, may thus be proved. For in the self same construction, imagine
perpendicular lines to be drawn from the points G and H to the two plain
superficieces wherein are the triangles ABC and DEF. Now those perpendicular
lines shall be equal the one to the other, for that the two pyramids are
supposed to be of equal altitude. And forasmuch as two right lines, namely,
GC, and the perpendicular line drawn from the point G, are divided by two
parallel plain superficieces, namely, ABC and OMN, therefore (by the 17. of the
eleventh) the parts of the lines divided are proportional. But the line GC is
by the plain superficies OMN divided into two equal parts in the point N.
Wherefore also the perpendicular line drawn from the point G to the plain
superficies wherein is the triangle ABC, is divided into two equal parts by
the superficies OMN: and by the same reason also the perpendicular line which
is drawn from the point H to the plain superficies DEF is divided into two
equal parts, by the plain superficies STV. And the perpendiculars drawn
from the points G and H to the plain superficieces ABC and DEF are equal.
Wherefore also the perpendicular lines which are drawn from the triangles OMN
and STV to the plain superficieces ABC and DEF are equal the one to the other.
Wherefore also the prismes whose bases are the triangles LXC and RWF and the
opposite sides the triangles OMN and STV, are of equal altitude. Wherefore
also the parallelipipedons which are described of the foresaid prismes and being
equal in altitude with them, are the one to the other, as the base of the one
is to the base of the other. Wherefore also as the half of the bases of those
parallelipipedons, namely, as the base LXC is to the base RWF, so are the
foresaid prismes the one to the other.] If therefore there be two pyramid under
equal altitudes, having triangles to their bases and either of those pyramids
be divided into two pyramids equal the one to the other and like unto the
whole, and into two equal prismes, Conclusion of the whole.
and again if in either of the pyramids made of the two first pyramids be
still observed the same order and manner: then as the base of the one pyramid is
to the base of the other piramis, so all the prismes which are in the one
pyramid to all the prismes which are in the other being equal in multitude:
which was required to be proved.

The 5. Theoreme. The 5. Proposition. Pyramids consisting under one and the
self same altitude, having triangles to their bases: are in that proportion
the one to the other that their bases are.
SVppose that these two Pyramids, whose bases are the triangles ABC and DEF,
and tops the points G and H, be under equal altitudes. Then I say, that as
the base ABC is to the base DEF, so is the pyramid ABCG to the pyramid DEFH.
For if the pyramid ABCG be not to the pyramid DEFH, as the base ABC is to the
base DEF, then as the base ABC is to the base DEF, Demonstration leading to an
impossibility.
so is the pyramid ABCG to a solid, either less then the pyramid DEFH, or
greater. First let it be to some less, and let the same be X. And (by the 3.
of the twelfth) let the pyramid DEFH be divided into two pyramids equal the
one to the other, and like unto the whole, and into two equal prismes. Now the
two prismes are greater then the half of the whole pyramid. And again (by the
same) let the pyramids which are made of the division, be in like sort divided,
and do this continually, until there remain some pyramids made of the pyramid
DEFH, which are less then the excess, whereby the pyramid DEFH excedeth the
solid X. Let such pyramids be taken, and for example sake, let those pyramids
be DPRS, and STVH. Wherefore the prismes remaining which are in the pyramid
DEFH, are greater then the solid X. Divide (by the Proposition next going
before) the pyramid ABCG in like sort, and as many times as the pyramid DEFH ^s
divided. Wherefore (by the same) as the base ABC is to the base DEF, so are all
the prismes which are in the pyramid ABCG, to all the prismes which are in the
pyramid DEFH. But as the base ABC is to the base DEF, so is the pyramid ABCG to
the solid X. Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as the pyramid ABCG, is to the
solid X, so are the prismes which are in the pyramid ABCG, to the prismes
which are in the pyramid DEFH. Wherefore alternately (by the 16. of the fifth)
as the pyramid ABCG is to the prismes which are in it, so is the solid X, to
the prismes which are i^ the pyramid DEFH. But the pyramid ABCG is greater then
the prismes which are in it. Wherefore also the solid X is greater then the
prismes which are in the pyramid DEFH (by the 14. of the fifth). But it is
supposed to be less which is impossible. Wherefore as the base ABC is to the
base DEF, so is not the pyramid ABCG to any solid less then the pyramid DEFH.

I say moreover, that as the base ABC is to the base DEF, so is not the pyramid
ABCG, In the Assu^p^ ^^llowin^ the second ^rop^^ition of this b^^ke.
as we have before proved. Wherefore also (by the 11. of the ^ift) as the base
DEF is to the base ABC, so is the pyramid DEFH, to some solid less then the
pyramid ABCG which thing we have proved to be impossible. Wherefore as the base
ABC is to the base DEF, so is not the pyramid ABCG to any solid greater then
the pyramid DEFH: and it is als^ proved that it is not in that proportion to
any less then the pyramid DEFH. Wherefore as the base ABC is to the base DEF,
so is the pyramid ABCG to the pyramid DEFH. Wherefore pyramids consisting under
one and the self same altitude, and having triangles to their bases, are in
that proportion the one to the other, that their bases are: which was required
to be demonstrated.

The 6. Theoreme. The 6. Proposition. Pyramids consisting under one and the
self same altitude, and having P^ligo^on figures to their bases: are in that
proportion the one to the other, that their bases are.
SVppose that there be two Pyramids, having to their bases these Polig^non
figures ABCED, and FGHKL, and let their ^oppes be the points M and N, which
let be of one and the self same altitude. Then I say, that as the base ABCED
is to the base FGHKL, so is the pyramid ABCEDM, to the pyramid FGHKLN.
Construction.
Divide the base ABCED into these triangles ABC, ACD, and CDE, and likewise the
base FGHKL into these triangles FGH, FHL, and HKL. And imagine that upon every
one of those triangles be set a pyramid of equal altitude with the two
pyramids put at the beginning. Demonstration.
And for that as the triangle ABC is to the triangle ADC, so is the pyramid
ABCM to the pyramid ADCM (by the 5. of this book). Wherefore, by composition (by
the 18. of the fifth) as the four sided figure ABCD is to the triangle ACD, so
is the pyramid ABCDM to the pyramid ACDM. But as the triangle ACD is to the
triangle CDE, so is the pyramid ACDM to the pyramid CDEM. Wherefore of
equality (by the 22. of the fifth) as the base ABCD is to the base CDE, so is
the pyramid ABCDM to the pyramid CDEM. Wherefore again by composition (by the
18. of the fifth) as the base ABCDE is to the base CDE, so is the pyramid ABCEDM
to the pyramid CDEM. And by the same reason also as the base FGHKL is to the
base HKL, so is the pyramid FGHKLN to the pyramid HKLN. And forasmuch as there
are two pyramids CDEM and HKLN, having triangles to their bases, and being
under one and the self same altitude, therefore (by the 5. of the twelfth) as
the base CDE is to the base HKL, so is the pyramid CDEM to the pyramid HKLN.
Now for that as the base ABCED is to the base CDE, so is the pyramid ABCEDM to
the pyramid CDEM. But as the base CDE is to the base HKL, so is the pyramid
CDEM to the pyramid HKLN. Wherefore of equality (by the 22. of the fifth) as
the base ABCED is to the base HKL, so is the pyramid ABCEDM to the pyramid
HKLN. But also as the base HKL is the base FGHKL, so is the Pyramid HKLN to to
the pyramid FGHKLN. Wherefore again of equality (by the 22. of the fifth) as
the base ABCED is to the base FGHKL, so is the pyramid ABCEDM to the pyramid
FGHKLN. Wherefore pyramids consisting under one and the self same altitude,
and having Polygonon figures to their bases, are in that proportion the one to
the other, that their bases are: which was required to be proved.

The 7. Theoreme. The 7. Proposition. Every prisme having a triangle to his
base, may be divided into three pyramids equal the one to the other, having
also triangles to their bases.
SVppose that ABCDEF be a prisme, having to his base the triangle ABC, and the
opposite side unto it, the triangle DEF. Then I say that the prisme ABCDEF, may
be divided into three piramids equal the one to the other, and having
triangles to their bases. Demonstration.
Draw these right lines BD, EC, and CD. And forasmuch as ABED is a
parallelogramme, and his diameter is the line BD, therefore the triangle ABD is
equal to the triangle EDB. Wherefore also the pyramid whose base is the
triangle ABD, and top the point C, is equal to the pyramid whose base is the
triangle EDB, and top the point C, by the 5. of this book. But the pyramid
whose base is the triangle EDB, and top the point C, is one and the same
which the pyramid whose base is the triangle EBC, and top the point D, for
they are comprehended of the self same plain superficieces, namely, of ye
triangles BDEDEC, DBC, and EBC. Wherefore also the pyramid whose base is the
triangle ABD and top the point C, is equal to the pyramid whose base is the
triangle EBC and top the point D. Again forasmuch as BCFE is a
parallelogramme, and the diameter thereof is EC, therefore the triangle ECF is
equal to the triangle CBE. Wherefore also the pyramid whose base is the
triangle EBC and top the point D, is equal to the pyramid, whose base is the
triangle ECF and top the point D, by the 5. of this book. But the pyramid
whose base is the triangle BEC and top the point D, is proved to be equal to
the pyramid whose base i^ the triangle ABD, and top the point C. Wherefore
also the pyramid whose base is the triangle CEF and top the point D, is
equal to the pyramid whose base is the triangle ABD and top the point C.
Wherefore the prisme ABDEF is divided into three equal pyramids having
triangles to their bases. And forasmuch as the pyramid whose base is the
triangle ABD and top the point C, is one and the self same with the pyramid
whose base is the triangle CAB and top the point D (for they are contained
under the self same plain superficieces) but it has been proved that the
pyramid whose base is the triangle ABD and top the point C, is the third
pyramid of the prisme whose base is the triangle ABC and the opposite side unto
it the triangle DEF. Wherefore the pyramid whose base is the triangle ABC and
top the point D is the third pyramid of the prisme, whose base is the
triangle ABC, and opposite side the triangle DEF. Wherefore every prisme having
a triangle to his base, may be divided into three pyramids equal the one to
the other, having also triangles to their bases: which was required to be
proved.

Corollary.
Hereby it is manifest that every pyramid is the third part of a prisme having
one and the same base with it and also being under the self same altitude with
it. For if the base of the prisme be any other rectiline figure the^ a
triangle, that also may be divided into prismes which shall have triangles to
their bases.

Here Campane and Flussas add certain Corollaryes.

First Corollary.
Every Prisme is treble to the Piramis, which has the self same triangle to
his base that the Prisme has, and the self same altitude. As it is manifest
by this propo^^tion, where the Prisme is divided into three equal Pyramids, of
which, two are upon one and the self same base, and under one and the self
same altitude. But if the Prisme have to his ^ase a parallelogramme, and if the
Pyramid have to his base the half of the same parallelogramme, and their
altitudes be equal, then again the Pyramid shall be the third part of the
Prisme. For it was manifest, by the 40. of the ^leu^th, that Prismes, being
under equal altitudes, and the one having to his base a triangle, and the
other a parallelogramme double to the same triangle, are equal the one to the
other. Whereof follows the former conclusion.

Second Corollary.
If there be many Prismes under one and the same altitude, and having triangles
to their bases, Note.

Sided Columns (sometime called prismes) are triple to pyramids, having one
base and equal he^th with them.


and if the triangular bases be so joined together upon one and the same
plain, that they compose a Poligonon figure: A pyramid set upon that base
being a Poligonon figure, and under the same altitude, is the third part of
that solid, which is compos^d of all the Prismes added together.

For forasmuch as eu^ry one of the Prismes which has to his base a triangle,
to every one of the Pyramids set upon the same base (the altitude being always
one and the same) is treble, it is manifest by the 12. of the fiueth, that all
the Prismes are to all the Pyramids treble. Wherefore Parallelipipedons are
treble to Pyramids set upon the self same base with them, and under the same
altitude, Note: ^arallelipipedons treble to pyramids of one base and heith with
them.
for that they contain two Prismes.

Third Corollary.
If two Prismes being under one and the self same altitude, have to their
bases either, both triangles, or both parallelogrammes, the Prismes are the one
to the other, as their bases are.

For forasmuch as those Prismes are equemultiqlices unto the Pyram^ds upon the
self same bases, and under the same altitude, which Pyramids are in proportion
as their bases, it is manifest (by the 15. of the fifth), that the Prismes are
in the proportion of the bases. For by the former Corollary, the Prismes are
treble to the Pyramids s^t upon the triangular bases.

Fourth Corollary.
Prismes are in sesquealtera proportion to Pyramids which have the self same
quadrangled base that the Prismes have, and are under the self same altitude.

For, that Pyramid contains two Pyramids set upon a triangular base of the
same Prisme, for it is proved, that that Prisme is treble to the Pyramid which
is set upon the half of his quadrangled base, unto which the other which is
set upon the whole base is double, by the sixth of this book.

Fiueth Corollary.
Wherefore we may in like sort conclude, that solides mentioned in the second
Corollary (which solids Campane calls sided Columns) being under one and the
self same altitude, are in proportion the one to the other, as their bases,
which are poligonon figures.

For they are in the proportion of the Pyramids or Prismes, set upon the self
same bases, and under the self same altitude, that is, they are in the
proportion of the bases of the said Pyramids or Prismes. For those solids may
be divided into Prismes having the self same altitude, when as their opposite
bases may be divided into triangles, by the 20 of the sixth. Upon which
triangles Prismes being set, are in proportion as their bases.

By this 7. Proposition it plainly appears that ^u^lide, as it was before
noted in the diffinition^^ under the diffinition of a Prisme, comprehended also
those kinds of solids, which Campane calls sided Columns. For in that he
says, Every Prisme having a triangle to his base, may be deuided^ etc. he
neded not (taking a Prisme in that sense which Campane and most men take it) to
have added that particle, having to his base a triangle. For by their sense,
there is no Prisme, but it may have to his base a triangle^ and so it may seem
that Euclide ought without exception have said, that, every prisme whatsoever,
may be divided into three pyramids equal the one to the other, having also
triangles to their bases. For so do Campane and Flussas put the proposition,
leaving out the former particle having to his base a triangle, which yet is red
in the Greek copye, and not le^t out by any other interpreters known abroad
except by Campane and Flussas. Yea and the Corollary following of this
proposition added by Theon or Euclide, and amended by M. Dee seems to confirm
this sense.

Of this, ^s (...) made manifest, that every pyramid is the third part of the
prisme, having the same base with it, and equal altitude. For, and if the base
of the prisme have any other right lined figure (then a triangle) and also the
superficies opposite to the base, the same figure: that prisme may be divided
into prismes, having triangled bases: and the superficieces to those bases
opposite, also triangled a ^^ike and equally.

For there, as we see are put these words, ^or and if the base of the prisme
be any other right lined figure^ etc. whereof a man may well infer that the
base may be any other rectiline figure whatsoever, and not only a triangle or a
parallelogramme, and it is true also in that sense, as it is plain to see by
the second corollary added out of Flussas, which corollary, as also the first
of his corollaries, is in a manner all one with the Corollary added by Theon or
Euclide. Farther Theon in the demonstration of the 10. proposition of this
book (as we shall a^terward see) most plainly calls not only sided
columns prismes, but also parallelipipedons. And although the 40. proposition
of the eleventh book may seem hereunto to be a let. For that it can be
understood of those prismes only which have triangles to their like, equal,
opposite, and parallel sides, or but of some sided columns, and not of all:
yet may that let be thus removed away, to say that Euclide in that proposition
used genus pro specie, that is, the general word for some special kind
thereof: which thing also is not rare, not only with him, but also with other
learned philosophers. Thus much I thought good by the way to note in farther
defense of Euclide definition of a Prisme.

The 8. Theoreme. The 8. Proposition. Pyramids being like and having triangles
to their bases, are in treble proportion the one to the other, of that in which
their sides of like proportion are.
SVppose that these pyramids whose bases are the triangles GBC and HEF and
tops, the points A and D be like, and in like sort described, and let AB and
DE be sides of like proportion. Then I say that the pyramid ABCG is to the
pyramid DEFH in treble proportion, of that in which the side AB is to the side
DE. Make perfect the parallelipipedons, namely, the solides BCKL and EFXO. And
forasmuch as the pyramid ABCG is like to the pyramid DEFH, Construction.
therefore the angle ABC is equal to the angle DEF, Demonstration.
and the angle GBC to the angle HEF, and moreover the angle ABG to the angle
DEH, and as the line AB is to the line DE, so is the line BC to the line OF,
and the line BG to the line EH. And for that as the line AB is to the line DE,
so is the line BC to the line OF, and the sides about the equal angles, are
proportional, therefore the parallelogramme BM is like to the parallelogra^me
EP: and by the same reason the parallelogramme BN is like to the
parallelogramme ER, and the parellelogramme BK is like unto the parallelogramme
EX. Wherefore the three parallelogrammes BM, KB and BN are like to the three
parallelogrammes EP, EX, and ER. But the three parallelogrammes BM, KB, and BN
are equal and like to the three opposite parallelogrammes, and the three
parallelogrammes EP, EX, and ER are equal and like to the three opposite
parallelogrammes. Wherefore the parallelipipedons BCKL and EFXO are
comprehended under plain superficieces like and equal in multitude. Wherefore
the solid BCKL is like to the solid EFXO. But like parallelipipedons are (by
the 33. of the eleventh) in treble proportion the one to the other of that in
which side of like proportion is to side of like proportion. Wherefore the
solid BCKL is to the solid EFXO in treble proportion of that in which the
side of like proportion AB is to the side of like proportion DE. But as the
solid BCKL is to the solid EFXO, so is the pyramid ABCG to the pyramid DEFH
(by the 15. of the fifth) for that the pyramid is the sixth part of this
solid: for the prisme, being the half of the parallelipipedon is treble to
the pyramid. Wherefore the pyramid ABCG is to the pyramid DEFH in treble
proportion of that in which the side AB is to the side DE. Which was required
to be proved.

Corollary.
Hereby it is manifest that like pyramids having to their bases poligonon
figures, are in treble proportion the one to the other, of that in which side
of like proportion, is to side of like proportion.

For if they be divided into pyramids having triangles to their bases (for like
poligono^ figures are divided into like triangles, and equal in multitude, and
the sides are of like proportion) as one of the pyramids of the one, having a
triangle to his base, is to one of the pyramids of the other, having also a
triangle to his base, so also are all the pyramids of the one pyramid having
triangles to their bases to all the pyramids of the other pyramid having also
triangles to their bases. That is, the pyramid having to his base a poligono^
^igure, to the pyramid having also to his base a poligono^ ^igure. But a
pyramid having a triangle to his base, is to a pyramid having also a triangle
to his base, and being like unto it, in treble proportion of that in which side
of like proportion is to side of like proportion. Wherefore a pyramid having to
his base a poligono^ figure, is to a pyramid having also a poligonon figure to
his base, the said pyramids being like the one to the other, in treble
proportion of that in which side of like proportion is to side of like
proportion. Likewise Prismes and sided columns, being set upon the bases of
those pyramids, An addition by Campane and Flussas.
and under the same altitude (forasmuch as they are equemultiplices unto the
pyramids, namely, triples, by the corollary of the 7. of this book) shall have
the ^ormer porportion that the pyramids have, by the 15, of the fifth, and
therefore they shall be in treble proportion of that in which the sides of like
proportion are.

The 9. Theoreme. The 9. Proposition. In equal pyramids having triangles to
their bases, the bases are reciprokall to their altitudes. And pyramids having
triangles to their bases, whose bases are reciprokall to their altitudes, are
equal the one to the other.
SVppose that BCGA and EFHD be equal pyramids, having to their bases the
triangles BCG and EFH, and the tops the points A and D. Then I say that the
bases of the two pyramids BCGA and EFHD are reciprokall to their altitudes:
that is, as the base BCG is to the base EFH, so is the altitude of the pyramid
EFHD to the altitude of the pyramid BCGA. Make perfect the parallelipipedons,
namely, BGML and EHPO. And forasmuch as the pyramid BCGA is equal to the
pyramid EFHD, Demonstration of the first part.
and the solid BGML is sextuple to the pyramid BCGA. (For the parallelipipedon
is duple to the Prisme set upon the base of the Pyramid, and the Prisme is
triple to the pyramid): and likewise the solid EHPO is sextuple to the pyramid
EFHD. Wherefore the solid BGML is equal to the solid EHPO. But in equal
parallelipipedons, the bases are (by the 34. of the eleue^th) reciprokall to
their altitudes. Wherefore as the base BN is to the base EQ, so is the alti^^de
of the solid EHP^, to the altitude of the solid BGML. But as the base BN is
to the base EQ, so is the triangle GBC to the triangle HEF (by the 15. of the
^ifth, for the triangles GBC and HEF are the halues of the parallelogrammes BN
and EQ)^ Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as the triangle GBC is to the
triangle HEF, so is the altitude of the solid EHPO to the altitude of the
solid BGML. But the altitude of the solid EHPO is one and the same with the
altitude of the pyramid EFHD, and the altitude of the solid BGML is one and
the same with the altitude of the pyramid BCGA. Wherefore as the base GBC is to
the base HEF, so is the altitude of the pyramid EFHD to the altitude of the
pyramid BCGA. Wherefore the bases of the two pyramids BCGA and EFHD are
reciprokall to their altitudes.

But now suppose that the bases of the pyramids BCGA and EFHD, be reciprokall
to their altitudes, Demonstration ^f the second part, which i^ the conue^se of
the first.
that is, as the base GBC is to the base HEF, so let the altitude of the
pyramid EFHD be to the altitude of the pyramid BCGA. Then I say that the
pyramid BCGA is equal to the pyramid EFHD. For (the self same order of
construction remaining), for that as the base GBC is to the base ^EF, so is the
altitude of the pyramid EFHD to the altitude of the pyramid BCGA. But as the
base GBC is to the base HEF, so is the parallelogramme GC to the
parallelogramme HF. Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as the parallelogramme
GC is to the parallegoramme HF, so is the altitude of the pyramid EFHD to the
altitude of the pyramid BCGA. But the altitude of the pyramid EFND and of the
solid EHPO, is one and the self same, and the altitude of the pyramid BCGA
and of the solid BGML, is also one and the same. Wherefore as the base GC is
to the base HF, so is the altitude of the solid EHPO to the altitude of the
solid BGML. But parallelipipedons, whose bases are reciprokall to their
altitudes are (by the 34. of the eleventh) equal the one to the other.
Wherefore the parallelipipedon BGML is equal to the parallelipipedon EHPO. But
the pyramid BCGA is the sixth part of the solid BGML, and likewise the pyramid
EFHD is the sixth part of the solid EHPO. Wherefore the pyramid BCGA is equal
to the pyramid EFHD. Wherefore in equal pyramids having triangles to their
bases, the bases are reciprokall to their altitudes. And pyramids having
triangles to their bases, whose bases are reciprocal to their altitudes, are
equal the one to the other: which was required to be demonstrated.

A Corrollary added by Campane and Flussas.
Hereby it is manifest that equal pyramids having to their bases Poligonon
figures, have their bases reciprokall with their altitudes. And Pyramids whose
bases being poligonon figures are reciprokall with their altitudes, are equal
the one to the other.

Suppose that upon the poligonon figures A and B, be set equal pyramids. Then
I say that their bases A and B are reciprokall with their altitudes. Describe
by the 25. of the sixth, triangles equal to the bases A and B. Which let be C
and D. Upon which let there be set pyramids equal in altitude with the
pyramids A and B. Wherefore the pyramids C and D, being set upon bases equal
with the bases of the pyramids A and B, and having also their altitudes equal
with the altitudes of the said pyramids A and B, shall be equal by the 6. of
this book. Wherefore by the first part of this proposition, the bases of the
pyramids, C to D are reciprokall with the altitudes of D to C. But in what
proportion are the bases C to D, in the same are the bases A to B, forasmuch as
they are equal. And in what proportion are the altitudes of D to C, in the
same are the altitudes of B to A, which altitudes are likewise equal.
Wherefore by the 11. of the fifth, in what proportion the bases A to B are, in
the same reciprokally are the altitudes of the pyramids B to A. In like sort by
the second part of this proposition may be proved the converse of this
corollary. The same thing follows also in a Prisme, and in a sided column,
as has before at large been declared in the corollary of the 40. proposition
of the 11. book. For those solides are in proportion the one to the other, as
the pyramids or parallelipipedons, for they are either parts of
equemultiplices or equemultiplices to parts.

The 10. Theoreme. The 10. Proposition. Every cone is the third part of a
cilinder, having one and the self same base and one and the self same
altitude with it.
SVppose that there be a cone having to his base the circle ABCD; and let there
be a cilinder having the self same base, and also the same altitude that the
cone has. Then I say that the cone is the third part of the cilinder, that is,
that the cilinder is in treble proportion to the cone. For if the cilinder be
not in treble proportion to the cone, then the cilinder is either in greater
proportions then triple to the cone, or else in less. First let it be in
greater then triple. Constr^
And describe (by the 6. of the fourth) in the circle ABCD a is greater then
the half of the circle ABCD. For if about the circle ABCD, we describe a
square, the square described in the circle ABCD is the half of the square
described about the circle. And let there be Parallelipipedon prismes described
upon those squares, Parallelipipedons called Prismes.
equal in altitude with the cilinder. But prismes are in that proportion the
one to the other, that their bases are (by the 32. of the eleventh, and 5.
Corollary of the 7. of this book). Wherefore the prisme described upon the
square ABCD is the half of the prisme described upon the square that is
described about the circle. Now the clinder is less then the prisme which is
made of the square described about the circle ABCD, being equal in altitude
with it, for it contains it. Wherefore the prisme described upon the square
ABCD and being equal in altitude with the cylinder, is greater then half the
cylinder. Divide (by the 30. of the third) the circumferences AB, BC, CD and DA
into two equal parts in the points E, F, G, H, And draw these right lines AE,
EB, BF, FC, CG, GD, DH and HA. Wherefore every one of these triangles AEB, BFC,
CGD and DHA is greater then half of that segment of the circle ABCD which is
described about it, as we have before in the 2. proposition declared. Describe
upon every one of these triangles AEB, BFC, CGD, and DHA a prisme of equal
altitude with the cylinder. Wherefore every one of these prismes so described
is greater then the half part of the segment of the cylinder that is set upon
the said segments of the circle. For if by the points E, F, G, H, be drawn
parallel lines to the lines AB, BC, CD and DA, and then be made perfect the
parallelogrammes made by those parallel lines, and moreover upon those
parallelogra^mes be erected parallelipipedons equal in altitude with the
cylinder, the prismes which are described upon each of the triangles AEB, BFC,
CGD, and DHA are the halfes of every one of those parallelipipedons. And the
segments of the cylinder are less then those parallelipipedons so described.
Wherefore also every one of the prismes which are described upon the triangles
AEB, BFC, CGD and DHA is greater then the half of the segment of the cylinder
set upon the said segment. Now therefore dividing every one of the
circumferences remaining into two equal parts, and drawing right lines, and
raising up upon every one of these triangles prismes equal in altitude with
the cylinder, and doing this continually, we shall at the length (by the first
of the tenth) leave certain segments of the cylinder which shall be less then
the excess whereby the cylinder excedeth the cone more then thrice. Let those
segments be AE, EB, BF, FC, CG, GD, DH and HA. Wherefore the prisme remaining,
whose base is the poligonon ^igure AEBFCGDH, and altitude the self same that
the cylinder has, is greater then the cone taken three times. By this it is
manifest that Euclide comprehended sided Columns also under the name of a
Prisme.
But the prisme whose base is the poligonon figure AEBFCGDH and altitude the
self same that the cylinder has, is treble to the pyramid whose base is the
poligonon figure AEBFCGDA and altitude the self same that the cone has, by
the corollary of the 3. of this book. Wherefore also the pyramid whose base is
the poligonon figure AEBFCGDH and top the self same that the cone has, is
greater then the cone which has to his base the circle ABCD. But it is also
less, for it is contained of it which is impossible. Wherefore the cylinder is
not in greater proportion then triple to the cone.

I say moreover that the cylinder is not in less proportion then triple to the
cone^ For if it be possible let the cylinder be in less proportion then triple
to the cone. Wherefore by conversion, the cone is greater then the third part
of the cylinder. Describe now (by the sixth of the fourth) in the circle ABCD a
square ABCD. Wherefore the square ABCD is greater then the half of the circle
ABCD upon the square ABCD describe a pyramid having one and the self same
altitude with the cone. Wherefore the pyramid so described is greater the^ half
of the cone. (For if as we have before declared we describe a square about the
circle, the square ABCD is the half of the square described about the circle,
and if upon the squares be described parallelipipedons equal in altitude with
the cone, which solides are also called prismes, the prisme or parallelipipedon
described upon the square ABCD is the half of the prisme which is described
upon the square described about the circle, for they are the one to the other
in that proportion that their bases are (by the 32. of the eleue^th, and 5.
corollary of the 7. of this book.) Wherefore also their third parts are in the
self same proportion (by the 15. of the fifth). Wherefore the pyramid whose base
is the square ABCD is the half of the pyramid set upon the square described
about the circle. But the pyramid set upon the square described about the
circle is greater then the cone whom it comprehends. Wherefore the pyramid
whose base is the square ABCD, and altitude the self same that the cone has;
is greater then the half of the cone.) Divide (by the 30. of the third) every
one of the circumferences AB, BC, CD, and DA into two equal parts in the
points E, F, G, and H: and draw these right lines AE, EB, BF, FC, CG, GD, DH,
and HA. Wherefore every one of these triangles AEB, BFC, CGD, and DHA is
greater then the half part of the segment of the circle described about it.
Upon every one of these triangles AEB, BFC, CGD, and DHA describe a pyramid of
equal altitude with the cone and after the same manner every one of those
pyramids so described is greater then the half part of the segment of the cone
set upon the segment of the circle. Now therefore dividing (by the 30, of the
third) the circumferences remaining into two equal parts, and drawing right
lines and raising up upon every one of those triangles a pyramid of equal
altitude with the cone, and doing this continually, we shall at the length (by
the first of the tenth) leave certain segmentes of the cone, which shall be
less then the excess whereby the cone excedeth the third part of the
cylinder. Let those segmentes be AE, EB, BF, FC, CG, GD, DH, and HA. Wherefore
the pyramid remaining, whose base is the poligono^ figure AEBFCGDH and altitude
the self same with the cone, is greater then the third part of the cylinder.
But the pyramid whose base is the poligonon figure AEBFCGDH and altitude the
self same with the cone, is the third part of the prisme whose base is the
poligono^ figure AEBFCGDH and altitude the self same with the cylinder. Whefore
A prisme having for his base a poligonon figure as we have often before noted
unto you.
the prisme whose base is the poligonon figure AEBFCGDH, and altitude the self
same with the cylinder, is greater then the cylinder whose base is the circle
ABCD. But it is also less, for it is contained of it, which is impossible.
Wherefore the cylinder is not in less proportion to the cone then in treble
proportion. And it is proved that it is not in greater proportion to the cone
then in treble proportion, wherefore the cone is the third part of the
cylinder. Wherefore every cone is the third part of a cylinder, having one and
the self same base, and one and the self same altitude with it: which was
required to be demonstrated.

Added by M. John Dee.
A Theoreme. 1.
The superficies of every upright Cylinder, except his bases, is equal to that
circle whose semidiameter is middell proportional between the side of the
Cylinder, and the diameter of his base.

A Theoreme. 2.
The superficies of every upright, or Isosceles Cone, except the base, is
equal to that circle, whose semidiameter is middell proportional between the
side of that Cone, and the semidiameter of the circle: which is the base of the
Cone.

My intent in additions is not to amend Euclide^ Method, (which needs little
adding or none at all). But my desire is somewhat to furnish you, toward a more
general art Mathematical the^ Euclides Elements, Note: M. Dee his chief
purpose in his additions.
(remaining in the terms in which they are written) can sufficiently help you
unto. And though Euclides Elements with my Additions, run not in one
Methodicall race toward my mark: yet in the mean space my Additions either
give light, where they are annexed to Euclides matter, or give some ready aid,
and show the way to dilate your discourses Mathematical; or to invent and
practice things Mechanically. And (in deed) if more leysor had happened, many
more strange matters Mathematical had, (according to my purpose general)
been presently published to your knowledge: but want of due leasour cau^eth you
to want, that, which my good will toward you, most heartily does wish you.

As concerning the two Theoremes here annexed, their verity, is by Archimedes,
in his book of the Sphere and Cylinder manifestly demonstrated, and at large:
you may therefore boldly trust to them, and use them, as suppositions, in any
your purposes: till you have also their demo^strations. But if you well
remember my instructions upon the first proposition of this book, and my other
addition, upon the second, with the suppositions how a Cylinder and a Cone are
Mathematically produced, you will not need Archimedes demonstration: nor yet
be utterly ignorant of the solid quantities of this Cylinder and Cone here
compared: (the diameter of their base, and heith being known in any measure)
neither can their crooked superficies remain unmeasured. Whereof undoubtedly
great pleasure and commodity may grow to the sincere student, and precise
practiser.

The 11. Theoreme. The 11. Proposition. Cones and Cylinders being under one and
the self same altitude, are in that proportion, the one other that their bases
are.
LEt there be taken cones and cylindres under one and the self same altitude
whose bases let be the circles ABCD and EFGH, and axes the lines KL and MN, and
let the diameters of their bases be AC and EG. The^ I say that as the circle
ABCD is to the circle EFGH, so is the cone AL to the cone EN, and also the
cylinder AL to the cylinder EN. Demonstration as touching Cones.
For if the cone AL be not to the cone EN as the circle ABCD is to the circle
EFGH, then as the circle ABCD is to the circle OF GH, so is the cone AL to some
solid either less then the cone EN, or greater. First case. 1.
First let it be unto a less, namely, to the solid X. And unto that which the
solid X is less then the cone EN, let the solid Y be equal. Wherefore the
cone EN is equal to the solides X and Y. Describe (by the 6. of the fourth) in
the circle EFGH a square EFGH. Wherefore the square is greater then half the
circle. Raise up upon the square EFGH a pyramid of equal altitude with the
cone. Wherefore the pyramid, so raised up is greater then half of the cone.
For if we describe a square about the circle, and upon that square raise up a
pyramid of equal altitude with the cone, the pyramid which is set upon the
square described with in the circle is the half of the pyramid set upon the
square described about the circle, for they are in proportion the one to the
other as their bases. But the cone is less then the pyramid which is set upon
the square described about the circle. Wherefore the pyramid whose base is the
square EFGH and top one and the same with the cone is greater then half of the
cone: divide (by the 30. of the third) the circumferences OF, FG, GH and HE
into two equal parts in the points O, P, R, S, and draw these right lines HO,
OE, EP, PF, FR, RG, GS, and SH. Where^ore every one of these triangles HOE,
EPF, FRG, and GSH is greater then half the segme^t of the circle described
about the^. Raise up upon every one of the triangles HOE, EPF, FRG and GSH a
pyramid equal in altitude with the cone. Wherefore every one of the pyramids
so raised up is greater then the half part of the segment of the cone
described about it. Now then dividing (by the 30. of the third) the
circumferences remaining into two equal parts, and drawing right lines, and
raising up upon every one of those triangles a pyramid of equal altitude with
the cone, and thus doing continually, we shall at length by the first of the
tenth leave certain segmentes of the cone which shall be less then the solid
Y. Let those segmentes be HOE, EPP, FRG, and GSH. Wherefore the pyramid
remaining whose base is the poligonon figure HOEPFRGS and top the self same
with the cone, is greater then the solid X. Inscribe in the circle ABCD a
poligonon figure like and in like sort situate to the poligonon figure
HOEPFRGS, and let the same be DTAVBZCW, and upon it raise a pyramid of equal
altitude with the cone AL. Now for that as the square of the line AC is to the
square of the line EG, so is the poligonon figure DTAVBZCW to the poligonon
figure HOEPFRGS (by the first of this book): But as the square of the line AC
is to the square of the line EG, so is the circle ABCD to the circle EFGH (by
the second of this book). Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as the circle
ABCD is to the circle EFGH, so is the poligonon figure DTAVBZCW to the
poligonon figure HOEPFRGS (this follows also of the corollary of the 2. of
this book): moreover as the circle ABCD is to the circle EFGH, so is the cone
AL to the solid X. And as the poligonon figure DTAVBZCW, is to the poligonon
figure HOEPRGS, so is the pyramid whose base is the poligonon figure DTAVBZCW,
and top the point L, to the pyramid whose base is the poligonon figure
HOEPRS, and top the point N. Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as the cone
AL is to the solid X, so is the pyramid whose base is the poligono^ figure
DTAVBZCW, and top the point L, to the pyramid whose base is the poligonon
figure HEOPFRGS, and top the point N. Wherefore alternately (by the 16. of
the fifth) as the cone AL is to the pyramid which is in it, so is the solid X,
to the pyramid which is in the cone EN. But the cone AL, is greater then the
pyramid which is in it. Wherefore also the solid X is greater then the pyramid
which is in the cone EN. But it is also less by construction. Which is
impossible. Wherefore as the circle ABGD, is to the circle EFGH, so is not the
cone AL to any solid less then the cone EN. Second case.


In like sort also may we proue^ that as the circle EFGH, is to the circle
ABCD, so is not the cone EN to any solid less then the cone AL. Now I say
that as the circle ABCD, is to the circle EFGH, so is not the cone AL to any
solid greater then the cone EN. For if it be possible let it be unto a
greater, namely to the solid X. Wherefore by conversion, as the circle EFGH,
is to the circle ABCD, so is the solid X to the cone AL: but as the solid X
is to the cone AL, so is the cone EN, to some solid less then the cone AL (as
we may see by the assumpt put after the second of this book): Wherefore (by
the 11. of the fifth) as the circle EFGH is to the circle ABCG^ so is the cone
EN to some solid less then the cone AL, which we have proved to be
impossible. Wherefore as the circle ABCD, is to the circle EFGH, so is not the
cone AL to any solid greater then the cone EN. And it is also proved that it
is not to any less. Wherefore as the circle ABCD, is to the circle EFGH, so is
the cone AL to the cone EN.

But as the cone is to the cone, so is the cylinder to the cylinder, (by the
15. of the fifth) for the one is in treble proportion to the other.
Demonstration touching cylinders.
W^erefore) by the 11. of the fifth) as the circle ABCD is to the circle EFGH,
so are the cylinders which are set upon them the one to the other, the said
cylinders being under equal altitudes with the cones. Cones therefore and
cylinders, being under one and the self same altitude, are in that proportion
the one to the other, that their bases are: which was required to be
demonstrated.

The 12. Theoreme. The 12. Proposition. Like Cones and Cylinders, are in treble
proportion of that in which the diameters of their bases are.
SVppose that these Cones and Cylinders, whose bases are the circles ABCD, and
EFGH, and diameters of their bases BD and FH, be like, and let the axes of the
Cones or Cylinders be KL and MN, and let the centres o^ their bases be the
points K and M. Then I say, that the cone, whose base is the circle ABCD, and
top the point L, First part which concerns cones.
is to the Cone, whose base is the circle EFGH, and top the point N, in
treble proportion of that in which the diameter BD is to the diameter FH. For
if the cone ABCDL be not to the cone EFGHN in treble proportion of that in
which the diameter BD is to the diameter FH, the cone ABCDL shall be in treble
proportion of that in which the diameter BD is to the diameter FH, either to
some solid less then the cone EFGHN, or to some solid greater. First case^
Construction.
First let it be unto a less, namely, to the solid X. Describe (by the 6. of
the fourth) in the circle EFGH, a square EFGH. Wherefore the square EFGH is
greater then the half of the circle EFGH. Ra^se up from the square EFGH a
pyramid of equal altitude with the cone. Wherefore the pyramid so raised up, is
greater then the half part of the cone. Divide now (by the 30. of the third)
the circumferences OF, FG, GH, and HE, into two equal parts in the points O,
P, R, S, and draw these right lines EO, OF, FP, PG, GR, RH, HS, and SE.
Wherefore every one of these triangles EOF, FPG, GRH, and HSE, is greater then
the half of the segment of the circle EFGH, described about each of them.
Erecte upon every one of these triangles EOF, FPG, GRH, and HSE, a pyramid,
having one and the self same altitude with the cone. Wherefore every one of
the pyramids so raised up, is greater then the half of the segment of the cone
described about them. Now therefore dividing the circumferences remaining into
two equal parts, and drawing right lines, and raising up upon every one of
the triangles a pyramid, having one and the self same altitude with the cone,
and, thus doing continually, we shall at the length (by the 1. of the tenth)
leave certain segmentes of the cone, which shall be less then the excess
whereby the cone EFGHN excedeth the solid X. Let those segmentes left be EO,
OF, FP, PG, GR, RH, HS, and SE. Wherefore the pyramid remayuing, whose base is
the Poligonon ^igure EOFPGRHS, and top the point N, is greater then the
solid X. Demonstration ^eadi^g to an impossibility.
Describe (by the 18. of the sixth) in the circle ABCD, unto the Poligonon
figure EOFPGRHS, a Poligonon figure like and in like sort situate, and let the
same be ATBVCZDW, and from it raise up a pyramid, having one and the self same
altitude with the cone ABCL. And let one of the triangles comprehending the
pyramid, whose base is the Poligonon figure ATBVCZDW, and top the point L, be
LBT, and let also one of the triangles comprehending the pyramid, whose base is
the Poligonon ^igure EOFPGRHS, and top the point N, be NFO, and draw these
right lines KNIGHT and MO. And forasmuch as the cone ABCDL is like to the cone
EFGHN, therefore (by the 20. definition of the eleventh) as the diameter BD is
to the diameter FH, so is the axe KL to the axe MN: But as the diameter BD is
to the diameter FH, so (by the 15. of the ^ift) is the semidiameter BK to the
semidiameter FM. Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as BK is to FM, so is KL to
MN. Wherefore alternately also (by the 16. of the fifth) as BK is to KL, so is
FM to MN. Wherefore the sides about the equal angles BKL and FMN (which angles
are equal, for that they are right angles (by the 18. definition of the
eleventh) are proportional. Wherefore (by the 1. definition of the sixth) the
triangle BKL is like to the triangle FMN. Again for that as BK is to KNIGHT, so is
FM to MO, and they comprehend equal angles, namely, BKT and FMO, for what part
the angle BKT is of those four right angles which are made at the center K,
the self same part is the angle FMO of the four right angles which are made
at the center M: forasmuch therefore as the sides about the equal angles are
proportional, the triangle BKT is like to the triangle FMO. Again, forasmuch
as it was proved, that as BK is to KL, so is FM to NM, but BK is equal to KNIGHT,
and FM to MO, therefore as TK is to KL, so is OM to MN. Wherefore the sides
about the equal angles TKL and OMN (which angles are equal, for that they are
right angles) are proportional. Wherefore the triangle LKT is like to the
triangle MNO. And for that (by the 6. of the sixth) and by reason of the likeness
of the triangles LKB and NMF, as LB is to BK, so is NF to FM, and again by
reason of the likeness of the triangles BKT and FMO, as KB is to BT, so is MF to
FO, therefore of equality (by the 22. of the fifth) as LB is to BT, so is NF to
FO. Again for that by reason of the likeness of the triangles LKT and NOM, as
LT is to TK, so is NO to OM, and by reason of the likeness of the triangles TKB
and OMF, as KNIGHT is to TB, so is MO to OF: therefore of equality (by the 22. of
the fifth) as LT is to TB, so is NO to OF. And it was proved that as TB is to
BL, so is OF to FN. Wherefore again of equality, as TL is to LB, so is ON to
NF.Wherefore the sides of the triangles LTB and NOF, are proportional.
Wherefore (by the 5. of the sixth) the triangles LTB and NOF, are equiangle.
Wherefore also they are like. Wherefore the pyramid, whose base is the triangle
BKT, and top the point L, is like unto the pyramid, whose base is the
triangle FMO, and top the point N. For they are comprehended under like
plain superficieces, and equal in multitude. But pyramids being like, and
having triangles to their bases, are (by the 8. of the twelfth) in treble
proportion the one to the other of that in which sides of like proportion are.
Wherefore the pyramid BKTL is to the pyramid FMON, in treble proportion of that
in which the line BK is to the line FM. And in like sort if we draw right lines
from the points A, W, D, Z, C, and V, to the point K, and likewise from the
points E, S, H, R, G, and P, to the point M, and raise up upon the triangles
pyramids, having the self same altitudes with the cones, we may prove that
every one of those pyramids of one and the self same order, is to every one of
the pyramids of the self same order, in treble proportion of that in which the
side of like proportion BK is to side of like proportion FM, that is, of that
which the line BD has to the line FH. But as one of the antecedentes is to one
of the consequentes, so are all the antecedentes to all the conseque^tes (by
the 12. of the fifth). Wherefore as the pyramids BKTL is to the pyramid FMON, so
is the whole pyramid, whose base is the Poligonon figure ATBVCZDW, and top
the point L, to the whole pyramid, whose base is the Poligonon figure EOFPGRHS,
and top the point N. Wherefore the pyramid, whose base is the Poligonon
figure ATBVCZDW, and top the point L, is to the pyramid, whose base is the
Poligonon figure EOFPGRHS, and top the point N, in treble proportion of that
in which the line BD is to the line FH. And it is supposed also that the cone,
whose base is the circle ABCD, and top the point L, is to the solid X, in
treble proportion of that in which the line BD is to the line FH. Wherefore as
the cone, whose base is the circle ABCD, and top the point L, is to the
solid X, so is the pyramid, whose base is the Poligonon ^igure ATBVCZDW, and
top the point L, to the pyramid, whose base is the Poligonon figure EOFPGRHS,
and top the point N. Wherefore alternately (by the 16. of the fifth) as the
cone, whose base is the circle ABCD, and top the point L, is to the pyramid
which is in it, whose base is the Poligono^ figure ATBVCZDW, and top the
point L, so is the solid X, to the pyramid, whose base is the Poligonon figure
EOFPGRHS, and top the point N. But the foresaid cone is greater then the
pyramid which is in it, for it contains it. Wherefore the solid X is greater
then the pyramid, whose base is the Poligonon figure EOFPGRHS, and top the
point N. But it was supposed to be less: which is impossible. Wherefore the
cone ABCDL is not to any solid less then the cone EFGHN, in treble proportion
of that in which the diameter BD is to the diameter FH. In like sort also may
we prove, that the cone EFGHN is not to any solid less then the cone ABCDL,
in treble proportion of that in which FH is to BD.

Now also I say, that the cone ABCDL is not to any solid greater then the cone
EFGHN, Second case.
in treble proportion of that in which the diameter BD is to the diameter FH.
For if it be possible, let it be to a greater, namely, to the solid X.
Wherefore by conversion (by the Corollary of the 4. of the fifth) the solid X
is to the cone ABCDL, in treble proportion of that in which the diameter FH is
to the diameter BD. But as the solid X is to the cone ABCDL, so is the cone
EFGHN to some solid less then the cone ABCDL (as it is easy to see by the
Assumpt put after the 2. Proposition). Wherefore also the cone EFGHN is unto
some solid less then the cone ABCDL, in treble proportion of that in which
the diameter FH is to the diameter BD: which is proved to be impossible.
Wherefore the cone ABCDL is not to any solid greater then the cone EFGHN in
treble proportion of that in which the diameter BD is to the diameter FH, and
it is also proved that it is not to any less. Wherefore the cone ABCD is to
the cone EFGHN in treble proportion of that in which the diameter BD is to the
diameter FH.

But as cone is to cone, so is cylinder to cylinder (by the 15. of the fifth)
for the cylinder is triple to the cone which is described on the one and self
same base, Second part which concerns Cillinders.
and having one and the self same altitude with the cone. For it is proved (by
the 10. of the twelfth) that every cone is the third part of a cylinder, having
one and the self same base with it, and one and the self same altitude.
Wherefore the cylinder is unto the cylinder in treble proportion of that in
which the diameter BD is to the diameter FH. Wherefore like cones and cylinders
are in treble proportion of that in which the diameters of their bases are:
which was required to be proved.

The 13. Theoreme. The 13. Proposition. If a Cylinder be divided by a plain
superficies being a parallel to the two opposite plain superficieces: then as
the one Cylinder is to the other Cylinder, so is the axe of the one to the axe
of the other.
SVppose that there be a cylinder AD, whose axe let be OF, and let the opposite
bases be the circles AEB, and CFD, and let AD be divided by the superfices GH
being a parallel to the two opposite plain superficieces, AB, and CD. Then I
say that as the cylinder BG is to the cylinder GD, so is the axe EK to the axe
KF. Extend the axe OF on either side to the points L and M. And unto the axe
EK put as many axes equal as you will, namely, Construction.
EN, and NL, and likewise unto the axe FK put as many axes equal as you will,
namely, FX and XM. And by the points L, N, and X, M, exte^de plain
superficieces parallels to the two superficieces AB, and CD (by the corollary
of the 15. of the eleue^th): and in the plain superficieces thus extended by
the points L, N, X, M, imagine to be be drawn these circles, namely, OP, RS,
TV, and ZW, having to their centers the points L, N, M, X, and le^ them be
equal to either of the circles AB, and CD and upon those circles imagine those
cylinders PR, RB, DT, TW to be set. Demonstra^ion.
Now forasmuch as the axes LN, NE, and EK are equal the one to the other:
Therefore the cylinders PR, RB, and BG are (by the 11. of the twelueth) in
proportion the one to the other as their bases are. But the bases are equal.
Wherefore also the cylinders PR, RB, and BG are equal the one to the other.
And forasmuch as the axes LN, NE, and EK are equal the one to the other, and
the cylinders PR, RB, and BG are also equal the one to the other, and the
multitude of the axes LN, NE, and EK is equal to the multitude of the
cylinders PR, RB, and BC: therefore how multiplex the whole axe KL is to the
axe EK, so multiplex is the whole cylinder PG to the cylinder BG. And (by the
same reason) also how multiplex the whole axe MK is the axe KF, so multiplex is
the whole cylinder WG to the cylinder GD. Wherefore if the axe KL be equal the
axe KM, the cylinder PG is equal to cilinder GW. And if the axe KL be greater
th^n the axe KM, the cylinder PG is greater then the cylinder GW. And if it be
less it is less. Now therefore there are four magnitudes, namely, the two
axes EK, and KF, and the two cylinders BG, and GD, and unto the axe EK, and to
the cylinder BG, namely, to the first and the third are taken equemultiplices,
namely, the axe KL, and the cylinder PG. And likewise unto the axe GF, and unto
the cylinder GD, namely, the second and the fourth, are taken other
equemultiplices, namely, the axe KM, and the cylinder GW. And it is proved that
if the axe KL, excede the axe KM, the cylinder PG excedeth the cylinder GW and
that if it be equal it is equal, and if it be less it is less. Wherefore (by
the 6. definition of the fifth) as the axe EK is to the axe KF, so is the
cylinder BG to the cylinder GD. If therefore a cylinder be divided by a plain
superficies being a parallel to the two opposite plain superficieces: then as
the one cylinder is to the other cilinder, so is the axe of the one to the axe
of the other: which was required to be proved.

The 14. Theoreme. The 14. Proposition. Cones and Cylinders consisting upon
equal bases, are in proportion the one to the other as their altitudes.
SVppose that the cylinders FD, and EB, and the cones AGB, and CKD, do consiste
upon equal bases, namely, upon the circles AB, and CD. Construction.
Then I say that as the cylinder EB is to the cylinder FD, so is the axe GH to
the axe KL. Extend the axe KL directly to the point N, and unto the axe GH,
put the axe LN equal: and about the axe LN imagine a cylinder CM.
Demonstration touching Cylinders.
Now forasmuch as the cilinders EB, and CM, are under equal altitudes,
therefore (by the 11. of the twelueth) they are in the proportion the one to
the other as their bases are. But the bases are equal the one to the other.
Wherefore also the cylinders EB, and CM are equal the one to the other. And
forasmuch as the whole cylinder FM, is divided by a plain superficies CD being
a parallel to either of the opposite plain superficieces: therefore (by the
13. of the twelueth) as the cylinder CM is to the cylinder FD, so is the axe LN
to the axe LK. But the cylinder CM is equal to the cylinder EB, and the axe LN
to the axe GH. Wherefore as the cylinder EB is to the cylinder FD, so is the
axe GH to the axe KL.

But as the cylinder EB is to the cylinder FD, so (by the 15. of the fifth) is
the cone ABG to the cone CDK, Demonstration touching Cones.
for the cylinders are in treble proportion to the cones (by the 10. of the
twelueth). Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as the axe GH is to the axe KL,
so is the cone ABG to the cone CDK, and the cylinder EB to the cylinder FD.
Wherefore cones and cylinders consisting upon equal bases are in proportion the
one to the other as their altitudes: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 15. Theoreme. The 15. Proposition. In equal Cones and Cylinders, the
bases are reciprokall to their altitudes. And cones and Cylinders whose bases
are reciprokall to their altitudes, are equal the one to the other.
SVppose that these cones ACL, EGN or these cylinders AX, EO, whose bases are
the circles ABCD, EFGH, and axes KL, and MN (which axes are also the altitudes
of the cones and cylinders) be equal the one to the other. First part of the
proposition demonstrated touching Cones.
The^ I say that the bases of the cylinders XA and EO are reciprokal to their
altitudes, that is, that as the base ABCD is to the base EFGH, Two cases in
this proposition.
so the altitude MN to the altitude KL. For the altitude KL is either equal to
the altitude MN or not. First let it be equal. The first case.
But the cylinder AX is equal to the cylinder EQ. But cones and cylinders
consisting under one and the self same altitude, are in proportion the one to
the other as their bases are (by the 11. of the twelueth). Wherefore the base
ABCD is equal to the base EFGH. Wherefore also they are reciprokal: as the
base ABCD is to the base EFGH, so is the altitude MN to the altitude KL.

But now suppose that the altitude LK be not equal to the altitude M. N,
Second case.

Construction.


but let the altitude MN be greater. And (by the 3. of the first) from the
altitude MN take away PM equal to the altitude KL, so that let the line PM, be
put equal to the line KL. And by the point P let there be extended a plain
super^icies TVS, which let cut the cylinder EO, and be a parallel to the two
opposite plain super^icieces, that is, to the circles EFGH, and TO.
Demonstration touching cylinders.
And making the base the circle EFGH, and the altitude MP imagine a cylinder
ES. And for that the cylinder AX is equal to the cylinder EO, and there is an
other cylinder ES, therefore (by the 7. of the fifth) as the cylinder AX is to
the cylinder ES, so is the cylinder EO to the cylinder ES. But as the cylinder
AX is to the cylinder ES, so is the base ABCD to the base EFGH. For the
cylinders AX, and ES are under one and the self same altitude. And as the
cylinder EO, is to the cylinder ES, so is the altitude MN to the altitude MP.
For cylinders consisting upon equal bases are in proportion the one to the
other as their altitudes. Wherefore as the base ABCD is ^o the base EFGH, so is
the altitude MN to the altitude MP. But the altitude PM is equal to the
altitude KL. Wherefore as the base ABCD is to the base EFGH, so is the altitude
MN to the altitude KL. Wherefore in the equal cylinders AX, and EO the bases
are reciprokall to their altitudes. But now suppose that the bases of the
cylinders AX, and EO be reciprokal to their altitudes, that is, as the base
ABCD is to the base EFGH, so is the altitude MN to the altitude KL. Second part
demonstra^ed.
Then I say that the cylinder AX is equal to the cylinder EO. For the self
same order of constructio^ remaining, for that as the base ABCD is to the base
EFGH, so is the altitude MN to the altitude KL, but the altitude KL is equal
to the altitude PM. Wherefore as the base ABCD is to the base EFGH, so is the
altitude MN to the altitude PM. But as the base ABCD is to the base EFGH, so is
the cylinder AX to the cylinder ES, for they are under equal altitudes: and as
the altitude MN is to the altitude PM, so is the cylinder EO to the cylinder ES
(by the 14. of the twelueth). Wherefore also as the cylinder AX is to the
cylinder ES, so is the cylinder EO to the cylinder ES. Wherefore the cylinder
AX is equal to the cylinder EO (by the 9. of the fifth). And so also is it in
the cones which ha^^ the self same bases and altitudes with the cylinders.
Wherefore in equal cones and cylinders, the bases are reciprokall to their
altitudes etc. which was required to be demonstrated.

A Corrollary added by Campane and Flussas.
Hitherto has been showed the passions and proprieties of cones and cylinders
whose altitudes fall perpendicularly upon the bases. Now will we declare that
cones and cilinders whose altitudes fall obliquely upon their bases have also
the self same passions and proprieties which the foresaid cones and cilinders
have.

Forasmuch as in the tenth of this book it was said, that every Cone is the
third part of a cilinder having one, and the self same base, and one and the
self same altitude with it, which thing was demo^strated by a cilinder given,
whose base is cut by a square inscribed in it, and upon the sides of the square
are described Isosceles triangles, making a poligonon figure, and again upon
the sides of this poligonon figure are infinitely after the same manner
described other Isosceles triangles taking away more the^ the half, as has
oftentimes been declared: therefore it is manifest, that the solides set upon
these bases, being under the same altitude that the cilinder inclined is, and
being also included in the same cilinder, do take away more then the half of
the cilinder, and also more the^ the half of the residue, as it has been
proved in erected cylinders. For these inclined solides being under equal
altitudes and upon equal bases with the erected solides are equal to the
erected solides by the corollary of the ^0. of the eleventh. Wherefore they also
in like sort as the erected, take away more then the half. If therefore we
compare the inclined cilinder, to a cone set upon the self same base, and
having his altitude erected, and reason by an argument leading to an
impossibility by the demonstration of the tenth of this book, we may prove
that the sided solid included in the inclined cylinder is greater then the
triple of his pyramid, and it is also equal to the same which is impossible.
And this is the first case, wherein it was proved that the cilinder not being
equal to the triple of the cone is not greater then the triple of the same.
And as touching the second case, we may after the same manner conclude that that
^ided solid contained in the cylin^er is greater then the cylinder: which is
very absurd^ Wherefore if the cylinder be neither greater then the triple of
the cone, nor less, it must needs be equal to the same. The demonstration of
these inclined cylinders most plainly follows the demonstration of the
erected cylinders: for it has already been proved, that pyramids, and sided
solides (which are also called generally Prismes) being set upon equal bases
and under one and the self same altitude, whether the altitude be erected or
inclined, are equal the one to the other, namely, are in proportion as their
bases are by the ^. of this book. Wherefore a cylinder inclined shall be
triple to every cone (although also the cone be erected) set upon one and the
same base with it, and being under the same altitude. But the cilinder erected
was the triple of the same cone by the tenth of this book. Wherefore the
cilinder inclined is equal to the cilinder erected being both set upon one and
the self same base, and having one and the self same altitude. The same also
comes to pass in cones, which are the third parts of equal cilinders, and
therefore are equal the one to the other.

Wherefore according to the eleventh of this book it follows, that cylinders
and cones inclined or erected, being under one and the self same altitude, are
in proportion the one to the other as their bases are. For forasmuch as the
erected are in proportion as their bases are, and to the erected cilinders the
inclined are equal: therefore they also shall be in proportion as their bases
are.

And therefore by the 12. of this book like cones and cylinders being inclined
are in triple proportion of that in which the diameters of the bases are. For
forasmuch as they are equal to the erected which have the proportion by the
12. of this book, and their bases also are equal with the bases of the
erected, therefore they also shall have the same proportion.

Wherefore it follows by the 13. of this book, tha^ cylinder inclined, being
cut by a plain superficies parallel to the opposite plain superficieces
thereof shall be cut according to the proportions of the axes. For suppose that
upon one and the self same base ^e set an erected cylinder and an inclined
cylinder, being both under one and the self same altitude, which (...) a
plain superficies parallel to the opposite bases. Now it is manifest that the
sections of the one cylinder are equal to the section of the other cylinder,
for they are set upon equal bases, and under one and the self same altitude,
namely, between the parallel plain superficieces. And their axes also are by
those parallel plain superfici^ (...) proportionally by the 1^^ of ^he
^leuen^h. Wherefore the inclined cylinders (being equal to the erected
cylinders) shall have the proportion of their axes, a^ also have the erected.
For in ech^ the proportion of the axes is one and the same.

Wherefore inclined Cones and Cylinders being set upon equal bases, shall by
the 14. of this book be in (...) as their altitude^ (...) forasmuch a^ the
i^clined are equal to the erected which have the self same bases and
altitude, and the erected are i^ proportion as their altitudes: therefore the
inclined shall be in proportion the one to the other as ^he self same
alti^udes which are common to each, namely, to the inclined and to the erected.

And therefore in equal cones and cylinders whether they be inclined or
erected, the bases shall be reciprokally proportional with the altitudes, and
contrariwise by the 15. of this book. For forasmuch as we have oftentimes
showed that the inclined cones and cylinders are equal to the erected, having
the self same bases and altitudes with them, and the erected unto whom the
inclined are equal, have their bases r^^ipro^all proportionally with their
altitudes, therefore it follows, that the inclined (being equal to the
erected) have also their bases and altitudes (which are common to each)
reciprokally proportional. Likewise if their altitudes and bases be
reciprokally proportional, they themselves also shall be equal, for that they
are equal to the erected cylinders and cones set upon the same bases and being
under the same altitude^ which erected cylinders are equal the one to the
other by the same 15. of this book. Wherefore we may conclude, that those
passions and proprieties which in this twelfth book have been proved to be in
cones and cylinders whose altitudes are erected perpendicularly to the (...)
set obliquely upon their bases. Howbeit this is to be noted that such inclined
cones or cylinders are not perfect round as are the erected: so that if they be
cut by a plain superficies passing at right angles with their altitude, this
section is a Conicall section, which is called Ellipsis, and shall not describe
in their superficies a circle as it does in erected cylinders and cones, but a
certain figure, whose less diameter is in cylinders equal to the dimetient
of the base: that is, is one and the same with it. And the same thing happens
also in cones inclined, being cut after the same manner.

The 1. Problem. The 16. Proposition. Two circles having both one and the
self same center being given, to inscribe in the greater circle a poligonon
figure, which shall consist of equal and even sides, and shall not touch the
superficies of the less circle.
SVppose that there be two circles ABCD, and EFGH having one and the self same
center, namely, K. It is required in the greater circle which let be ABCD to
inscribe a poligonon figure which shall be of equal and even sides and not touch
the circle EFGH. Draw by the center K a right line BD. Construction.
And (by the 11. of the first) from the point G raise up unto the right line BD
a perpendicular line AG, and extend it to the point C. Wherefore the line AC
touches the circle EFGH (by the 15. of the third). Now therefore if (by the 30.
of the third) we divide the circumference BAD into two equal parts, and
again the half of that into two equal parts, and thus do continually, we
shall (by the corollary of the 1. of the tenth) at the length leave a certain
circumference less then the circumference AD. Let the circumference left be
LD. And from the point L. Draw (by the 12. of the first) unto the line BD a
perpendiculare line Note this LM, because of KZ in the next proposition, and
here the point M: for the point Z in the next demonstration.
LM, I. Dee.
and extend it to the point N. And draw these right lines LD and DN. And
forasmuch as the angles DML, and DMN are right angles, therefore (by the 3. of
the third) the right line BD divides the right line LN into two equal parts
in the point M. Wherefore (by the 4. of the first) the rest of the sides of the
triangles DML, and DMN, namely, the lines DL, and DN shall be equal. And
forasmuch as the line AC is a parallel to the LN (by the 28. of the first):
But AC touches the circle EFGH, wherefore the line LM touches not the circle
EFGH, and much less do the lines LD, and DN touch the circle EFGH. If
therefore there be applied right lines equal to the line LD continually into
the circle ABCD (by the 1. of the fourth) there shall be described in the circle
ABCD a poligonon figure which shall be of equal, and For that the sections were
made by the number two: that is, by taking halues, and of the residue the
hal^e^ and so, to LD, being an half, and a residue which shall be a common
measure back again, to make sides of the Poligonon figure.
even sides, and shall not touch the less circle, namely, EFGH: (by the 14. of
the third or by the 29.) which was required to be done.

Corollary.
Hereby it is manifest that a perpendicular line drawn from the point L to the
line BD touches not one of the circles.

An Assumpt added by Flussas.
If a Sphere be cut of a plain superficies, the common section of the
superficieces, shall be the circumference of a circle.

Suppose that the sphere ABC be cut by the plain superficies AEB, and let the
center of the sphere be the point D. Construction.
And from the point D, let there be drawn unto the plain superficies AEB a
perpendicular line (by the 11. of the eleventh) which let be the line DE. And
from the point E draw in the plain superficies AEB unto the common section of
the said superficies and the sphere, lines how many so ever, namely, EA and EB.
And draw these lines DA and DB. Now forasmuch as the right angles DEA and DEB
are equal (for the line DE is erected perpendicularly to the plain
superficies). Demonstration.
And the right lines DA and DB which subtend those angles are by the 12.
defini^ion of the eleventh equal: which right lines moreover (by the 47. of
the first) do contain in power the squares of the lines DE, EA, and DE, EB: if
therefore from the squares of the lines DE, EA, and DE, EB ye take away the
square of the line DE which is common unto them, the residue namely the squares
of the lines EA and EB shall be equal. Wherefore also the lines EA and EB are
equal. And by the same reason may we prove, that all the right lines drawn
from the point E to the line which is the common section of the superficies of
sphere and of the plain superficies, are equal. Wherefore that line shall be
the circumference of a circle, by the 15. definition of the first. The circles
so made: or so considered in the sphere, are called the greatest circles: All
other, not having the center of the sphere, to be their center also^ are called
less circles.
But if it happen the plain superficies which cutteth the sphere, to pass by
the center of the sphere, the right lines drawn from the center of the sphere
to their common section, shall be equal by the 12. definition of the eleventh.
For that common section is in the superficies of the sphere. Wherefore of
neces^itie the plain superficies comprehended under that line of the common
section shall be a circle, and his center shall be one and the same with the
center of the sphere.

John Dee.
Euclide has among the definition of solides omitted certain, which were easy
to conceive by a kind of Analogy. As a segment of a sphere, a sector of a
sphere, the vertex, or top of the segment of a sphere: with such like. But
that (if need be) some farthe^ light may be given, in this figure next before,
Note these descriptions.
vnders^and a segment of the sphere ABC to be that part of the sphere contained
between the circle AB, (whose center is E) and the sphericall superficies AFB.
To which (being a less segment) add the cone ADB (whose base is the former
circle: and top the center of the sphere) and you have DAFB a sector of a
sphere, or solid sector (as I call it). DE extended to F, shows the top or
vertex of the segment, to be the point F and OF is the altitude of the segment
sphericall. Of segmentes, some are greater the^ the half sphere, some are
less. As before ABF is less, the remanent, ABC is a segment greater then the
half sphere.

A Corollary added by the same Flussas.
By the foresaid assumpt it is manifest, that if from the center of a sphere
the lines drawn perpendicularly unto the circles which cut the sphere, be
equal: those circles are equal. And the perpendicular lines so drawn fall
upon the centres of the same circles.

For the line which is drawn from the center of the sphere to the
circumference, contains in power, the power of the perpendicular line, and
the power of the line which joins together the ends of those lines. Wherefore
from that square or power of the line from the center of the sphere to the
circumference or common sectio^ drawn, which is the semidiameter of the
sphere, taking away the power of the perpendicular, which is common to them
^ound about, it follows, that the residues how many so ever they be, be
equal powers, and therefore the lines are equal the one to the other.
Wherefore they will describe equal circles, by the first definition of the
third. And upon their centers fall the perpendicular lines by the 9. of the
third.

An other Corollary.
And those circles upon which falls the greater perpendicular lines are the
less circles. For the powers of the lines drawn from the center of the sphere
to the circumference being always one and equal, to the powers of the
perpendicular lines and also to the powers of the lines drawn from the centres
of the circles to their circumference, the greater that the powers of the
perpendicular lines taken away from the power containing them both are, the
less are the powers and therefore the lines remaining, which are the
semidiameters of the circles and therefore the less are the circles which they
describe. Wherefore if the circles be equal, the perpendicular lines falling
from the center of the sphere upon the^, shall also be equal. For if they
should be greater or less, the circles should be unequal as it is before
manifest. But we suppose the perpendiculars to be equal. An other Corollary.
Also the perpendicular lines falling upon those bases are the least of all,
that are drawn from the center of the sphere: for the other drawn from the
center of the sphere to the circumference of the circles, are in power equal
both to the powers of the perpendiculars and to the powers of the lines joining
these perpendiculars and these subtendent lines together: making triangles
rectangleround about: as most easily you may conceive of the figure here
annexed.

A the Center of the Sphere.



AB the lines from the Center of the Sphere to the Circumference of the Circles
made by the Section.

BCB the Diameters of Circles made by the Sections.

AC the perpendiculars from the Center of the Sphere to the Circles^ whose
diameters BCB are one both sides or in any situation else.

CB the Semidiameters of the Circles made by the Sections.

AO a perpendicular long then AC: and therefore the Semidiameter OB is less.

ACB, and AOB triangles rectangle.

The 2. Problem. The 17. Proposition. Two spheres consisting both about one
and the self same ce^tre, being given, to inscribe in the greater sphere a
solid of many sides (which is called a Polyhedron) which shall not touch the
superficies of the less sphere.
SVppose that there be two spheres about one and the self same ce^tre, namely,
about A. It is required in the greater sphere to inscribe a Polyhedron, or a
solid of many sides, which shall not with his superficies touch the superficies
of the less sphere. Let the spheres be cut by some one plain superficies
passing by the center A. Construction.
Then shall their sectio^s be circles. This is also proved in the As^umpt
before added out o^ Flussas.
[For (by the 12. definition of the eleventh) the Diameter remaining fixed, and
the semicircle being turned round about makes a sphere. Wherefore in what
positio^ so ever you imagine the semicircle to be, the plain superficies which
passes by it shall make in the superficies of ye sphere a circle. And it is
manifest that is also a greater circle, for the diameter of the sphere which is
also the diameter of the semicircle, and therefore also of the circle is (by
the 15. of the third) greater then all the right lines drawn in the circle or
sphere] which circles shall have both one center being both also in that one
plain superficies, Note what a greater or greatest circle in a Spear is.
by which the spheres were cut. Suppose that that section or circle in the
greater sphere be BCDE, and in the less, be the circle FGH. Draw the
diameters of those two circles in such sort that they make right angles, and
let those diameters be BD, and CE. First part of the Construction.
And let the line AG, being part of the line AB, be the semidiameter of the
less sphere and circle, as AB is the semidiameter of the greater sphere and
greater circle: both the spheres and circles having one and the same center.
Now two circles that is, BCDE, and FGH consisting both about one, and the self
same center being given, let there be described (by the proposition next going
before) in the greater circle BCDE a poligonon figure consisting of equal and
even sides, not touching the less circle FGH. And let the sides of that figure
in the fourth part of the circle, namely, in BE, be BK, KL, LM, and ME. And
draw a right line from the point K to the point A, and extend it to the point
N. And (by the 12. of the eleventh) from the A raise up to the superficies of
the circle BCDE a perpe^dicular line AX, and let it light upon the superficies
of the greater sphere in the point X. Note^
And by the line AX, and by either of these lines BD, and KN extend plain
superficieces. Now by that which was before spoken, those plain superficieces
shall in the You know full well, that in the superficies of the sphere, ^^^ly
the circumferences of the circles are: but by th^se circumferences the
limitatio^ and assigning of circles is used: and so, the circumference of a
circle, usually called a circle, which in this place can not offend.

This figure is restored by M. Dee his diligence. For in the greek and Latin
Euclides, the line GL, the line AG, and the line KZ, (in which three lines the
chief pinch of both the demonstrations does stand), are untruly drawn: as by
comparing, the studious may perceive.


superficies of ye sphere make two greater circles. Let their semicircles
consisting upon the diameters BD, and KN be BXD. and KXN. And forasmuch Note.

You must imagine (...) right line AX, to be perpe^dicular upon the diameters
BD and CE: though here AC the semidiater, seem to be part of AX. And so in
other points, in this figure, and many other, strengthen your imagination,
according to the tenor of constructions: though in the delineatio^ in plain,
sense be not satisfied.


as the line XA is ^rected perpendicularly to the plain superficies of the
circle BCDE. Therefore all the plain superficieces which are drawn by the line
XA are erected perpendicularly to the superficies of the circle BCDE (by the
18. of the eleventh). Wherefore the semicircles BXD, and KXN are erected
perpendicularly to the plain superficies of the circle BCDE. And forasmuch as
the semicircles BED, BXD, and KXN are equal, for they consist upon equal
diameters ^D, and KN: therefore also the fourth parts or quarters of those
circles, namely, BE, BX and KX are equal the one to the other. Wherefore how
many sides of a poligonon figure there are in the fourth part or quarter BE,
so many also are there in the other fourth parts or quarters BX, and KX,
equal to the right lines BK, KL, LM, and ME. Let those sides be described, and
let them be BO, OP, PR, RX, KS, ST, TV, and VX: Note.

BO equal to BK, in respect of M. Dee his demonstration following.


and draw these right lines SO, T^, and V^. And from the points O and ^.
Draw to the plain superficies of the circle BCDE perpendicular lines, which
perpendicular lines will fall upon the common section of the plain
superficieces, namely, upon the lines BD, and KN, (by the 38. of the eleventh)
for that the plain superficieces of the semicircles BXD, KXN are erected
perpendicularly to the plain superficies of the circle BCDE. Let those
perpendicular lines be GZ, Note ^his point Z that you may the better understand
M. Dee his demo^stration.
and SW. And draw a right line from the point Z to the point W. And forasmuch
as in the equal semicircles BXD, and KXN the right lines BO, and KS are
equal, from the ends whereof are drawn perpe^dicular lines OZ, and SW,
therefore (by the corollary of the 35. of the eleue^th) the line OZ is equal to
the line SW, and the line BZ is equal to the line KW. [Flussas proves this an
other way thus: Forasmuch as in the triangles SWK, and OZB, the two angles SWK,
and OZB are equal, for that by co^struction they are right angles, and by the
27. of third the angles WKS, and ZBO are equal, for they subtend equal
circumferences SXN and OXD, and the side SK is equal to the side OB as it has
before ben proved. Wherefore (by the 26. of the first) the other sides and
angles are equal, namely, the line OZ to the lines SW, and the line BZ to the
line KW,] But the whole line BA is equal to the whole line KA: by the
definition of a circle Wherefore the residue ZA is equal to the residue WA.
Wherefore the line ZW is a parallel to the line BK (by the 2. of the sixth). And
forasmuch as either of these lines OZ, and SW is erected perpendicularly to the
plain superficies of the circle BCDE, therefore the line OZ is a parallel to
the line SW, (by the 6. of the eleue^th) and it is proved that it is also equal
unto it. Wherefore the lines WZ and SO are also equal and parallels (by the 7,
of the eleventh, and the 33. of the first, and by the 3. of the first) And
forasmuch as WZ is a parallel to SO: But ZW is a parallel is to KB: Wherefore
SO is also a parallel to KB, (by the 9. of the eleventh). And the lines BO,
and KS do knit them together. Wherefore the four sided figure BOKS is in one
and the self same plain superficies. For (by the 7. of the eleventh) if there
be any two parallel right lines, and if in either of them be taken a point at
allauentures, a right line drawn by these points is in one, and the self same
plain superficies with the parallels: And by the same reason also every one of
the four sided figures SOPT, and TPKV is in one and the self same plain
superficies. And the triangle VRX is also in one and the self same plain
superficies (by the ^. of the eleventh). Now if we imagine right lines drawn
from the points O, S, P, T, R, V, to the point (...), there shall be described a
Polyhedro^ or a solid figure of many sides, between the circu^ferences BX and
KX composed of pyramids, whose bases are the four sided figures BKOS, SOPT,
TPRV, and the triangle VRX, and top the point A. And if in every one of the
sides K^L, LM and ME we use the self same construction that we did in BK, and
moreover in the other three quadrants or quarters, and also in the other half
of the sphere, there shall then be made a Polyhedron or solid figure
consisting of many sides described in the sphere, which Polyhedron is made of
the pyramids whose bases are the foresaid four sided figur^s, and the triangle
VRK, and others which are in the self same order with them: and common top
to them all in the point A. Now I say that the foresaid polihedron solid of
many sides touches not the superficies of the less sphere in which is the
circle FGH: Second part of the construction.
Draw (by the 11. of the eleventh) from the point A to the plain superficies
of the four sided figure KBOS a perpendicular line AY, and let it fall upon
the plain superficies in the point Y. And draw these right lines BY and YK.
And forasmuch as the line AY is erected perpendicularly to the plain
superficies of BKOS, therefore the same AY is erected perpendicularly to all
the right lines that touch it, and are in the plain superficies of the four
sided figure (by the ^. definition of the eleventh). Second part of the
demonstration.
Wherefore the line AY is erected perpendicularly to either of these lines BY,
and YK. And forasmuch as (by the 15. definition of the first) the line A^ is
equal to the line AK, therefore the square of the line AB is equal to the
square of the line AK. And to the square of the line A^ are equal the squares
of the lines AY, and YB (by the 47. of the first) for the angle ^. YA is a
right angle. And to the square of the line AK are equal the squares of the
lines AY and YK. Wherefore the squares of the lines AY, and YB are equal to the
squares of the lines AY, and TK: take away the square of the line AY which is
common to them both. Wherefore the residue, namely, the square of the BY is
equal to the residue, namely, to the square of the line YK. Wherefore the line
BY is equal to the line YK. In like sort also may we prove that right lines
drawn from the point Y to the points O, and S, are equal to either of the
lines BY, and YK. Wherefore making the center the point Y, and the space either
the line BY or the line YK describe a circle, and it shall pass by the points
O, and S, and the four sided figure KBOS shall be inscribed in the circle. And
forasmuch as the line KB is greater then the line WZ (by the 2. of the sixth,
because AK is greater then AW), but the line WZ is equal to the line SO.
Wherefore the line BK is greater the^ the line SO. But the line BK is equal to
either of the lines KS, and BO by construction. Wherefore either of the lines
KS, and ^O is greater th^n the line SO. And forasmuch ^s in the circle is a
four sided figure KBOS, and the sides BK, BO and KS are equal, and the side OS
is less then any one of them, and the line BY is drawn from the center of the
circle: therefore the square of the line KB is greater then the double of the
square of the line BY (by the 12. of the second) ^for that it sub^endeth an
angle greater then a right angle contained of the two equal (...) B^, and YK,
which angle BYK is an obtuse angle. For the 4. angles at the ce^ter Y are equal
to 4^ right angles: of which three, namely, the angles BYK, KYS, and BYO are
equal by the 4. of the first, and the fourth namely, ye angle SYO is less
then any of those three angles, by the 25. of the first.) Draw (by the 12. of
the first) from the point K to the line BZ, a perpendicular line Which of
necessity shall fall upon Z, as M. Dee proves it: and his proof is set after
at this mark following.
KZ. And forasmuch as the line BD is less then the double to the line DZ (for
the line BD is double to the line DA, which is less then the line DZ): but as
the line BD is to the line DZ, so is the parallelogramme contained under the
lines DB and BZ, to the parallelogramme contained under the lines DZ and ZB (by
the 1. of the sixth): therefore if ye describe upon the line BZ a square, and
making perfect the parallelogramme contained under the lines ZD, and ZB, that
which is contained under the lines DB and BZ, shall be less then the double to
that which is contained under the lines DZ and ZB. And if ye draw a right line
from the point K to the point D, that which is contained under the lines DB and
BZ, equal to the square of the line BK (by the Corollary of the 8. of the
sixth) for the angle BKD is a right angle, by the 3^. of the third, for it is in
the semicircle BED): and that which is contained under the lines DZ and ZB, is
equal to the square of the line KZ (by the same Corollary). Wherefore the
square of the line KB, is less then the double to the square of the line KZ.
But the square of the line KB is greater then the double to the square of the
line BY, as before has been proved. Wherefore the square of the line KZ, is
greater then the square of the line BY (by the 10. of the fifth). And forasmuch
as (by the 15. definition of the first) the line BA is equal to the line KA:
therefore also the square of the line BA is equal to the square of the line
KA. But (by the 47. of the first) unto the square of the line AB, are equal
the squares of the lines BY and YA: (for the angle BYA is by construction, a
right angle). And (by the same reason) to the square of the line KA, are equal
the squares of the lines KZ and ZA: (for the angle KZA is also by construction,
a right angle). Wherefore the squares of the lines BY and YA, are equal to the
squares of the lines KZ and ^A^ Of which the square of the line KZ is greater
then the square of the line BY, as has before been proved. Wherefore the
residue, namely, I. Dee.
the square of the line ZA, is less then the square of the line YA. Wherefore
the line YA is greater then the line AZ. But AZ is greater the^ AG, as in the
former proposition, KM was evident to be greater then KG: so may it also be
made manifest that KZ does neither touch nor cut the circle FG^H.
Wherefore the line AY is much greater the^ the line AG. But the line AY
falls upon one of the bases of the Polihedron, and the line AG falls upon
the superficies of the less sphere. Wherefore the Polihedron touches not the
superficies of the less sphere.

An other and more ready demonstration to prove that the line AY is greater
then the line AG. An other prove that the line AY is greater the^ the line AG.
Raise up (by the 11. of the first) from the point G to the line AG a
perpendicular line GL. And draw a right line from the point A to the point L.
Now the^ dividing (by the 30. of the third) the circumference E^ into halues,
and again that half into halues, and thus doing continually, we shall at the
length by the corollary of the first of the tenth, leave a certain
circumference, which shall be less then the circumference of the circle BCD
which is subtended of a line equal to the line GL. Let the circumference left
be KB. Wherefore also the right line KB is less then the right line GL. And
forasmuch as the four sided figure BKOS is in a circle, and the lines OB, BK,
and KS are equal, and the line OS is less, therefore the angle BYK is an
obtuse angle. Wherefore the line BK is greater then the line BY. But the line
GL is greater then the line KB. Wherefore the line GL is much greater then the
line BY. Wherefore also the square of the line GL is greater then square of the
line BY. And forasmuch as (by the 15. definition of the first) the line AL is
equal to the line AB, therefore the square of the line AL is equal to the
square of the line AB. But unto the square of the line AL are equal the
squares of the lines AG and GL, and to the square of the line AB are equal the
squares of the lines BY and YA. Wherefore the squares of the lines AG and GL
are equal to the squares of the lines BY and YA, of which the square of the
line BY is less then the square of the line GL. Wherefore the residue, namely,
the square of the line YA is greater the^ the square of the line AG. Wherefore
also the line AY is greater the^ the line AG. Wherefore two spheres consisting
both about one and the self same center, being given, there is inscribed in
the greater sphere a polihedron or solid of many sides which touches not the
superficies of the less sphere^ which was requi^red to be done.

Corollary.
And if in the other sphere, namely, in the less sphere be inscribed a
Polihedron or solid of many sides like to the polihedron inscribed in the
sphere BCDE, then the polihedron inscribed in the sphere BCDE is to the
polihedron inscribed in the other sphere in treble proportion of that in which
the diameter of the sphere BCDE is to the diameter of the other sphere. For
those solides being divided into pyramids equal in number and equal in order,
the pyramids shall be like. But like pyramids are (by the 8. of the twelfth)
the one to the other in treble proportion of that in which side of like
proportion is to side of like proportion. Wherefore the pyramid whose base is
the four sided figure KBOS and top the point A is to that py^amis which is
of like order in the other sphere, in treble proportion of that in which side
of like proportion is to side of like proportion, that is of that in which the
side AB which is drawn from the ce^ter of the sphere which is about the ce^ter
A, is to the side which is drawn from the ce^ter of the other sphere. And in
like sort also every one of ye pyramids which is in ye sphere which is about
the ce^tre A is to every one of the pyramids of the self same order in the
other sphere in treble proportion of that in which the side AB is to the side
which is drawn from the center of the other sphere. But as one of the
antecedentes is to one of the consequen^es, so are all the antecedents to all
the consequentes by the 12. of the fifth. Wherefore the whole polihedron solid
of many sides which is in the sphere which is about the center A, is to the
whole polihedron or solid of many sides which is in the other sphere, in
treble proportion of that in which the side AB is to the side which is drawn
from the center of the other sphere, that is, of that which the diameter BD is
to the diameter of the other sphere, by the 15. of the fifth: which was
required to be demonstrated.

M. Dee his devise, to help the imagination to young stude^ts in Geometry^ and
to make his demonstration more evident as concerning the errors by him
corrected in Euclides figure, by the ignorant, mislined.

I. D^e.
This figure is answerable to the first plain: which, cutting the two Spheres
by their common center A, made two concentricall circles (having the same
center with the two Spheres) namely BCDE, and FGH. Upon which, ^ you aptly
rear perpendicularly, the second figure containing two concentricall circles,
(to the first equal) and make the points noted with like letters to agree,
and afterward upon the second figure, set on the third figure being here for
the better handling made a semicircle: which upon the first figure must also
be erected perpendicularly: And lastly if you take the little quadrangled
figure BOKS, and make every point to touch, his like: and then read the
construction and wey the demonstration (twice o^ thrice being red over) shall
you in this del^^eatio^ in apt pastborde, or like ma^ter framed, find al
things in this problem very evident.

I need not warn you, that the line AY may easily be imagined, or with a fine
thread supplied: or of the right lines imaginable between P and T, and between R
and V, I need say nothing, trusting that the great exercise past, by that time
you are orderly come to this place, will have made you sufficient perfect to
supply any farther thing herein to be considered.

The little fowercornerd pieces remaining to the semicircle, are to be let
through the first ground plain: thereby to stay this semicircle the better in
his apt place and situation: which it will the more aptly do, if ye do (...),
the contrary arasses of the slitt of it, and of the slitt of the second figure,
into which it is to be let: abating the^ alike much: a little will serve.
Experience, by advise, will teach sufficiently.

Master Dee his advise and demonstration, reforming a great error in the
designation of the former figure of Euclides second Problem: with two
Corollaries (by him inferred) upon his said demonstration.
A Theoreme.
That a right line dr^wen from the point K, perpendicularly upon the line BZ,
does fall upon the point Z: we will, thus, make evident.

BY the premises, it is manifest, that the point Z is that point where a right
line from the point O being perpendicularly let ^all to the circle BCDE, does
touch the same circle. Which point Z also is proved to be in the right line
BAD, the common section of two circles cutting each other: being one to the
other perpendicularly erected. These things, with other, before demonstrated,
I here make my suppositions. Consider now the two triangles rectangles OZB and
KZB: Of which, the angle OZB i^ equal to the angle KZB. For, by construction,
they are both right angles: This, as an assumpt, is presently proved.
and the angle Z^O is equal to the angle ZBK. For, if from D to K you imagine
a right line: and the like from D to O: you have two triangles in equal
semicircles, rectangles, namely, DKB and DOB: which have the diameter BD
common: and BK, the Chord, equal to BO the Chord, by construction. Wherefore
(by the 47. of the first) the third side, namely, DK, is equal to the third,
namely, DO: Wherefore (by the 5. of the sixth) the angle ZBO, which is DBO, is
equal to ZBK, which is DBK. (For the line ZB, by con^^ruction, is part of DB).
And seeing two angles of OZB, are proved equal, to two angles of KZB, of
necessity the third, namely, ZOB, is equal to the third, namely, ZKB, by the
32. of the first. Wherefore the two triangles rectangles OZB and KZB, are
proved equiangled. By the fourth, therefore, of the sixth, their sides are
proportional: therefore by the premises, proved, as BO is to BK, so is OZ to
KZ, and the third line, which subtendeth the angle ZOB, to the third line which
subtendeth the angle ZKB. But, by construction, BO is equal to BK: therefore
OZ is equal to KZ: And the third al^o is equal to the third: Wherefore the
point Z, in respect of the two triangles rectangles, OZB and KZB determines
one and the same magnitude, i^ the line BZ. Which can not be: if any other
point, in the line BZ, were assigned, nearer, or farther of, from the point B.
One only point therefore, is that, at which the two perpendiculars KZ and OZ
fall: But, by construction, OZ falls at Z the point and therefore at the same
Z, does the perpendicular, drawn from K, fall likewise: Which was required to
be demonstrated.

Although a brief monition, might herein have served for the pregnant or the
humble learner, yet for them that are well pleased to have things made plain,
with many words, and for the stiffenecked busy body, it was necessary, with
my controlment of other, to annexe the cause and reason thereof, both invincible
and also evident.

A Corollary. 1.
Hereby it is manifest, that two equal circles cutting one the other by the
whole diameter, if from one and the same end of their common diameter, equal
portions of their circumferences be taken: and from the points ending those
equal portions, two perpendiculars be let down to their common diameter,
those perpendiculars shall fall upon one and the same point of their common
diameter.

2.
Secondly it follows that those perpendiculars are equal.

Note.
From circles in our first supposition each to other perpendicularly erected,
we proceed and infer now these Corollaries, whether they be perpendicularly
erected or no: by reasou the demonstration has a like force, upon our
suppositions here used.

The 16. Theoreme. The 18. Proposition. Spheres are in treble proportion the
one to the other of that in which their diameters are.
SVppose that there be two spheres ABC and DEF, and let their diameters be BC
and OF. Then I say that the sphere ABC is to the sphere DEF in treble
proportion of that in which the diameter BC is to the diameter OF. Two cases in
this proposition.
For if not, then the sphere ABC is in treble proportion of that in which BC is
to OF, either to some sphere less then the sphere DEF, or to some sphere
greater. First let it be unto a less, namely, to GHK. The first case.
And imagine that the spheres DEF and GHK be both about one and the self same
center. Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
And (by the proposition next going before) describe in the greater sphere DEF
a polihedron or a solid of many sides not touching the superficies of the
less sphere GHK. And suppose also that in the sphere ABC be inscribed a
polihedron like to the polihedron which is in the sphere DEF. Wherefore (by the
corollary of the same) the polihedron which is in the sphere ABC, is to the
polihedron which is in the sphere DEF in treble proportion of that in which the
diameter BC is to the diameter OF. But by supposition the sphere ABC is to the
sphere GHK in treble proportion of that in which the diameter BC is to the
diameter OF. Wherefore as the sphere ABC is to the sphere GHK, so is the
polihedro^ which is described in the sphere ABC to the polihedro^ which is
described in the sphere DEF by the 11. of the fifth. Wherefore alternately (by
the 16. of the fifth) as the sphere ABC is to the polihedron which is described
in it, so is the sphere GHK to the polihedron which is in the sphere DEF. But
the sphere ABC is greater then the polihedro^ which is described in it.
Wherefore also the sphere GHK is greater then the polihedro^ which is in the
sphere DEF by the 14. of the fifth. But it is also less, for it is contained in
it, which impossible. Wherefore the sphere ABC is not in treble proportion of
that in which the diameter BC, is to ye diameter OF, to any sphere less then
the sphere DEF. In like sort also may we prove that the sphere DEF is not in
treble proportion of that in which the diameter OF is to the diameter BC, to
any sphere less then the sphere ABC. Second case.
Now I say that the sphere ABC is not in treble proportion of that in which the
diameter BC is to the diameter OF to any sphere greater the^ the sphere DEF.
For if it be possible, let it be to a greater, namely, to LMN. Wherefore by
conversion the sphere LMN is to the sphere ABC in treble proportion of that in
which the diameter OF is to the diameter BC. But as the sphere LMN is to the
sphere ABC, so is the sphere DEF to some sphere less the^ the sphere ABC, As
it is ^asi^ to gather by the ^^^umpt put after the seco^^ of this boo^^.
as it has before been proved, for the sphere LMN is greater then the sphere
DEF. Wherefore the sphere DEF is in treble proportion of that in which the
diameter OF is to the diameter BC to some sphere less the^ the sphere ABC,
which is proved to be impossible. Wherefore the sphere ABC is not in treble
proportion of that in which BE is to OF to any sphere greater the^ the sphere
DEF. And it is also proved that it is not to any less. Wherefore the sphere
ABC is to the sphere DEF in treble proportion of that in which the diameter BC
is to the diameter OF: which was required to be demonstrated.

A Corrollary added by Flussas.
Hereby it is manifest, that spheres are the one to the other, as like
Polihedrons and in like sort described in them are: namely, each are in triple
proportion of that in which the diameters.

A Corollary added by M^ Dee.
It is then evident, how to give two right lines, having that proportion
between them, which, any two spheres given, have the one to the other.

For, if to their diameters, as to the first and second lines (of four in
continual proportion) you adioyne a third and a fourth line in continu^ll
proportion (as I have taught before): The first and fourth lines, shall
answer the P^obleme. Note: a general rule.
How general this rule is, in any two like solides, with their correspondent
(or Omologall) lines, I need not, with more words, declare.

Certain Theoremes and Problemes (whose use is manifold, in Spheres, Cones,
Cylinders, and other solides) added by Ioh. Dee.
A Theoreme. 1.
The whole superficies of any Sphere, is quadrupla, to the greatest circle, in
the same sphere contained.

It is needeles to bring Archimedes demonstration hereof, into this place:
seeing his book of the Sphere and Cylinder, with other his wo^kes, are every
where to be had, and the demo^stration thereof, easy.

A Theoreme. 2.
Every sphere, is quadrupl^, to that Cone, whose base is the greatest circle,
and height, the semidiameter of the same sphere.

This is the 32. Proposition of Archimedes first book of the Sphere and
Cylinder.

A Problem. 1.
A Sphere being given, to make an upright Cone, equal to the same: or in any
other proportion, given, between two right lines.

Suppose the Sphere given, to be A, his diameter being BC, and center D: with a
line equal to the semidiameter BD (which let be NO) describe a circle NRP:
Construction.
whose diameter let be NP, and center O, it is evident, that NRP is equal to
the greatest circle in A, contained. At the center O, let a perpendicular be
reared equal to BD (the semidiameter of A) which suppose to be OQ: It is now
plain that to the Cone, whose base is the circle NRR, and height OQ, the
Sphere A, is quadrupla: by the 2. Theoreme here, and by construction. Take a
line equal to NP, which let be FE: and with the semidiameter FE (making the
point F center) describe a circle: which suppose to be EKG, and diameter EG. At
the center F, rear a line perpendicular to EKG, by the 12. of the eleventh:
and make it equal to OQ. Let that line be ^L. I say that the Cone, whose base
is the circle EKG, and height the line FL^ is equal to A. For seeing FE, the
semidiameter of EKG, is equal to N^ (the diameter of NRP) by construction:
Demonstration.
EG, the diameter of EKG, shall be double to NP. Wherefore the square of EG, is
quadrupla to the square of NP: by the 4. of the second. But as the square of
EG, is to the square of NP, so is the circle EKG to the circle NRP, by the 2.
of this twelueth. Wherefore the circl^ EKG, is quadruple to the circle NRP. And
FL, the height is (by construction) equal to OQ the height. Wherefore the
cone, whose base is the circle EKG, and height FL, is quadruple to the cone,
whose base is NRP, and the height OQ: by the ^1. of this twelfth. But unto the
same cone whose base is NRP, and height OQ, the Sphere A is likewise proved
quadrupla^. Wherefore the cone whose base is EKG and height FL, is equal to
the Sphere A: by the 7. of the fifth. To a Sphere being given therefore, we have
made an upright cone equal.

And as concerning the other part of this Problem, The second part of the
Problem two ways executed.
it is now easy to execute, and that two ways: I mean to A the sphere given,
to make an upright cone in any proportion given between two right lines. For,
let the proportion given, be that which is between X and Y. By the order EKG
make an other circle in that proportion that X is to Y: which let be Z. Upon
the center of Z, rear a line perpendicular and equal to FL. I say that the
cone, whose base is Z, and the height equal to FL, is to A, in the proportion
of X to Y. For the cone upon Z, by construction, has height equal to the
height of the cone LEKG: and Z, by construction, is to EKG^ as X is to Y:
Wherefore, by the 11. of this twelfth, the cone upon Z, is to the cone LEKG, as
X is to Y. But the cone LEKG is proved equal to the sphere A. Wherefore the
cone upon Z, is to A, as X is to Y, by the 7. of the fifth. To a Sphere given
therefore, we have made a cone in any proportion given, between two right
lines. Secondly, as X is to Y, so to FL, let there be a fourth W. I say that a
cone, whose base is equal to EKG, and height the line W, is to A, as X is to
Y. For, by the 14. of this twelfth, cones being set on equal bases, are one to
the other, as their heightes are: But, by construction, the height W, is to the
height FL, a^ X is to Y. Wherefore the cone which has his base equal to EKG,
and height the line W, is to the cone LEKG, as X is to Y. And it is proved,
that to the cone LEKG, the Sphere A is equal: Wherefore, by the 7. of the fifth,
the cone, whose base is equal to EKG, and height the line W, is to A, as X is
to Y. Therefore a Sphere being given, we have made an upright cone, An upright
Cone.
in any proportion given between two right lines. And before, we made an
upright cone, equal to the Sphere given. Wherefore a Sphere being given, we
have made an upright cone, equal to the same, or in any other proportion,
given between two right lines. I call that an upright cone, whose axe is
perpendicular to his base.

A Corollary.
Of the first part of the demonstration, it is evident: A Sphere being
propounded, that a Cone, whose base has his semidiameter, equal to the
diameter thereof, and height equal to the semidiameter of the same Sphere, is
equal to that sphere propounded.

A Problem. 2.
A Sphere being given, and a circle, to re^re an upright Cone, upon that circle
(as a base) equal to the Sphere given: or in any proportion between two right
lines assigned.

Suppose the Sphere given, to be Q: and the circle given to be C. By the first
Problem make an upright cone equal to Q the Sphere given: which cone suppose
to be A^ and (by the 2. Problem of my additions upon the second of this
twelfth book) as C the circle ^euen, is to the base of A, so let the height of
A, be to a line found: which let be D. Then it is evident, that the cone, which
has for his base C, the circle given, and height the line D, last found, shall
be equal to Q the Sphere given: which cone let be F. For, by construction, F
has his base and height in reciprokall proportion with the cone A, made equal
to Q the Sphere given: Whe^fore by the 15. of this twelfth, and 7. of the
fifth, this upright cone F, reared upon C, the circle given, is equal to Q,
the Sphere given: which thing the Problem first required.

And the second part of this Problem is thus performed. Suppose the proportion
given to be that which is between X and Y. The second part of the Problem.
Then, as X is to Y, so let an other right line found, be to the h^ight of F:
which line let be G. For this G, the found height (by construction) being to
the height of F, as X is to Y, does cause this cone (which let be M) upon C,
the circle given (or an other to it equal) duly reared, to be unto the cone
F, as X is to Y, by the 14. of this twelfth. But F is proved equal to the
Sphere given: Wherfo^e M, is to the Sphere given, as X is to Y. And M, is
^eared upon the circle given: or his equal. Wherfo^e, a Sphere being given,
and a circle, we have reared an vp^ight cone, upon that given circle (as a
base) equal to the Sphere given: or in any proportion, between two right lines
assigned: which was required to be done.

A Problem. 3.
A Sphere being given, and a right line, to make an upright cone, equal to the
Sphere given, or in any other proportion given between two right lines: which
made cone, shall have his height equal to the right line given.

Suppose the Sphere given, to be R: and the right line given, to be S. To R the
Sphere given, make an upright cone, equal: by the first Problem: which cone
suppose to be A. Then as S, the line given, is to the height of A, so let the
base of A, be to an other circle, which let be K, by my additions, upon the
second Proposition of this twelfth book. I say that an upright cone, having
his height, equal to S, the right line given, and his base K, is equal to the
Spheres given. Let this cone be noted by L: for by construction, this cone L,
and A, have their heightes and bases reciprokall in proportion: Wher^ore this
cone L, and the cone A, are equal, by the 15. of the twelfth). But A is equal
to the Sphere given by construction. Wherefore L is equal to the Spheres
given. And the height of L, is equal to the right line given, by construction:
which ought to be done.

The second ^a^^ o^ the ^robleme.
For the second part: sinde a circle, which shall have to the base of L, any
proportion appointed in ^ight lines: as the proportion of X to Y: which, by my
additions, upon the second of this book, ye have l^arned to do. Then, with the
height, equal to the height of L reared upon this last found circle, which let
be T, as a base, you shall satisfy the Problem. Let that Cone be V. For this
last cone V, is to L, as his base is to the base of L, by the 11. of this
twelfth. But L is proved equal to the Sphere given: Wherefore by the 7. of the
fifth, this l^^t cone V, has to R, the Sphere given, that proportion which is
between X and Y assigned: and forasmuch as the height of this cone V, is equal
to the height of L: and the height of L, equal to S, the right line given (by
construction): it is evident, that a Sphere being given, and a right line, we
have made an upright cone, equal to the Sphere given, or in any other
proportion given between two right lines: which made cones, have their height
equal to the right line given: which ought to be done.

Vuwilling I am to use thus many words, in matters so plain^ and ease.
But this (I think) can not hinder them, that by nature are not so quick of
invention, as to lead every thing, gen^rally spoken, to a particular execution.

A Theoreme. 3.
Every Cylinder which has his base, the greatest Circle in a Sp^er^, and heith
equal to the diameter of that Sphere, is Sesquialtera to that Sphere. Also the
superficies of that Cylinder, with his two bases is Sesquilatera to the
superficies of the Sphere: and without his two bases, is equal to the
superficies of that Spher^

Suppose, a sphere to be signified by A, and an upright cylinder having to his
base a circle equal to the greatest circle in A contained, and his heith
equal to the diameter of A, let be signified by FG. I say that FG, is
sesquialter to A: Secondly I say that the crooked cylindricall super^icies of
FG, together an upright cylinder, and at the point N, cut by a plain
Superficies parallel to his opposite bases, the common section of that plain
superficies and the cylind^r FG, must be a This may easily be demonstrated, as
in the 17. proposition the section of a sphere was proved to be a circle.
circle, equal, to his base FLB, and have his center, the point N. Which
circle, let be IOK: And seeing that FLB is, by supposition, equal to the
greatest circle in A, IOK, also, shall be equal to the greatest circle, in A,
contained: Also, by reason MH, is by supposition, equal to the diameter of A:
and NH, by constructio^, half of MH, it is manifest that NH is equal to the
semidiameter of A. If, therefore, you suppose a cone to have the circle IOK to
hi^ base: and NH to his heith, the sphere A, shall be to that Cone, quadrupla,
by the 2. Theoreme. Let that cone be HIOK. Wherefore A, is quadrupla to HIOK.
And the Cylinder IG having the same base, with HIOK (the circle IOK) and the
same heith, (the right line NH) is triple to the cone HIOK by the 10. of this
twelfth book. But to IG, the whole cylinder FG, is double, as is proved:
Wherefore FG, is triple and triple, to the cone HIOK, that is, sextuple. And A
is proved quadrupla to the same HIOK. Wherefore FG is to HIOK, as 6. to 1: and
A, is to HIOK, as 4. to 1: For taking away all doubt, this, a^ a Lemma,
afterward is dem^strated.
Therefore FG is to A, as 6, to 4: which in the least terms, is, as 3 to 2. but
3 to 2, is the terms of sesquialtera proportion. Wherefore the cylinder FG, is
to A sesquialtera in proportion. Secondly, forasmuch as the superficies of a
cylinder (his two opposite bases excepted) is equal to that circle whose
semidiameter is middell proportional between the side of the cylinder, and the
diameter of his base: (as unto the 10. of this book, I have added.) But of FG,
the side BG, being parallel and equal to the axe MH, must also be equal to
the diameter of A. And the base FLB, being (by supposition) equal to the
greatest circle in A contained, must have his diameter (FB) equal to the said
diameter of A. The middle proportional therefore between BG and FB, being equal
each to other, shall be a line, equal to either of them. [As i^ (...) set BG
and FB together, as one line, and upon that line composed, as a diameter make a
semicircl^ and from the center, to the circumference draw a lin^ perpendicular
to the said diameter: A Lemma (as it were) presently demonstrated.
by the (...) of the sixth, that perpendicular, is middel proportional between
FB and BG, the semidiameters^ and he him self also a semidiameter: and
therefore by the definition of a circle, equal to FB, and likewise, to BG.] And
a circle, having his semidiameter, equal to the diameter FB, is quadruple to
the circle FLB. [For the square of every whole line, is quadruple to the squ^re
of his half line, as may be proved by the 4. of the second: and by the second
of this twelfth, circles are one to the other, as the squares of their
diameters, are.] Wherefore the superficies cylindricall of FG, alone, is
quadrupla to his base FLB. But if a certain quantity be dupla to one thing,
and an other, quadrupla to the same one thing, those two quantities together
are sextupla to the same one thing. Therefore seeing the base, opposite to FLB,
(being equal to to FLB) added to FLB, makes that co^pound, double to FLB:
that double added to the cylindricall super^icies of FG, does make a
superficies sextupla to FLB. And the superficies of A, is quadrupla to the same
FLB, by the first Theoreme. Therefore the cylindricall superficies of FG, with
the superficieces of his two bases is to the superficies FLB, as 6 to 1, and
the superficies of A to FLB, is as 4 to 1. Wherefore the cylindricall
superficies of FG, and his two bases, together, are to the superficies of A, as
6 to 4: that is, in the smallest terms, as 3 to 2. Which is proper to
ses^uialtera proportion. Thirdly, it is already made evident that the
superficies cylindrical, of FG (only by it self)

The Lemma.
If A be to C, as 6, to 1: and B, to C, as 4 to 1: A, is to B, as 6, to 4.

For, seeing, B is to C, as 4 to 1, by supposition: therefore backward, by the
4. of the fifth, C is to B, as 1, to 4. Imagine now two orders of qnantities,
the first, A, C, and B the second, 6, 1, and 4. Forasmuch as, A, is to C, as 6,
to 1, by supposition: and C is to B, as 1, to 4, as we have proved: wherefore, A
is to B, as 6 to 4, by the 22 of the fifth. Therefore, if A be to C as 6 to 1,
and B to C, as 4 to 1: A is to B, as 6, to 4. which was to be proved.

Note.
Slight things (some times) lacking evident proof, bread doubt or ignorance.
And, I need not warn^ you, how gen^rall, this demonstration is: for if you put
in the place of 6 and 4, any other numbers, the like manner of conclusion will
follow. So likewise, in place of 1. any other one number may be, as, if A be to
C as ^ to 5: and B unto C, be as 7 to 5: A, shall be to B, as 6 to 7. etc.

A Problem. 4.
To a Sphere given, to make a cylinder equal, or in any proportion given
between two right lines.

Suppose the given Sphere to be A: and the proportion given to be that between
X and Y. I say that a cylinder is to be made, equal to A^ or else in the same
proportion to A, that is between X to Y. Let a cylinder be made (such one as
the Theoreme next before supposed) that shall have his base equal to the
greatest circle in A, Construction.
and height equal to the diameter of A: Let that cylinder b^ the upright
cylinder BC. Le^ the one side of BC, be the right line QC. Divide QC into three
equal part^ of which, let QE contain two, and let the third part be CE. By the
point E suppose a plain (parallel to the bases of BC) to pass through the
cylinder BC, cutting the same by the circle DE. I say that the cylinder BE is
equal to the Sphere A. For seeing BC, being an upright cylinder, is cu^ by a
plain, parallel to his bases, by construction: therefore as the cylinder DC,
is to the cylinder BE, so is the axe of DC, to the axe of BE, by the 13. of
this twelfth. Demonstration.
Wherefore as the axe is to the axe, so is cylinder to cylinder. But axe is to
axe, as side to side, namely, CE to QE, because the axe is parallel to any side
of an upright cylinder: by the definition of a cylinder. And the circle of the
section, is parallel to the bases, by construction. Wherefore in the
parallelogramme (made of the axe, and of two semidiameters, on one side
parallels, one to the other, being coupled together by a line drawn between
their ends in their circumferences, which line is the side QC) it is evident,
that the axe of BC is cut in like proportion, that the side QC is cut. Wherefore
the cylinder DC, is to the cylinder BE, as EC is to QE. Wherefore, by
composition, the cylinders DC and BE, that is, whole BC, are to the cylinder
BE, as CE and QE (the whole right line QC) are to QE. But by co^struction, QC
is of 3. such parts, as QE contains 2. Wherefore the cylinder BC, is of 3.
such parts, as BE contains 2. Wherefore BC the cylinder, is to BE, as 3. to
2: which is sesquialtera proportion. But by the former Theoreme, BC is
sesquialtera to the Sphere A: Wherefore, by the 7. of the fifth, BE is equal to
A. Therefore to a Sphere given, we have made a cylinder equal.

Or thus more briefly omitting all cutting of the Cylinder.
Forasmuch as BC is an upright Cylinder: his sides are equal to his axe or
heith: therefore the two cylinders, whereof one has the heith QC and the other
the heith QE, having both their bases, the greatest circle in the Sphere A, are
one to the other as QC is to QE, by the 14. of this twelfth, but QC is to QE,
as 3. to 2, by construction: and 3. to 2. is in Sesquialtera proportion:
therefore the cylinder BC having his heith QC, and his base the greatest circle
in A contained, is Sesquialtera to the cylinder which has his base the
greatest circle in A contained, and heith the line QE. But by the former
Theoreme, BC, is also Sesquialtera to A: wherefore the cylinder having the base
BQ (which by supposition, The second part of the Problem.
is equal to the greatest circle in A contained) and heith, QE, is equal to
the sphere A, by the 7. of the fifth. And now it can not be hard, to give a
cylinder, to A, in that proportion, which is between X and Y. For let the side
QE, be to QP, as Y is to X, by the 12. of the sixth. Therefore backward, QP is
to QE as X to Y. Wherefore the cylinder having the base the greatest circle in
A and heith the line QP, *
is to the cylinder having the same base, and heith the line QE, as X is to Y,
by the 14. of this twelfth: but the cylinder having the heith QE, and his base
the greatest circle in A, contained, is proved equal to the Sphere A.
Wherefore by the 7. of the fifth, the cylinder whose heith is QP and base the
greatest circle in A, contained, is to the sphere A, as X to Y. Therefore to a
sphere given: we have made a cylinder, in any proportion given b^twene two
right lines, and also, before we have to a sphere given, made a cylinder
equal. Therefore to a sphere given, we have made a cylinder equal, or in any
proportion given between two right lines.

A Problem. 5.
A Sphere being given, and a circle, upon that circle as a base, to rere a
cylinder, equal to the sphere given: or in any proportion, given between two
right lines.

A Problem. 6.
A Sphere being given, and a right line, to make a cylinder, equal to the
sphere given, or in any other proportion, between two right lines, given.

In this 5. and 6. problem, first make a cylinder equal to the sphere given,
by the 4. problem: and then by the order of the 2. and 3. problemes, in cones,
execu^e these accordingly in cylinders.

A Problem. 7.
Two unlike Cones or Cylinders, being given, to find two right lines, which
have the same proportion one to the other, that the two given cones or
cylinders have one to the other.

Upon one of their bases rere a cone (if cones be compared) or a cylinder (if
cylinders be compared) equal to the other: by the order of the second and
third probleme^: and the heith of the cone or cylinder, on whose base you rered
an equal cone or cylinder, with the new heith found, have that proportion,
which the cones or cylinders have, one to the other, by the 14. of this twelfth
book.

A Problem. 8.
An upright Cone, and Cylinder, being given: to find two right lines, having
that proportion, the one to the other, which the Cone and Cylinder have, one to
the other.

Suppose, QEK an upright cone and AB an upright cylinder given. I say two right
lines are to be given which shall have that proportion one to the other,
Construction.
which QEK and AB have one to the other. Upon the base BH, erecte a Cone,
equal to QEK: by the order of the second problem: which let be OBH, and his
heith let be OC, Demonstration.
and let the heith of AB, (the cylinder), be CS, produce CS to P: so that CP,
be tripla to CS, and make pe^fect the cone PBH. I say that FC and OC have that
proportion, which AB has to QEK. For, by constr^ction, OBH is equal to QEK:
and PBH is equal to AB, as we will prove. (Assumpt wise). And PBH, and OBH are
upon one base, namely BH: wherefore by the 14. of this twelfth, ^BH and OBH are
one to the other as their heithes PC, and OC, are one to the other) wherefore
the cylinder and cone equal to PBH and OBH are as PC is to OC: by the 7. of
the fifth. But AB the cylinder QEK the cone, are equal to PBH and OBH: by
construction: wherefore AB the cylinder, is to QEK the cone, as PC, is to OC.
Wherefore we have found two right lines having that proportion that a cone and
a cylinder given, have one to the other. Which thing we may execute upon the
base of the cone given, as we did upon the base of the cylinder geu^n, on this
manner. Upon the base of the cone QEK, An other way of executing this problem.
which base, let be EK, erect a cylinder, equal to AB, by the order of my
second problem. Which cylinder let be ED, and GT his heith, and let the heith
of the cone QEK, be QG. Take the line GR, the ^hird part o^ QG, (by the 9. of
the sixth): and with a plain passing by R, parallel to EK, cut of the cylinder
E^: which shall be equal to the cone QEK, by the assumpt following^ I say now,
that AB, the cylinder, is to QEK the cone, as GT, is to GR. For the cylinder ED
is to the cylinder OF, as GT is to GR, by the 14. of the twelfth: and to ED is
the cylinder AB equal: by construction: and to OF, we have proved the cone
QEK, equal, wherefore by the 7. of the fifth, AB is to QEK, as GT i^ to GR.
Wherefore an upright cone, and a cylinder being given, we have found two right
lines having the same proportion between them, which the cone and the cylinder,
have one to the other: which was requisite to be done.

An assumpt.
If a come, and a cylinder, being both on one base, are equal one to the
other: the heith of the cone ^s tripla to the heith of the cylinder. And if a
cone and a cylinder being both on one base, the heith of the cone be tripla to
the heith of the cylinder, the cone and the cylinder are equal.

We will use the cylinder AB and the cone PBH in the ^o^mer problem: with
their base and heithes so noted as before. I say if PBH be equal to AB, that
CP the heith of PBH, is tripla to CS the heith of the cylinder AB. Suppose upon
the base BH, a cone to be rered of the heith of CS, which let be SBH: it is
manifest that AB is tripla to that cone SBH, by the 10. of this twelfth.
Wherefore a cone equal to AB the cylinder is tripla to SBH the cone, by the 7.
of the fifth, but PBH is supposed equal to AB. Therefore PBH is tripla to SBH,
therefore the heith of PBH shall be tripla to the heith of SBH by the 14. of
the twelfth. But the heith of PBH, is CP: and of SBH, the heith is CS:
wherefore CP is tripla to CS. And CS is the heith of the cylinder AB by
supposition. Therefore a cone and a cylinder, being both on one base, and
equal, the heith of the cone is tripla to the heith of the cylinder. And the
second part, as easily may be confirmed. For if AB a cylinder, and PBH a cone,
have one base, as the circle about BH: and the heith of PBH be tripla to the
heith of AB, I say that PBH, and AB are equal. The converse of the assu^pt.
The heith of AB let be (as before) CS: and of PBH, the heith, let be CP: of the
heith CS, imagine a Cone upon the same base BH: by the 10. of this twelfth, AB
shall be triple to that cone. And the cone PBH having heith CP, (by
supposition) tripla to CS, shall also be tripla to that cone SBH: by the 14. of
this twel^th. Wherefore by the 7. of the fifth AB and PBH are equal.
Therefore, if a cone and a cylinder being both on one base, the heith of the
cone be tripla to the heith of the cylinder, the cone and the cylinder are
equal. So have we demonstrated both parts: as was required.

A Theoreme. 4.
The superficies of the segment or protion of any sphere, is equal to the
circle, whose semidiameter, is equal to that right line which is drawn from
the top of that segment to the circumference of the circle, which is the base
of that portion or segment.

As in the Sphere A, a Segment being cut of by the circle, whose diameter is
CE: and the same circle being the base of the Segment, whose top also is D: the
crooked superficies sphericall of the same Segment, is equal to a circle whose
Semidiameter is equal to the right line DC. As is the circle B.

This has Archimedes demonstrated in this first book of the Sphere and
Cylinder, in his 40. and 41 propositions: and I remitte them thither, that will
herein demonstratiuely be certified: I would wish all Mathematiciens, as well
of verities easy, as of verities rare and obscure, to seek the causes
demonstratiue, the final fruit thereof, is perfection in this art.

Note.
Besides all other uses and commodities, that are of the Crooked superficieces
of the Cone, Cylinder, and Sphere, so easily and certaynely, of us to be dealt
with all: this is not the least, that a notable Error, which among Sophistical
brablers, and vngeometricall Masters and Doctors, has a long time been
vpholden: may most evidently, hereby be confuted, and utterly rooted out of all
men's fantasies for ever. The Error is this, Curui, ad rectum, nulla est
proportio, that is: A great error commonly maintained.
Between crooked and straight, is no proportion^ This error, in line^,
sup^^ficieces, and solides, may with more true demonstrations be overthrown,
then the favorers of that fond fa^tasie are able, with argument, either
probable or Sophistical to make show or pretense to the contrary. In lines, I
omit (as now) Archimedes two ways, for the finding of the proportion of the
circles circumference to a straight line. I mean, by the inscription and
ci^cumscription of like poligonon figures, and that other, by spirall lines.
And I omit likewise (as now) in solides, of a parallelipipedon, equal to a
Sphere, Cone, or Cylinder^ or any segment or sector of the said solides. And
only, here require you to consider in this twelfth book, the ways brought to
your knowledge, how to the crooked superficies of a cone and cylinder, and of a
sphere, Between straight and crooked all manner of proportion may be given.
(the whole, any segment or sector thereof) a plain and straight superficies
may be given equal: Namely, a Circle to be given equal, to any of the said
crooked superficieces assigned, and given. And then farther by my Additions upon
the second proposition, you have means to proceed in all proportions, that
any man can in right lines given or assign. The^fore, Curui ad rectum,
proportio omnimoda potest dari. One thing it is, to demonstrate, that between a
crooked line and a straight or a crooked superficies and a plain or straight
superficies, etc. there is proportion. And an other thing it is, to demonstrate
a particular and special kind of proportion, being between a crooked
superficies and a straight or plain superficies. For this also confi^meth the
first. This short warning will cause you to avoid the said error, and make you
also hable to cure them, which are infected therewith.

A Theoreme. 5.
Any two Spheres being given, as the Sphericall Superficies of the one, is to
the Sphiricall Superficies of the other: So is the greatest Circle contained in
that one, to the greatest Circle contained in that other. And as greatest
Circle, is to greatest Circle, so is Sphericall superficies, to Sphericall
superficies.

For the superficies of every sphere is quadrupla to his greatest circle, by my
first Theoreme: wherefore, of two given spheres, as the sphericall super^icies
of the one, is to his greatest circle, so is the sphericall superficies of the
other, to his greatest circle: therefore by alternate proportion, as spherical
superficies is to spherical superficies, so is greatest circle to greatest
circle. And therefore also as greatest circle, is to greatest circle, so is
spherical superficies to sphericall superficies: which was to be demo^strated.

A Problem. 9.
A Sphere being given, to give an other Sphere, to whose Sphericall
superficies, the superficies Sphericall of the Sphere given shall have any
proportion, between two right lines given.

Suppose A, to be a sphere given, and the proportion given, to be that, which
is between the right lines X and Y. I say that a sphere is to be g^uen to whose
sphericall superficies, the superficies sphericall of A, shall have that
proportion which X has to Y. Let the greatest circle, contained in A the
sphere be the circle BCD. Construction.
And by the problem of my additions, upon the second proposition of this
book, as X is to Y, so let the circle BCD be to an other circle found, let
that other circle be EFG: and his diameter EG. I say that the sphericall
superficies of the sphere A, has to the sphericall superficies of the sphere,
whose greatest circle is EFG, (or his equal) that proportion, which X has to
Y. Demonstration.
For (by construction) BCD is to EFG, as X is to Y: and by the theoreme next
before^ as BCD is to ^FG, so is the spherical superficies of A (whose greatest
circle is BCD, by supposition) to the sphericall superficies, of the sphere,
whose greatest circle is EFG: wherefore, by the 11. of the fifth as X is to Y:
So is the sphericall superficies of A, to the sphericall superficies of the
sphere, whose greatest circle is EFG: wherefore, the sphere whose diameter is
EG, (the diameter also of EFG) is the sphere, to whose sphericall superficies,
the sphericall superficies of the sphere A, has that proportion which X has
to Y. A sphere being given therefore, we have given an other sphere, to whose
sphericall superficies, the superficies sphericall of the sphere geu^ has any
proportion given, between two right lines: which ought to be done.

A Problem. 10.
A sphere being given, and a Circle less then the greatest Circle, in the same
Sphere contained. to coapt in the Sphere given, a Circle equal to the Circle
given.

Suppose A, to be the sphere given: and the circle given less then the
greatest circle in A contained, to be FKG. The diffini^io^ of a circ^e ^^ap^^d
in a sp^er^.
I say, that in the Sphere A, a circle, equal to the circle FKG, is to be
coapted. First understand, what we mean here, by coapting of a circle in a
Sphere. We say, that circle to be coapted in a Sphere, whose whole
circumference is in the superficies of the same Sphere. Let the greatest circle
in the Sphere A contained, be the circle BCD. Whose diameter suppose to be BD,
and of the circle FKG, let FG be the diameter. Construction.
By the 1. of the fourth, let a line equal to FG, be coapted in the circle
BCD. Which line coapted, let be BE. And by the line BE, suppose a plain to
pass, cutting the Sphere A, and to be perpendicularly erected to the
superficies of BCD. Demonstration.
Seeing that the portion of the plain remaining in the sphere, is called their
common section: the said section shall be a circle, as before is proved. And
the common section of the said plain, and the greatest circle BCD, (which is
BE by supposition) shall be the diameter of the same circle, as we will prove.
For, let that circle be BLEM. Let the center of the sphere A, be the point H:
which H, is also the ce^ter of the circle BCD, because BCD is the greatest
circle in A contained. From H, the center of the sphere A, let a line
perpendicularly be let fall to the circle BLEM. Let that line be HO: and it is
evident that HO shall fall upon the common section BE, by the 38. of the
eleventh. And it deuideth BE, into two equal parts, by the second part of the
third proposition of the third book: by which point O, all other lines drawn
in the circle BLEM, are, at the same point O, divided into two equal parts.
As if from the point M, by the point O, a right line be drawn one the other
side coming to the circumference, at the point N: it is manifest that NOM is
divided into two equal parts at the point O: This is manifest: if you
consider the two triangles rectangles, HOM and HON: and then with all, use the
47. of the first of Euclide.
by reason, if from the center H, to the points N and M, right lines be
drawn, HN and HM, the squares of HM, and HN are equal: for that all the
semidiameters of the sphere are equal: and therefore their squares are equal
one to the other: and the square of the perpendicular HO, is common: wherefore
the square of the third line MO is equal to the square of the third line NO:
and therefore the line MO to the line NO. So therefore is NM equally divided at
the point O. And so may be proved of all other right lines, drawn in the
circle BLEM, passing by the point O, to the circumference one both sides.
Wherefore O is the center of the circle BLEM: and therefore BE passing by the
point O is the diameter of the circle BLEM. Which circle (I say) is equal to
FKG: for by construction BE is equal to FG: and BE is proved the diameter of
BLEM, and FG is by supposition the diameter of the circle FKG: wherefore BLEM
is equal to FKG the circle given: and BLEM is in A the sphere given. Wherefore
we have in a sphere given coapted a circle equal to a circle given: which was
to be done.

A Corollary.
Besides our principal purpose, in this Problem, evidently demonstrated, this
is also made manifest: that if the greatest circle in a Sphere, be cut by an
other circle, erected upon him at right angles,

A Problem. 11.
A Sphere being given, and a circle, less then double the greatest circle in
the same Sphere contained, to cut of, a segment of the same Sphere, whose
Sphericall superficies, shall be equal to the circle given.

Suppose K to be a Sphere given, whose greatest circle let be ABC: and the
circle given, suppose to be DEF. Construction.
I say, that a segment of the Sphere K, is to be cut of, so great, that his
Sphericall superficies, shall be equal to the circle DEF. Let the diameter of
the circle ABC, be the line AB. At the point A, in the circle ABC, coapt a
right line equal to the semidiameter of the circle DEF (by the first of the
fourth). Which line suppose to be AH. From the point H, to the diameter AB, let
a perpendicular line be drawn: which suppose to be HI. Produce HI to the other
side of the circumference, and let it come to the circumference at the point L.
By the right line HILL (perpendicular to AB) suppose a plain superficies to
pass, perpendicularly erected upon the circle ABC: and by this plain
superficies, the Sphere to be cut into two segmentes: one less then the half
Sphere, namely, HALI: and the other greater then the half Sphere, namely,
HBLI. I say, that the Sphericall superficies of the segment of the Sphere K, in
which the segment (of the greatest circle) HALI, is contained, (whose base is
the circle passing by HILL, and top the point A) is equal to the circle DEF.
Demonstration
For the circle, whose semidiameter is equal to the line AH, is equal to the
Sphericall superficies of the segment HAL, by the 4. Theoreme here added. And
(by construction) AH is equal to the semidiameter of the circle DEF: therefore
the Sphericall superficies of the segment of the Sphere K (cut of by the circle
passing by HILL) whose top is the point A, is equal to the circle DEF.
Wherefore, a Sphere being given, and a circle less then double the greatest
circle in the same Sphere, we have cut of, a segment of the same Sphere, whose
Sphericall superficies, is equal to the circle given: which was requisite to
be done.

An advise.
In noting or signifying of Spheres, sometimes we use by one and the same
circle, in plain designed, to represent a Sphere and also the greatest circle
in the same contained: and likewise, by a segment of that circle, signify a
segment of the same Sphere, as by a straight line, we often signify the
circle, which is the base of a segment of a Sphere, Cone, or Cylinder: and so
in such like. Wherein, consider our suppositions: and take heed when we shift
from one signification to an other, in one and the same designation: and
withal remember the principal intent of our drift: and such light things,
can not either trouble or offend thee. Compendiousnes and artificial custom,
procures such means: sufficient, to stir up imagination Mathematical: or
to inform the practiser Mechanical.

A Problem. 12.
To cut a Sphere given, into two such segmentes, that the Sphericall
superficieces of the segment^^ shall have one to the other, any proportion
given between two right lines.

Suppose F to be a Sphere given: and the proportion given, to be that, which is
between GH and HI. I say, that the Sphere F, is to be cut into two such
segmentes, that the Sphericall superficies of those segmentes, shall have that
proportion, one to the other, which, the right line GH, has to the right line
HI. Construction.
Suppose ABCE to be a greatest circle, in the Sphere F, contained: and his
diameter, to be AB. Divide ABinto two such parts, as GI is divided into, in
the point H (by the 10. of the sixth) Let those parts be AD, and DB. So that,
as GH is to HI, so is AD to DB. By the point D, let a plain superficies pass,
cutting the Sphere F, and the diameter AB: So, that unto that cutting plain,
the diameter AB, be perpendicular: and the Sphere also thereby by divided into
two segmentes, whose common base suppose to be the circle CE, having the
center, the point D: and the top of the one to be the point A, and the top
of the other to be the point B: and the segmentes them selves, to be noted by
EAC, and EBC: Draw from the two tops, A and B, to C (a point in the
circumference of their common base) two right lines AC and BC. I say now, that
the Sphericall superficies of the segment EAC, has to the Sphericall
superficies of the segment EBC, the same proportion, Demonstration
which GH has to HI. For, forasmuch as circles have that proportion, one to
the other, that the squares of their diameters have one to the other (by the 2.
of this twelfth). This in manner of a Lemm^ is presently proved.
And the squares of their semidi^meters, have the same proportion one to the
other, which the squares of their diameters have. [For like parts have that
proportion one to the other, that the whole magnitudes^ whose like parts they
are, have the one to the other: by the 15. of the fifth. But the square of every
diameter is quadruple to the the square of his semidiameter: as has often
before^ been proved: therefore, circle haue^ one to an other, that proportion,
that the squares of their semidiameters have one to the other]. Wherefore,
seeing AC and BC are semidiameters of two circles, whereof each is equal to the
Sphericall superficies of the segmentes, between whose tops and circumference
of their base, they are drawn: by the 4. Theoreme of these additions: it
follows that both those circles whose semidiameters they are: and also those
Sphericall superficieces, which are equal to those circles, have the one to
the other, the same proportion, which the square of AC has to the square of
BC. But AC is drawn between the circumference of the base, and top of the
segment Sphericall, EAC, by construction: and likewise BC is drawn between the
(...) and the (...) of the base Sphericall segments ^BC, by construction:
Wherefore the Sphericall superficies of the segment EAC, is to the Sphericall
superficies of the segment EBC, as the square of AC is to the square of BC. But
the square of AC is to the square of BC, as AD is to DB: by the Corollary of
the Problem of my additions upon the second of this twelfth: And AD is to DB,
as GH is to HI: by construction. Wherefore the Sphericall superficies of the
segment EAC, is to the Sphericall superficies of the segment EBC, as GH is to
HI. We have therefore, cut the Sphere given, into two such segmentes, that the
Sphericall superficieces of the segmentes, have one to the other any proportion
given between two right lines: which was to be done.

A Corollary. 1.
Here it app^areth demonstrated, that, circles are one to the other, as the
squares of their semidiameter are, one to the other.

Whereby (as occasion shall serve) you may, by force of the former argument, use
other like parts of the diameter, as well as halues.

A Corollary. 2.
It is also evident, that the Sphericall superficieces of the two segment^s of
any Sphere, to whose common base, the diameter (passing to their two topp^s) is
perpendicular, have that proportion the o^e to the other, that the portions of
the said diameter^ have the one to the other: that superficies and that portion
of the diameter on the one side of the common base, being compared to that
superficies, and that portion of the diameter^ on the other side of the common
base.

A Corollary. 3.
It likewise evidently follows, that the two Sphericall superficieces of two
segmentes of a Sphere: which two segmentes are equal to the Sphere, are in
that proportion the one to the other, that their axes (perpendicularly erected
to their bases) are in, one to the other: where soever in the Sphere those
segmentes be taken.

I say that the Sphericall superficies of the segment CAE, and the Sphericall
superficies of the segment FGH, having their axes AD and GI (perpendicular to
their bases): are in proportion one to the other, as AD is to GI: if the
segment of the Sphere containing CAE with (the segment of the same Sphere) FGH
be equal to the whole Sphere. For seeing the diameter (of axe) AD, extended to
the other pole or top, opposite to A (which opposite top, let be Q) does
make with the segment CAE, the complement of the whole Sphere: Note here of
Axe, base, and soliditie, more then I need to bring any farther proof for.
and by supposition, the segment FGH, whith the segment CAE, are equal to the
whole Sphere: Wherefore from equal, taking CAE (the segment common) remains
the segment CQE, equal to the segment FGH. And thereby, Axe, Base, Solitie, and
superficies Sphericall of the segment FGH, must (of ncessitie) be equal to the
Axe, Base, Soliditie, and superficies Sphericall of the segment CQE: Wherefore,
by the second Corollary here, and the 7. of the fifth, our conclusion is
inferred, the superficies Sphericall, of the segment CAE, to be, to the
superficies Sphericall of the segment FGH, as AD is to GI.

A Theoreme. 6.
To any solid sector of a Sphere, that upright C^^e is equal, whose base is
equal to the c^nnex Sphericall superficies of that sector, and heith equal to
the semidiameter of the same Sphere.

Hereof the demonstration in respect of the premises: and the common argument
of inscriptio^ and circumscription of figures is easy: and nevertheless, if
your own write will not help you sufficiently: you may take help at
Archimedes hand, in his first book and last proposition of the sphere and
cylinder. Whether if ye have recourse, you shall perceive how your Theoreme
here amendeth the common translation there: and also our delin^ation gives
more s^u^y show of the chief circumstances necessary to the construction, then
there you shall find. Of the sphere here imagined to be A, we note a solid
sector by the letter^ PQRO. So that PQR does signify the sphericall
superficies, to that solid sector belonging: Note.
( which is also common to the segment of the same sphere PRQ) and therefore a
line drawn from the top of that segment^ (which top suppose to be Q) is
the semidiameter of the circle, which is equal to the sphericall superficies
of the said solid sector, or segment^ as before is taught. Let that line be
QP. By Q draw a line contingent: which let be SQT. At the point Q from the line
QS, cut a line equal to PQ which let be SQ. And unto SQ, make QT equal, then
draw the right lines OSO^ and OQ. About which OQ (as an axe fa^^ened) if you
imagine the triangle OST, to make an I say half a circ^lar revolution for that
su^^iseth in the whole diameter ST, to describe a circle by: i^ it be moved
^^out his center Q etc.
half circular revolution, you shall have the upright cone OST: (whose heith is
OQ, the semidiameter of the sphere, and base the circle, whose diameter is ST,)
equal to the solid sector PQRO.

A Theoreme. 7.
To any segment, or portion of a Sphere, that cone i^ equal, which has that
circle to his base, which is the b^se of the segme^t, and heith, a right line,
which unto the heith of the segme^t has that proportion, which the
semidiameter of the Sphere together with the heith of the other segment
remay^^^g has to the heith of the same other segment remayn^ng.

This is well demonstrated by Archi^^des and therefore needs no invention of
mine, Lib 2 prop 2. de Sphe^a and Cylindr^.
to confirm the same: and for that the said demonstration is over long here to
be added, I will refere you thither for the demonstration: and here supply that
which to Archimedes demonstration shall give light, and to your farther
speculation and practice, shall be a great aid and direction. Suppose K to be a
sphere: and the greatest circle K in contained, let be ABCE, and his diameter
BE, and ce^ter D. Let the sphere K, be cut by a plain superficies,
perp^ndicularly erected upon the said greatest circle ABCE: let the section be
the circle about AC: And let the segmentes of the sphere be the one that
wherein is ABC, whose ^oppe is B^ and the other let be that wherein is AEC and
his top, let be E: I say that a cone which has his base the circle about AC,
and held a line which to BF (the heith of the segment, whose top is B,) has
that proportion that a line compo^ed of DE, the semidiameter of the sphere, and
OF (the heith of the other remaining segment, whose top is E) has to OF,
(the heith of that other segment remaining), is equal to the segment of the
sphere K, whose top is B. To make this cone, take my easy order thus. Frame
your work for the find^ng of the fourth proportional line^ by making OF the
first and a line composed of DE and OF, the second^ and the third, let be BF:
then by the 12. of the six^h, let the fourth proportional line be found: which
let be FG^ upon F the center of the base of the segment, whose top is B,
erect a line perpendicular equal to FG found and draw the lines GA and GC:
and so make perfect the cone GAC. I say, that the cone GAC, is equal to the
segment (of the sphere K) whose top is B. In like manner, for the other
segme^t whose top is E, to find the heith due for a cone equal to it: by the
order of the Theoreme you must thus frame your lines: let the first be BF: the
second DB and BF, composed in one right line, and the third must be OF: where
by the 12. of the sixth, finding the fourth, it shall be the heith, to rere
upon the base, (the circle about AC,) to make an upright cone, equal to the
segment, whose top is E.

Logistically.
The Logisticall finding hereof is most easy: the diameter of the sphere being
given, and the portions of the diameter in the segmentes contained (or axes of
the segmentes) being known. Then order your numbers in the rule of proportion,
as I here have made most plain, in ordring of the lines: for the ^ought heith
will be the producte.

A Corollary. 1.
Hereby, and other the premises it is evident that to any segment of a Sphere,
Note.
whose whole diameter is known and the Axe of the segment given, An upright
cone may be made equal: or in any proportion, between two right lines
assigned^ and therefore also a cylinder may to the said segment of the Sphere,
be made equal ^r in any proportion given, between two right lines.

A Corollary. 2.
Manifestly also, of the former theoreme, it may be inferred that a Sphere, and
his diameter being divided, by one and the same plain superficies, to which
the said diameter is perpendicular^ the two segmentes of the Sphere, are one to
the other in that proportion, in which a rectangle parallelipipedon having for
his base the square of the greater part of the diameter, and his heith a line
composed of the less portion of the diameter, and the semidiameter: to the
rectangle parallelip^pedon, having for his base the square of the less portion
of the diameter, and his heith a line composed of the semidiameter and the
greater part of the diameter.

A Theoreme. 8.
Every Sphere, to the cube, made of his diameter, is (in manner) as 11. to 21.

As upon the first and second propositio^s of this book, I began my additions
with the circle (being the chief among plain figures) and therein brought
manifold considerations, about circles: as of the proportion between their
circumferences and their diameters of the content or Area of circles: of the
proportion of circles to the squares described of their diameters: and of
circles to be given in all pro^portions, to other circles: with diverse other
most necessary problemes (whose use is partly there specified): So have I in
the end of this book, added some such Problemes and Theoremes^ about the
sphere (being among solides the chief) as of the same, either in it self
considered, or to cone and cylinder, compared (by reason of superficies, or
soliditie, in the hole, or in part^) such certain knowledge demonstratiue may
arise, and such mechanical exercise thereby be devised, that (sure I am) to the
sincere and true student great light, aid, and comfortable courage (farther to
wade) will enter into his heart; and to the Mechanical, witty, and industrous
deviser, new manner of inventions, and executions in his works will (with small
travail for fete application) come to his perceiueraunce and understanding.
Therefore, even a, manifold speculations and practices may be had with the
circle, his quantity being not known in any kind of smallest certain
measure: So likewise of the sphere many Problemes may be executed and his
precise quantity, in certain measure, not determined, or known: yet,
because, both one of the first (humane) occasions of inuenting and stablishing
this Art, was measuring of the earth (and therefore called Geometria, that is,
Earthmeasuring), and also the chief and general end (in deed) is measure:
and measure requires a determination of quantity in a certain measure by
number expressed: It was needful for Mechanical earthmeasures, not to be
ignorant of the measure and contents of the circle, neither of the sphere his
measure and quantity, as near as sense can imagine or wish. And (in very
deed) the quantity and measure of the circle, being known, makes not only,
the cone and cylinder, but also the sphere his quantity to be as precisely
known, and certain. Therefore seeing in respect of the circles quantity (by
Archimedes specified) this Theoreme is noted unto you: I will, by order, upon
that (as a supposition) infer the conclusion of this our Theoremes.

Suppose a sphere to be signified by A^ whose diameter let be RS. To RS, let a
line equal be taken, which let be TV: of TV, by the 46. of the first, describe
a square. Let that square be TY. With in TY let a circle be inscribe^: by the
2. of the fourth, which cir^l^ suppose to be OZW. That OZW is equal to the
greatest circle in the sphere A contained, it is evident by the diameter, equal
to TV. If upon the square TY, as a base, be erected, a parallelipipedo^
recta^gle, whose h^ith is equal to TV, it is evident that that
parallelipipedon is a cube. Which let be done: and that cube produced, let be
noted by TX. Likewise, if upon the circle OZW, as a base, and of the heith
equal to the line TV, a cylinder be erected, it is manifest that the cylinder
has his base equal to the greatest circle, in the sphere A, contained: and
heith, a line equal to the diameter of the same sphere A. Which cylinder let
be produced and noted by ZM. I say now that the sphere A, is to the cube TX,
(in manner) as the number 11. is to the number 21. For seeing the cube TX, was
produced of his base, (the square TY), being brought into the heith of a line
equal to TV: and likewise seeing the cylinder ZM, is produced, of his base (the
circle OZW) being brought into a line^ equal to the said TV: it follows,
seeing their heithes is all one, that the cube TX shall be to the cylinder ZM,
as the base of TX, (which is the square TY) is to the base of ZM, that is the
circle OZW. But the square TY, is to the circle OZW, as the number 14. is to
the number 11. (in manner), by Archimedes demo^stratio^: wherefore, the cube TX
is to the cylinder ZM, as the number 1^, is to the number 11. (well nere). And
by my third Theoreme (here added) the cylinder ZM, is to the Sphere A, in
sesquialtera proportion: that is, as 3. to 2. Wherefore the cylinder ZM, having
the same 11. equal parts (which he conteyneth in respect of the cube TX,
being 14. of the same parts) divided into 3. equal portions, every one of
those portions is 3. And allowing to the Sphere A, two of those portions: it is
evident, that the Sphere A shall be 71/^; such parts as are 14. in the cube
TX: and 11. in the cylinder ZM. Wherefore the Sphere A, is to the cube TX, as
71/^ to 14. The fraction being reduced, makes ^^/^: and the number 14. being
brought to the same name, and denomination of thirds, makes 4^/^. Put away now
their common denominator^ and then remains, for the Sphere A, 22. such
parts, as the cube TX has 4^. And then depressing them, to the smallest
terms: for the Sphere A, you shall have 11. such parts as the cube TX
conteyneth 21. Wherefore every Sphere, to the cube made of his diameter is, as
11. to 21. which was requisite to be demonstrated.

Note. 1.
Wherefore if you divide the one side (as TQ) of the cube TX into 21. equal
parts, and where 11. parts do end, reckening from T, suppose the point P: and
by that point P, imagine a plain (passing parallel to the opposite bases) to
cut the cube TX: and thereby, the cube TX, to be divided into two rectangle
parallelipipedons, namely, TN, and PX: It is manifest, A rectangle
parallelipipedon geu^n, equal to a Sphere given.
TN, to be equal to the Sphere A, by construction: and the 7. of the fifth.

Note. 2.
Secondly, the whole quantity, of the Sphere A, To a Sphere, or to any part of
a Sphere assigned: as a third, fourth, fifth etc to give a parallelipipedon
equal.

Sided Columes Pyramids, and prismes to be given equal to a Sphere, or to any
certain part thereof.

To a Sphere or any segment, or sector of the same, to give a cone or cylinder
equal or in any proportion assigned.


being contained in the rectangle parallelipipedon TN, you may easily
transform the same quantity, into other parallelipipedons rectangles, of what
height, and of what parallelogramme base you list: by my first and second
Problemes upon the 34. of this book. And the like may you do, to any assigned
part of the Sphere A: by the like means dividing the parallelipipedon TN: as
the part assigned does require. As if a third, fourth, fifth, or sixth, part of
the Sphere A, were to be had in a parallelipipedon, of any parallelogra^^e base
assigned, or of any heith assigned: then dividing TP, into so many parts (as
into 4. if a fourth part be, to be transformed: or into five, if a fifth part,
be to be transformed etc.) and then proceed, ^s you did with cutting of TN,
from TX. And that I say of parallelipipedons, may in like sort (by my ^^yd two
problemes, added to the 34. of this book) be done in any sided columns,
pyramids, and prisme^: so th^^ in pyramids and some prismes you use the
cautions necessary, in respect of their quan(...)odyes having parallel, equal,
and opposite bases: whose parts (...)re in their propositions, is by Euclide
demonstrated. And finally, (...) additions, you have the ways and orders how
to give to a Sphere, or any segme^^ o^ the same, Cones, or Cylinders equal, or
in any proportion between two right lines, given: with many other most
necessary speculations and practices about the Sphere. I trust that I have
sufficiently ^raughted your imagination, for your honest and profitable study
herein, and also given you rea^^, ^^tter, whe^^ with to s^^p the mouths of the
malycious, ignorant, and arrogant, despisers of the most excellent discourses,
trauayles, and inventions mathematical. Sting as well the heavenly spheres, and
sterres their sphericall soliditie, Farther use of Sphericall Geometry.
with their conue^e spherical superficies, to the earth at all times
respecting, and their distances from the earth, as also the whole earthly
Sphere and globe it self, and infinite other cases, concerning Spheres or
globes, may hereby with as much ease and certainety be determined of, as of the
quantity of any bowl, ball, or bullet, which we may gripe in our hands
(reason, and experience, being our witnesses): and without these aids, such
things of importance never hable of us, certainly to be known, or attained
unto.

Here end M. John Dee his additions upon the last proposition of the twelfth
book.

A proposition added by Flussas.
If a Sphere touch a plain superficies^ a right line drawn from the center
to the touch, shall be erected perpendicularly to the plain superficies.

Suppose that there be a Sphere BCDL: whose center let be the point A. And let
the plain superficies GCI touch the Spear in the point C, and extend a right
line from the center A to the point C. Then I say that the line AC is erected
perpendicularly to the plain GIC. Let the sphere be cut by plain
superficieces passing by the right line LAC: which playnes let be ABCDL and
ACEL, which let cut the plain GCI by the right lines GCH and KCI. Now it is
manifest (by the assumpt put before the 17. of this book) that the two
sections of the sphere shall be circles, having to their diameter the line LAC,
which is also the diameter of the sphere. Wherefore the right lines GCH and KCI
which are drawn in the plain GCI, do at the point C fall without the circles
BCDL and ECL. Wherefore they touch the circles in the point C, by the second
definition of the third. Wherefore the right line LAC makes right angles with
the lines GCH and KCI by the 16. of the third. Wherefore by the 4. of the
eleventh the right line AC is erected perpendicularly to to the plain
superficies GCI wherein are drawn the lines GCH and KCI. If therefore a Sphere
touch a plain superficies, a right line drawn from the center to the touch,
shall be erected perpendicularly to the plain superficies: which was required
to be proved.

The end of the twelfth book of Euclides Elements.
The thirtenth book of Euclides Elements.
IN THIS THIRTENTH BOOK are set forth certain most wonderful and excellent
passions of a line divided by an extreme and mean proportion: The argument of
the thirtenth book.
a matter undoubtedly of great and infinite use in Geometry, as ye shall both
in this book, and in the other books following most evidently perceive. It
teaches moreover the composition of the five regular solides, and how to
inscribe them in a Sphere given, and also sets forth certain comparisons of
the said bodies both the one to the other, and also to the Sphere, wherein they
are described.

The 1. Theoreme. The 1. Proposition. If a right line be divided by an extreme
and mean proportion, and to the greater segment, be added the half of the
whole line: the square made of those two lines added together shall be quintuple
to the square made of the half of the whole line.
SVppose that the right line AB be divided by an extreme and mean proportion
in the point C. And let the greater segment thereof, be AC. And unto AC, add
directly a right line AD, and let AD be equal to the half of the line AB.
Construction.
Then I say that the square of the line CD is quintuple to the square of the
line DA. Describe (by the 46. of the first) upon the lines AB and DC squares,
namely, AE and DF. And in the square DF, describe and make complete the figure.
And extend the line FC, to the point G. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the line AB is divided by an extreme and mean proportion in
the point C, therefore that which is contained under the lines AB and BC is
equal to the square of the line AC. But that which is contained under the
lines AB and BC, is the parallelogramme CE, and the square of the line AC is
the square HF. Wherefore the parallelogramme CE is equal to the square HF. And
forasmuch as the line BA, is double to the line AD, by construct^on: (...) the
line BA is equal to the line KA, and the line AD, to the line AH: therefore
also, the line KA, is double to the line AH. But as the line KA is to the line
AH, so is the parallelogramme CK to the parallelogramme CH: Wherefore the
parallelogramme CK is double to the parallelogramme CHAPTER And the
parallelogrammes LH and CH are double to the parallelogramme CH (for
supplementes of parallelogrammes are b^ the 4^. of the first equal the one to
the other). Wherefore the parallelogramme CK is equal to the parallelogrammes
LH and CHAPTER And it is proved that the parallelogramme CE is equal to the square
FH. Wherefore the whole square AE is equal to the gn^mon MXN. And forasmuch as
the line BA, i^ double to the line AD, therefore the square of the line BA is,
by the 20. of the sixth, quadruple to the square of the line DA, that is, the
square AE to the square DH. But the square AE is equal to the gnomo^ MXN,
wherefore the gnomo^ MXN, is also quadruple to the square DH. Wherefore the
whole square DF is quintuple to the square DH. But the square DF, i^ the square
of the line CD, and the square DH is the square of the line DA. Wherefore the
square of the line CD, is quintuple to the square of the line DA. If therefore
a right line be divided by an extreme and mean proportion, and to the greater
segment, be added the half of the whole line: the square made of those two
lines added together shall be quintuple to the square made of the half of the
whole line: Which was required to be demonstrated.

This proposition is an other way demonstrated after the fiueth proposition of
this book.

The 2. Theoreme. The ^. Proposition. If a right line, be in power quintuple to
a segment of the same line: the double of the said segment is divided by an
extreme and mean proportion, and the greater segment thereof is the other
part of the line given at the beginning.
This proposition is the converse of the former.
SVppose that the right line DC be in power quintuple to a segment of the same
line, namely, to AD, and let the double of the line AD be the line AB. Then I
say that the line AB is divided by an extreme and mean proportion, and the
greater segment thereof is the line AC. Construction.
Describe on either of the lines AB and CD squares, namely AE and DF. And in
the square DF make perfect the figure, and extend the line FC to the point G.
Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the square DF is quintuple to the square DH, by suppossition,
therefore the gnomon MNX is quadruple to the square DH. And forasmuch as the
line AB is double to the line AD, therefore the square of the line AB is
quadruple to the square of the line AD (by the 20. of the sixth), that is, the
square AE to the square DH. And it is proved that the gnomon MNX is quadruple
to the square DH. Wherefore the gnomon MNX is equal to the square AE. And
forasmuch as the line AB is double to the line AD, but the line AB is equal to
the line AK, and the line AD to the line AH: therefore the line AK is double to
the line AH: wherefore also (by the first of the sixth) the parallelogramme AG
is double to the parallelogramme CHAPTER But the parallelogrammes LH and CH are
double to the parallelogramme CH (by the 43. of the first): wherefore the
parallelogramme AG is equal to the parallelogrammes LH and CHAPTER And it is
proved that the whole gnomon MNX is equal to the whole square AE. Wherefore
the residue HF is equal to the parallelogramme CE. And CE is that which is
contained under the lines AB and CB, for the line AB is equal to the line BE,
and HF is the square made of the line AC. Wherefore that which is contained
under the lines AB and BC, is equal to the square of the line AC. Wherefore as
the line AB is to the line AC, so is the line AC to the line CB. An Assu^pt.
But the line A^ i^ greater then the line AC, wherefore the line AC is greater
then the line CB. Wherefore the line AB is divided by an extreme and mean
proportion, and the greater segment thereof is the line AC. If therefore a right
line be in power quintuple to a segment of the same line, the double of the
said segment is divided by an extreme and mean proportion, and the greater
segment thereof is the other part of the line given at the beginning: Which was
required to be proved.

The Assu^pt proved.
Now, that the double of the line AD (that is AB) is greater then the line AC
may thus be proved. For if not, then if if it be possible let the line AC be
double to the line AD, wherefore the square of the line AC is quadruple to the
square of the line AD. Wherefore the squares of the lines AC and AD are
quintuple to the squares of the line AD. And it is supposed that the square of
the line DC is quintuple to the square of the line AD, wherefore the square of
the line DC is equal to the square of the lines AC and AD: which is impossible
(by the 4. of the second). Wherefore the line AC is not double to the line AD.
In like sort also may we prove that the double of the line AD is not less
then the line AC, for this is much more absurd: wherefore the double of the
line AD is greater the^ the line AC^ which was required to be proved.

This proposition also is an other way demonstrated after the fiueth
proposition of this book.

Two Theoremes, (in Euclides Method necessary) added by M. Dee.
A Theoreme. 1.
A right line can be divided by an extreme and mean proportion, but in one
only point.

Suppose a line divided by extreme and mean proportion, to be AB. And let the
greater segment be AC. I say, that AB can not be divided by the said
proportion, in any other point then in the point C. If an adversary would
contend that it may, in like sort, be divided in an other point: let his other
point, be supposed to be D: making AD; the greater segment of his imagined
division. Which AD, also, let be less then our AC: for the first discourse.
Now, forasmuch as by our adversaries opinion, AD, is the greater segment, of
his divided line^ the parallelogramme contained under AB, and DB, is equal to
the square of AD, by the third definition and 17. proposition of the sixth
Book. And by the same definition and proposition, the parallelogramme under
AB, and CB, contained, is equal to the square of our greater segment AC.
Wherefore, as the parallelogramme, under AB, and D^, is to the square of AD: so
i^ (...) parallelogramme, under AB, and CB, to the square of AC. For proportion
of equality, is concluded in them both. But, forasmuch as D^^ i^ (by^ Because
AC is supposed greater then AD: therefore his residue is less, then the
residue of AD, by the common sentence. Wherefore, by the supposition: DB is
greater then ^C.
supposition) greater the^ CB, the parallelogra^me under AB, and DB, is greater
then the parallelogramme under AC, and CB: by the first of the sixth (for AB is
their equal heith.) Wherefore, the square of AD, shall be greater then the
square of AC: by the 14. of the fifth. But the line AD, is less then the line
AC, by supposition: wherefore the square of AD is less then the square of AC.
And it is concluded also to be greater then the square of AC: Wherefore the
square of AD, is both greater, then the square of AC^ and also less. Which is
a thing impossible. The square therefore of AD, is not equal to the
parallelogramme under AB, and DB. And therefore by the third definition of the
sixth, AB is not divided by an extreme and mean proportion, in the point D:
as our adversary imagined. And (Secondly) in like sort will the inconueniency
fall out: if we assign AD, our adversaries greater segment, to be greater then
our AC. Therefore seeing neither on the one side of our point C: neither on the
other side of the same point C, any point can be had, at which the line AB can
be divided by an extreme and mean proportion, it follows of nec^ssitie,
that AB can be divided by an extreme and mean proportion in the point C,
only. Therefore, a right line can be divided by an extreme and mean
proportion, but in one, only point: which was requisite to be demonstrated.

A Theoreme. 2.
What right line so ever, being divided into two parts, has those his two
parts, proportional, to the two segmentes of a line divided by extreme and
mean proportion: is also it self divided by an extreme and mean proportion:
and those his two parts, are his two segments, of the said proportion.

Suppose, AB, to be a line divided by an extreme and mean proportion in the
point C, and AC to be the greater segment. Suppose also the right line DE, to
be divided into two parts, in the point F: and that the part DF, is to FE, as
the segment AC, is to CB: or DF, to be, to AC, as FE is to CB. For so these
pa^tes are proportional, to the said segmentes. I say now, that DE is also
divided by an extreme and mean proportion in the point F. And that DF, FE,
are his segmentes of the said proportion. For, seeing, as AC, is to CB: so is
DF, to FE: (by supposition). Therefore, as AC, and CB (which is AB) are to CB:
so is DF, and FE, (which is DE) to FE: by the 18. of the fifth. Wherefore
(alternately) as AB is to DE: so is CB, to FE. And therefore, the residue AC,
is to the residue DF, as AB is to DE, by the fifth of the fifth. And then
alternately, AC is to AB, as DE, is to DF. Now therefore backward, AB is to AC,
as DE is to DF. But as AB is to AC, so is AC to CB: by the third definition of
the sixth book. Wherefore DE is to DF, as AC is to CB: by the 11. of the
fifth. And by supposition, as AC is to CB, so is DF to FE: wherefore by the 11.
of the fifth, as DE is to DF: so is DF to FE. Wherefore by the 3. definition of
the sixth, DE is divided by an extreme and mean proportion, in the point F.
Wherefore DF, and FE are the segmentes of the said proportion. Therefore, what
right line so ever, being divided into two parts, has those his two parts,
proportional to the two segmentes of a line divided by extreme and mean
proportion^ is also it self divided by an extreme and mean proportion, and
those his two parts are his two segmentes, of the said proportion^ which was
requisite to be demonstrated.

Note.
Many ways, these two Theoremes, may be demonstrated: which I leave to the
exercise of young students. But utterly to want these two Theoremes, and their
demonstrations: in so principal a line, or rather the chief pillar of
Euclides Geometrical palace, The chie^e line in all Euclides Geometry.
was hitherto, (and so would remain) a great disgrace. Also I think it good
to note unto you, what we meant, by one only point. We m^^^^, that the
quantities of the two segmentes, can not be altered, the whole line being once
given. And though, from either end of the whole line, the greater segment may
begin: What is meant here by, A section in one only poi^t.
And so as it were the point of section may seem to be altered: yet with us,
that is no alteration: forasmuch as the quantities of the segmentes, remain
all one. I mean, the quantity of the greater segment, is all one: at which
end so ever it be taken: And therefore, likewise the quantity of the less
segment is all one, etc. The like confideration may be had in Euclides tenth
book, in the Binomiall lines. etc.

Io^n Dee. 1569. December. 18.

The 3. Theoreme. The 3. Proposition. If a right line be divided by an extreme
and mean proportion, and to the less segment be added the half of the
gerater segment: the square made of those two lines added together, is
quintuple to the square made of the half line of the greater segment.
SVppose that the right line AB be divided by an extreme and mean proportion
in the point C. And let the greater segment thereof be AC. And divide AC into
two equal parts in the point D. Then I say that the square of the line BD, it
quintuple to the square of the line DC. Construction.
Describe (by the 46. of the first) upon the line AB a square AE. And describe
and make perfect the figure (that is divide the line AT like unto the division
of the line AB, by the 10. of the sixth, in the points R, H, by which points
draw (by the 31. of the first) unto the line AB parallel lines RM and HN. So
likewise draw by the points D, C, unto the line BE these parallel lines DL and
CS, and draw the diameter BT). Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the line AC is double to the line DC, therefore the square of
AC, is quadruple to the square of DC, by the 20. of the sixth, that is, the
square RS to the square FG. And forasmuch as that which is contained under the
lines AB and BC is equal to the square of the line AC, and that which is
contained under the lines AB and BC is equal to the parallelogramme CE, and
the square of the line AC is the square RS: wherefore the parallelogramme CE is
equal to the square RS. But the square RS is quadruple to the square FG:
wherefore the parallelogramme CE also is quadruple to the square FG. Again
forasmuch as the line AD is equal to the line DC, therefore the line HK is
equal the line KF, wherefore also the square GF is equal to the square HL:
wherefore the line GK is equal to the line KL, that is, the line MN to the
line NE: wherefore the parallelogramme MF is equal to the parallelogramme FE.
But the parallelogramme MF is equal to the parallelogramme CG, wherefore the
parallelogramme CG is also equal to the parallelogramme FE. Put the
parallelogramme CN, common to the^ both: Note, how CE and the gnonom XOP, are
proved equal, for it serves in the converse demonstrated by M. Dee, here next
after.
Wherefore the gnomon XOP is equal to the parallelogramme CK. But the
parallelogramme CE is proved to be quadruple to G^ the square, wherefore the
gnomon XOP is quadruple to the square GF. Wherefore the square DN is quintuple
to the square FG. And DN is the square of the line DB, and GF the square of the
line DC. Wherefore the square of the line DB is quintuple to the square of the
line DC. If therefore a right line be divided by an extreme and mean
proportion, and to the less segment be added the half of the greater segment:
the square made of those two lines added together, is quintuple to the square
made of the half line of the greater segme^t. Which was required to be
demonstrated.

Ye shall find this proposition an other way demonstrated after the fiueth
proposition of this book.

Here follows M. Dee, his additions.
A Theoreme. 1.
If a right line, given, be quintuple in power, to the power of a segment of
him self: the double of that segment, This proposition, ^the converse of the
former.
and the other part remaining, of the first given line, make a line, divided by
extreme and mean proportion: and that double of the segment, is the greater
part thereof.

Forasmuch as, this, is the converse of Euclides third proposition: we will use
the same suppositions and constructions there specified: so far, as they
shall serve our purpose. Beginning therefore at the conclusion, we must infer
the part of the proposition, before granted. It was concluded, that the square
of the line DB, is quintuple, to the square of the line DC, his own segment.
Therefore DN (the square of DB) is quintuple, to GF, (the square of DC). But
the squa^e of AC (the double of DC) which is RS, is quadruple to GF, (by the
second Corollary of the 20. of the sixth): and therefore RS, with GF, are
quintuple to GF: and so it is evident, that the square DN, is equal to the
square RS, together with the square GF. Wherefore, from those two equalles,
taking, the square GF, (common to them both): remains the square RS, equal
to the Gnomon XOP. But to the Gnomon XOP, the parallelogramme As we have noted
the place of the peculier pro^e there ^in the demo^stration of the 3.
CE is equal: Wherefore the square of the line AC, which is RS, is equ^ll to
the parallelogra^me C^. Which parallelogamme is contained under BE, (equal to
AB:) and CB, the part remaining of the first line g^uen: which was DB. And the
line AB, is made of the double of the segment DC, and of CB^ the other part of
the line DB, first gouen. Wherefore the double of the segment DC, with CB, the
part remaining (which altogether, is the whole line AB) is to AC, (the double
of the segment DC) as that same, AC, is to CB: by the second part of the 16. of
the sixth. Therefore by the 3. definition of the sixth book, the whole line AB,
is divided by an extreme and mean proportion, and AC, (the double of the
segme^t DC) being middell proportional, is the greater part thereof. Whe^efore,
if a right line, be quintuple in power, etc. (as in the proposition) which was
to be demonstrated.

Or, thus it may be demonstrated.
Forasmuch as the square, DN is quin^uple to the square GF, (I mean the square
of DB the line given, to the square o^ DC the segme^t). And the same square DN,
is equal to the parallelogra^me under AB, CB, with the square made of the line
DC: by the sixth of the second: (for unto the line AC, equally divided: the
line, CB, is, as it were adjoined). Wherefore the parallelogramme under AB, CB,
together with the square of DC, which is GF, is quintuple to the square GF,
made o^ the line DC. Taking then, that square GF, from the parallelogramme
under AB, CB: that parallelogramme (under AB, CB) remaining alone, is but
quadruple to the said square of the line DC. But, (by the 4. of the second, or
the second Corollary of the 20. of the sixth) RS, ^he square of the line AC, is
quadrupla to the same square GF^ Wherefore by the 7. of the fifth, the square of
the line AC, is equal to the parallelogramme under AB, CB, and so, by the
second part of the 16. of the sixth: AB, AC, and CB, are three lines in
continual proportion. And seeing AB is greater the^ AC, the same AC, the double
of the line DC, shall be greater then the part BC, remaining: Wherefore by the
3. definition of the sixth, AB, (composed or made of the double of DC, and the
other part of DB remaining) is divided by an extreme and middel proportion: and
also his greater segment is AC the double of the segment DC. Wherefore, If a
right line be quintuple in power etc. as in the proposition^ which was to be
demonstrated.

A Theoreme. 2.
If a right line, divided by an extreme and mean proportion, be given, and to
the great segment ^herof, he directly adjoined a line equal to the whole line
given, that adjoined line, and the said greater segment, do make a line divided
by extreme and mean proportion, whose greater segment is the line ^dioyned.

Suppose the line given, divided by extreme and mean proportion, to be AB
divided in the point C, and his greater segment, let be AC: unto AC directly
adioyne a line equal to AB: let that be AD: I say, that AD, together with AC,
(that is DC) is a divided by extreme and middel proportion, whose greater
segment is AD, the line adjoined. Divide AD, equally in the point E. Now,
forasmuch as AE, is the half of AD, (by construction,) it is also, the half
of AB (equal, to AD, by construction): Wherefore by the 1. of the thirtenth,
the square of the line composed of AC and AE (which ^ne is EC) is quintuple to
the square of the line AE. Wherefore the double of AE, and the line AC
composed, (as in one right line) is a line divided by extreme and mean
proportion, by the converse of this third (by me demonstrated): and the double
of AE, is the greater segment. But DC is the line composed of the double of AE,
and the line AC: and with all, AD is the double of AE. Wherefore, DC, is a line
divided by extreme and mean proportion, and AD, i^ hi^ greater segment. If a
right line, therefore, divided by extreme and mean proportion, be given, and
to the greater segment thereof, be directly adjoined a line equal to the whole
line given, that adjoined line, and the said greater segment, do make a line
divided by extreme and mean proportion, whose greater segment, is the line
adjoined: Which was required to be demonstrated.

Two other brief demonstrations of the same.
Forasmuch as, AD is to AC: as AB, is to AC (because AD is equal to AB, by
construction): but as AB is to AC, so is AC to CB: by supposition. Therefore by
the 11. of the fifth, as AC, is to CB, so is AD to AC. Therefore, by my second
Theoreme added upon the second proposition, DC is divided by extreme and mean
proportion in the point A. And because AC is bigger then CB: therefore DA is
greater then AC: wherefore if a right line etc. as in the proposition. Which
was to be demonstrated.
Wherefore, as AC, and CB, (which is AB) is to CB: so is AD, and AC (which is
DC) to AC. Therefore, euersedly, as AB, is to AC: so is DC to AD. And it is
proved, AD, to be to AC: as AC is to CB. Wherefore as AB is to AC, and AC, to
CB: so is DC, to AD, and AD, to AC. But AB, AC, and CB are in continual
proportion, by supposition: Wherefore DC, AD, and AC, are in continual
proportion. Wherefore, by the 3. definition of the sixth book, DC, is divided
by extreme and middell proportion, and his greatest segment, is AD. Which was
to be demonstrated. Note from the mark Therefore, by my second Theoreme added
upon the second proposition, DC is divided by extreme and mean proportion in
the point A. And because AC is bigger then CB: therefore DA is greater then AC:
wherefore if a right line etc. as in the proposition. Which was to be
demonstrated.
, how this has two demonstrations. One I have set in the margent by.

A Corollary. 1.
Upon Euclides third proposition demonstrated, it is made evident: that, of a
line divided by extreme and mean proportion, if you produce the less
segment, equally to the length of the greater: the line thereby adjoined,
together with the said less segment, make a new line divided by extreme and
middle proportion: Whose less segment, is the line adjoined.

For, if AB, be divided by extreme and middell proportion in the point C, AC,
being the greater segment, and CB be produced, from the point B, making a line,
with CB, equal to AC, which let be CQ: and the line thereby adjoined, let be
BQ: I say that CQ, is a line also divided by an extreme and mean proportion,
in the point B: and that BQ (the line adjoined) is the less segment. For by
the third, it is proved, that half AC, (which, let be, CD) with CB, as one
line, composed, has his power or square, quintuple to the power of the segment
CD: Wherefore, by the second of this book, the double of C D, is divided by
extreme and middell proportion^ and the greater segment thereof, shall be CB.
But, by construction, CQ, is the double of CD, for it is equal to AC.
Wherefore CQ is divided by extreme and middle proportion, in the point B: and
the greater segment thereof shall be, CB. Wherefore BQ, is the less segment,
which is the line adjoined. Therefore, a line being divided, by extreme and
middell proportion, if the less segment, be produced equally to the length of
the greater segment, the line thereby adjoined together with the said less
segment, make a new line divided, by extreme and mean proportion, who^e less
segment, is the line adjoined. Which was to be demonstrated.

A Corollary. 2.
If^ from the greater segment, of a line divided, by extreme and middle
proportion, a line, equal to the less segment be cut of: the greater segment,
thereby, is also divided by extreme and mean proportion, whose greater
segment^ shall be (...) that part of it, which is cut of.

For, taking from AC, a line equal to CB: let AR remain. I say, that AC, is
divided by an extreme and mean proportion in the point R: and that CR, the
line cut of, is the greater segment. For it is proved in the former Corollary
that CQ is divided by extreme and mean proportion in the point B. But AC, is
equal to CQ, by construction: and CR is equal to CB by construction:
Wherefore the re^idue, AR is equal to BQ the residue. Seeing therefore the whole
AC is equal to the whole CQ: and the greater part of AC, which is CR is equal
to CB the greater part of CQ and the less segme^t also equal to the less:
and withal seeing CQ is proved to be divided by extreme and mean proportion in
the point B, it follows of necessity, that, AC, is divided by extreme and
mean proportion in the point R. And seeing CB, is the greater segment of CQ: CR
shall be the greater segment of AC. Which was to be demonstrated.

A Corollary. 3.
It is evident thereby, a line being divided by extreme and mean proportion,
that the line whe^^by the greater segment excedeth the less, together with the
less segment, do make a line divided by extreme and mean proportion: whose
less segment, is the said line of exceesse, or difference between the segments.

John Dee.
Two new ways, to divide any right line given by an extreme and mean
proportion: demonstrated and added by M. Dee.

A Problem.
To divide by an extreme and mean proportion, any right line given, in length
and position.

Suppose a line given in length and position^ to be AB. I say that AB is to be
divided by an extreme, and mean proportion. Construction.
Divide AB into two equal parts as in the point C. Produce AB directly, from
the point B, to the point D: making BD, equal to BC. To the line AD, and at the
point D, let a line be drawn Though I say, perpe^dicular: yes you may perceue
how infinite other p^s^^io^s will serve: so that DI and AD make an angle for a
triangle to have his sides proportionally cut. etc.
perpendicular: by the 11. of the first, which let be DF: (of what length you
will). From DF and at the point D, cut of the sixth part of DF: by the 9. of
the sixth. And let that sixth part, be the line DG. Upon DF, as a diameter,
describe a semicircle: which let be DHF. From the point G, rere a line
perpendicular to DF, which suppose to be GH: and let it come to the
circumference of DHF, in the point H. Draw right lines, HD, and HF. Produce DH,
from the point H, so long, till a line adjoined with DH, be equal to HF, which
let be DI, equal to HF. From the point H, to the point B, (the one end of our
line given) let a right line be drawn: as HB. From the point I, let a line be
drawn, to the line AB: so that it be also parallel to the line HB. Which
parallel line suppose to be IK: cutting the line AB, at the point K. I say that
AB, is divided by an extreme and mean proportion, in the point K. For the
triangle DKI, having HB, parallel to IK, has his sides DK and DI,
Demonstration.
cut proportionally, by the 2. of the sixth. Wherefore as IH is to HD: so is
KB, to BD. And therefore compoundingly, (by the 18. of the fiueth) as DI, is to
DH: so is DK to DB. But by construction DI is equal to HF: wherefore by the 7.
of the fifth, DI is to DH, as HF is to DH. Wherefore by the 11. of the fifth,
DK is to DB, as HF is to DH. Wherefore the square of DK is to the square of DB,
as the square of HF, is to the square of DH: by the 22. of the sixth. But the
square of HF, is to the square of DH: as the line GF is to the line GD^ by my
corrollary upon the 5, problem of my additions to the second proposition of
the twelfth. Wherefore by the 11. of the fifth, the square of DK is to the
square of DB, as the line GF is to the line GD. But by construction, GF is
quintuple to GD. Wherefore the square of DK is quintuple to the square of DB:
and therefore, the double of DB, is divided by an extreme and mean proportion,
and BK is the greater segment thereof, by the 2. of this thirtenth. Wherefore
seeing AB is the double of DB by construction: the line AB is divided by an
extreme and mean proportion: and his greater segment, is the line BK.
Wherefore AB is divided by an extreme and mean proportion, in the point K. We
have therefore divided by extreme and mean proportion any line given in length
and position. Which was requisite to be done.

The second way to execute this problem.
Suppose the line given to be AB. Divide A^ into two equal parts: as suppose
it to be done in the point C. Produce AB from the point B: adjoining a line
equal to BC, which let be BD. To the right line AD, and at the point D, erect
a perpendicular line equal to BD, let that be DE. Produce ED from the point D
to the point F: making DF to contain five such equal parts, as DE is one.
Now upon OF as a diameter, describe a semicircle which let (...) EKF, and let
the point where the circumference of EKF, does cut the line AB, be the point K.
I say that AB, is divided in the point K, by an extreme and mean proportion.
For by the 13. of the sixth ED, DK, and DF, are three lines in continual
proportion, ( DK being the middle proportional)^ Wherefore by the corollary of
the 20. of the sixth, as ED is to DF, so is the square of ED, to the square of
DK, but by construction, ED, is subquintuple to DF. Wherefore the square of ED,
is subquintuple to the square of DK. And therefore the square of DK, is
quintuple to the square of ED. And ED is equal to ED, by construction,
therefore the square of DK, is quintuple to the square of E D. Wherefore the
double of BD, is divided by an extreme and mean proportion: whose greater
segment is BK^ by the second of this thirte^th. But by construction, AB, is the
double of ^D^ Wherefore AB, is divided by extreme and mean proportion, and his
greater segment, is BK: and thereby, K^ the point of the division. We have
therefore divided by extreme and mean proportion, any right line given, in
length and position. Which was to be done.

Note^
Each of these ways, may well be executed: But in the first, you have this
auantage: that the diameter is taken at pleasure. Which ^n the second way, is
ever just thrice so long, as the line given to be divided.

John Dee.

The 4. Theoreme. The 4. Proposition. If a right line be divided by an extreme
and mean proportion: the squares made of the whole line and of the less
segme^t, are treble to the square made of the greater segment.
SVppose that the right line AB, be divided by an extreme and mean
proportion, in the point C. And let the greater segment thereof be AC. Then I
say, that the squares made of the lines AB, and BC, are treble to the square of
the line AC. Describe (by the 46. of the first) upon the line AB, a square
ADEB. And make perfect the figure. Now forasmuch as the line AB, Demonstration.
is divided by an extreme and mean proportion, in the point C: and the
greater segme^t thereof, is the line AC, therefore that which is contained
under the lines AB and BC is equal to the square of the line AC. But that
which is contained under the lines AB and CB is the parallelogramme AK, and the
square of the line AC is the square FD. Wherefore the parallelogramme AK is
equal to the square FD. And the parallelogramme AF is equal to the
parallelogramme FE, put the square CK common to them both wherefore the whole
parallelogra^me AK is equal to the whole parallelogramme CE. Wherefore the
parallelogrammes CE and AK are double to the parallelogramme AK. B^t the
parallelogrammes AK and CE, are the gnomon LMN, and the square CK. Wherefore
the gnomon LMN and the square CK, are double to the parallelogramme AK. But it
is proved that the parallelogramme AK is equal to the square DF. Wherefore the
gnomon LMN and the square CK are double to the square DF. Wherefore the gnomon
LMN and the squares CK and DF, are treble to the square DF. But the gnomon LMN
and the squares CK and DF, are the whole square AE together with the square CK,
which are the squares of the lines AB and BC. And DF is the square of the line
AC. Wherefore the squares of the lines AB and BC, are treble to the square of
the line AC. If therefore a right line be divided by an extreme and mean
proportion, the squares made of the whole line and of the less segment, are
treble to the square made of the greater segment: which was required to be
proved.

Look for an other demonstration of this proposition after the fifth
proposition of this book.

The 5. Theoreme. The 5. Proposition. If a right line be divided by an extreme
and mean proportion, and unto it be added a right ^ine, I. Dee. This is most
evident of my second Theoreme, added to the third proposition. For to add to a
whole line, a line equal to the greater segme^t: and to add to the greater
segment a line equal to the whole line, is all one thing, in the line
produced. By the whole line, I mean the line divided by extreme and mean
proportion.
equal to the greater segment, the whole right line is divided by an extreme
and mean proportion, and the greater segment thereof, is the right line given
at the beginning.
SVppose that the right line AB be divided by an extreme and mean proportion
in the point C, and let the greater segment thereof be AC. And unto the line
AB, add the line AD equal to the line AC. Then I say that the line D^, is
divided by an extreme and mean proportion in the point A: and the greater
segment thereof, is the right line p^t at the beginning, namely, AB. Describe
(by the 46. of the first) upon on the line AB a square AE, and make perfect the
figure. And forasmuch as the line AB, is divided by an extreme and mean
proportion in the point C, therefore that which is contained under the lines AB
and BC is equal to the square of the line AC. But that which is contained
under the lines AB and BC is the parallelogramme CE^ and the square of the ^^ne
AC is the square CHAPTER Wherefore the parallelogramme CE is equal to the square
CHAPTER But unto the square CH is equal the square DH, by the first of the sixth:
and unto the parallelogramme CE, is equal the parallelogramme HE. Wherefore
the parallelogramme DH is equal to the parallelogramme HE. Add the
parallelogramme HB, common to them both. Wherefore the whole parallelogramme DK
is equal to the whole square AE. And the parallelogramme DK, is that which is
contained under the lines BD and DA, for the line AD is equal to the line DL,
and the square AE is the square of the line AB. Wherefore that which is
contained under the lines AD and DB is equal to the square of the line AB.
Wherefore as the line DB is to the line BA, so is the line BA to the line AD,
by the 17. of the sixth. But the line DB is greater then the line BA. Wherefore
the line BA is greater then the line AD. Wherefore the line BD is divided by an
extreme and mean proportion in the point A, and his greater segment is the
line AB. If therefore a right line be divided by an extreme and mean
proportion, and unto ^t be added a right line, equal to the greater segment:
the whole

This proposition is again afterward demonstrated.

A Corollary added by Campane.
Hereby it is (...) from the grea^^^ (...) of a line divided by an extreme and
mean proportion, This is before demonstrated most evidently and briefly by M.
Dee, after the 3. proposition.
be (...) away (...) segment: the said great a segment shall be divided by an
extreme and mean proportion, and the greater segment thereof shall be the
line taken away.

As let the line ^^, be divided by an extreme and mean^ proportion, in the
point C. And le^ the (...) line (...) A. D. I say that AC is also divided by an
extreme and mean^ proportion in the point D, and that his greater portion is
DC. For, by the definitino (of a line so divided) AB, is to AC, as AC is to CB.
But as AC is to CB, so is AC to DC, by the 7. of the (...) is equal to CB)
wherefore, by the 11. of the fifth, as AB is to AC, so is AC to CD: and
therefore by the 19. of the fifth, as AB is to AC, so is the residue CB, to the
residue AD. But CB is to AD, as DC is to AD (by the 7. of the fifth) for DC is
by construction equal to C^. Wherefore, (...) so by the definition of A line
divided by an extreme and mean (...) the point D, to be divided, by an
extreme and mean proportion: which was to be proved.

Two Corollaries (added by M. Dee) following chiefly upon the verity, and
demonstration of his Additions, unto the 3. porposition annexed, and partly
upon this fifth, by Euclide demonstrated.

A Corollary. 1.
As any line being divided by an extreme and middle proportion, does give us
three right lines, (...) Note.


Of these two lines, (by extreme and mean proportion divided,) their
demonstrations^ are after Euclides 3, proposition added: and here in this fifth
by Euclide proved. But of the four lines in continual proportion, seeing, the
demonstration is most easy for any man to frame. I will here, but note the
lines unto you: as in every of the four places, the constructions have them
lettred and specified. As in my Note 4. Proportional lines.
DC, AD, AC, and CB^ are four lines in continual proportion. Euclide
declared) DB, AB, AC (equal to AD) and CB^ are four Note two middle
proportionals.
So, that in the first way you have AD, and AC, middle proportionals

A Corollary. 2.
It is also manifest, that you may by any of the four ways, here specified,
proceed infinitely in the proportion of a line divided by extreme and middle
proportion: Note 4. ways of progres^ion, in the proportion of a line divided
by extreme and middle proportion.
And in the first, and fourth ways, increasing continually the quantities of
the lin^s made: but in the second and third ways, dim^nishing continually the
quantities of the said whole lines, made (and thereby their segmentes). And
ye^, nevertheless reteyning in every line made (by ^^y of the ways) and in
his segments all, and the same properties, which the first line, and his
segment ^^ have. After which ^are of Progression, as the terms in continual
proportion do increase, and are m^e in number: So, likewise, do the middle
proportionalls, (accordingly) become more: But ever four in number, by two,
then the terms of the Progression are.

What Resolution is.
Resolution, is the assumption or taking of the thing which is to be proved, as
granted, and by things which necessarily follow it, What resolution and
composition is, has before been taught in the beginning of the first book.
to pass unto some truth granted.

What Composition is.
Composition, is an assumption or taking of a thing granted, and by things
which of necessity follow it, to pass unto the finding out of the thing sought
or to be proved.

Resolution of the first Theoreme.
Suppose that a certain right line AB, be divided by an extreme and mean
proportion in the point C, and let the greater segme^t thereof be AC, unto which
add a line equal to the half of the line AB, and let that line be AD. Then I
say that the square of the line CD is quintuple to the square of AD. For
forasmuch as the square of the line CD is quintuple to the square of AD: but
the square of the line CD is (by the 4. of the second) equal to that which is
composed of the squares of the lines CA, and AD, together with that which is
contained under the lines CA, and AD twice. Wh^^f^re that which is composed of
the squares of the lines CA, and AD, together with that which is contained
under the lines CA, and AD twice is quintuple to the square of the line AD.
Wherefore, that which is composed of the square of the line CA together with
that, which is contained under the lines CA, and AD twice is quadruple to the
square of the line AD. But unto that, which is contained under the lines CA,
and AD, twice, is equal that which is contained under the lines CA, and AB,
for the line AB is double to the line AD. And unto the square of the line AC,
is equal that which is contained under the lines AB and BC, for the line AB,
is by supposition divided by an extreme and mean proportion, in the point C.
Wherefore, that, which is contained under the lines AB, and AC, together with
that which is contained under the lines AB, and BC, is quadruple to the square
of the line AD. But that, which is composed of that which is contained under
the lines AB, and AC, together with that which is contained under the lines AB,
and BC, is the square of the line AB (by the 2. of the second.) Wherefore the
square of the line AB is quadruple to the square of the line AD. And so is it
in deed: for the line AB is double to the line AD: as was at the first
supposed.

Composition of the first Theoreme.
Now forasmuch as the square of the line AB is quadruple to the square of the
line AD, but the square of the line AB, is that which is contained under the
lines AB, and AC, together with that, which is contained under the lines BA,
and BC. Wherefore that which is contained under the lines BA, and AC, together
with that which is contained under the lines BA, and BC is quadruple to the
square of the line AD. But that which is contained under the lines BA, and AC,
is equal to that which is contained under the lines DA, and AC twice (by the
1. of the sixth), and that which is contained under the lines AB, and ^C is
equal to the square of the line AC, by the definition of a line divided by
extreme and mean proportion. Wherefore the square of the line AC, together
with that, which is contained under the lines DA, and AC twice, is quaduple to
the square of the line DA. Wherefore that which is composed of the squares of
the lines DA, and AC, together with that which is contained under the lines DA,
and AC, twice, is quintuple to the square of the line DA. But that which is
composed of the squares of the lines DA, and AC, together with that which is
contained under the lines DA, and AC twice, is equal to the square of the line
CD (by the 4. of the second). Wherefore the square of the line CD is quintuple
to the square of the line AD: which was required to be demonstrated.

Resolution of the 2. Theoreme.
Suppose that a certain right line, CD, be quintuple to a segme^t of the same
line, namely, to DA: and let the double of the line DA, be AB. The^ I say that
the line AB is divided by an extreme and mean proportion in the point C^ and
the greater segme^t thereof is AC, which is the rest of the right line put at
the beginning. For forasmuch as the line AB is divided by an extreme and mean
proportion in the point C, and the greater segment thereof is the line AC,
therefore that which is contained under the lines A^, and BC, is equal to the
square of the line AC. But that which is contained under the lines BA, and AC,
is equal to that which is contained under the lines DA, and AC twise^ for the
line BA, is double to the line AD. Wherefore that which is contained under the
lines AB, and BC together with that which is contained under the lines BA, and
AC, which is the square of the line AB (by the 2. of the second) is equal to
that which is contained under ye lines DA, and AC, twice together with the
square of the line AC. But the square of the line AB, is quadruple to the
square of the line DA. Wherefore that which is contained under the lines DA, and
AC, twice, together with the square of the line AC, is quadruple to the square
of the line AD. Wherefore the squares of the lines DA, and AC, together with
that which is contained under the lines DA, and AC, twice, which is the square
of the line DC, are quintuple to the square of the line DA. And so are they in
deed by supposition.

Composition of the 2. Theoreme.
Now forasmuch as the square of the line CD, is quintuple to the square of the
line DA^ But the square of the line CD, is that which is composed of the
squares of ye lines DA, and AC, together with that which is contained under the
lines DA, and AC, twice: Wherefore ye squares of the line DA, and AC together
with that which is contained under the lines DA, and AC, twice, are quintuple
to the square of the line DA. Wherefore, by division, that which is contained
under the lines DA, and AC, twice together with the square of the line CA, is
quadruple to the square of the line AD. And the square of the line AB, is
quadruple to the square of the line AD. Wherefore that which is contained under
the lines DA, and AC twice, which is that, which is contained under the lines
BA, and AC once, together with the square of the line AC, is equal to the
square of the line AB. But the square of BA, is that which is contained under
the lines BA, and AC, together with that which is contained under the lines BA,
and BC. Wherefore that which is contained under the lines BA, and AC, together
with that which is contained under the lines AB, and BC, is equal to that
which is contained under the lines BA, and AC together with the square of the
line AC. Now then taking away that which is common to them both, namely, that
which is contained vnde^ the lines BA, and AC, the residue, namely, that which
is contained under the lines AB, BC is equal to the square of the line AC.
Wherefore as the line BA, is to the line AC, so is the line AC to the line CB.
But the line BA is greater then the line AC, wherefore the line AC also is
greater then the line CB. Wherefore the line AB is divided by an extreme, and
mean proportion in the point C, and the greater segment thereof is the line
AC, which was required to be demonstrated.

Resolution of the 3. Theoreme.
Suppose that a certain right line AB, be divided by an extreme, and mean
proportion in the point C^ and let the greater segment thereof be the line AC,
and let the half of the line AC, be the line CD. Then I say that the square of
the BD is quintuple to the square of the line CD. For forasmuch as the square
of the line BD, is quintuple to the square of the line CD. But the square of
the line DB, is that which is contained under the lines AB, and BC, together
with the square of the line DC (by the 6. of the second). Wherefore that which
is contained under the lines AB, and BC, together with the square of the line
DC, i^ quintuple to the square of the line DC. Wherefore, that which is
contained under the lines AB, and BC, is quadruple to the square of the line
DC. But unto that which is contained under the lines AB, and BC, is equal the
square of the line AC: for the line AB, is divided by an extreme and mean
proportion in the point C. Wherefore the square of the line AC is quadruple to
the square of the line DC: and so is it in deed, for the line AC is double to
the line DC.

Composition of the 3. Theoreme.
Forasmuch as the line AC is double to the line DC, therefore the square of the
line AC is quadruple to the square of the line DC (by the 20. of the sixth).
But unto the square of the line AC, is equal that which is contained under the
lines AB, and BC, by supposition: wherefore that which is contained under the
lines AB, and BC, is quadruple to the square of the line CD. Wherefore, that
which is contained under AB, and BC, the other with the square the line DC, which
is the square of the line DB (by the 6. of the second) is quintuple to the
square of the line DC: which was required to be demonstrated.

Resolution of the 4. Theoreme.
Suppose that a certain right line AB, be divided by an extreme and mean
proportion in the point C. And let the greater segment thereof be AC. Then I
say that the squares of the lines AB, and BC, are treble to the square of the
line AC. For forasmuch as the squares of the lines AB, and BC, are treble to
the square of the line AC, but the squares of the lines AB, and BC, are that
which is contained under AB, and BC, twice together with the square of the line
AC (by the 7. of the second). Wherefore that which is contained under the lines
AB, and BC, twice, together with the square of the line AC, is treble to the
square of the line AC. Wherefore, that which is contained under the lines AB,
and BC, twice, is double to the square of the line AC. Wherefore that which is
contained under the lines AB, and BC, once, is equal to the square of the line
AC. And so it is in deed. For the line AB is divided by an extreme, and mean
proportion in the point C.

Composition of the 4. Theoreme.
Forasmuch therefore as the line AB, is divided by an extreme and mean
proportion in the point C, and the greater segment thereof is the line AC^
therefore that which is contained under the lines AB, and BC is equal to the
square of the line AC. Wherefore that which is contained under the lines AB, and
BC twice is double to the square of AC. Wherefore that which is contained under
the lines AB, and BC, twice, together with the square of the line AC, is treble
to the square of the line AC. But that which is contained under the lines AB,
and BC, twice, together with the square of the line AC, is the squares of the
lines AB, and BC (by the 7. of the second). Wherefore the squares of the lines
AB, and BC, are treble to the square of the line AC: which was required to be
demonstrated.

Resolution of the 5. Theoreme.
Suppose that a certain right line AB, be divided by an extreme and mean
proportion in the point C. And let the greater segment thereof be the line AC.
And unto the line AB, add a line equal to the line AC, and let the same be
AD. The^ I say that the line DB, is divided by an extreme and mean proportion
in the point A. And the greater segment thereof is the line AB. For forasmuch as
the line DB is divided by an extreme and mean proportion in the point A, and
the greater segment thereof is the line AB, therefore as the line DB, is to the
line BA, so is the line BA, to the line AD: but the line AD, is equal to the
line AC: wherefore as the line DB, is to the line BA, so is the line BA to the
line AC. Wherefore by conversion as the line BD is to the line DA, so is the
line AB to the line BC (by the corollary of the 19. of the fifth): wherefore by
division, by the 17. of the fifth, as the line BA, is to the line AD, ^o is the
line AC, to the line CB. But the line AD is equal to the line AC. Wherefore as
the line BA, is to the line AC, so is the line AC to the line CB. And so it is
indeed, for the line AB is, by supposition, divided by an extreme and mean
proportion in the point C.

Composition of the 5. Theoreme.
Now forasmuch as the line AB, is divided by an extreme and mean proportion in
the point C: therefore as the line BA is to the line AC, so is the line AC to
the line CB: but the line AC is equal to the line AD. Wherefore as the line BA
is to the line AD, so is the line AC to the line CB. Wherefore by composition
(by the 18. of the fifth) as the line BD is to the line DA, so is the line AB
to the line BC. Wherefore by conversion (by the corollary of the 19. of the
fiueth) as the line DB is to the line BA, so is the line BA to the line AC: but
the line AC is equal to the line AD. Wherefore as the line DB is to the line
BA, so is the line BA to the line AC. Wherefore the line DB, is divided by an
extreme and mean proportion in the point A: and his greater segment is the
line AB: which was required to be demonstrated.

An Advise, by John Dee, added.
Seeing, it is doubteles, that this parcel of Resolution and Composition, is not
of Euclides doing: it can not ^ustly be imputed to Euclide, that he has,
thereby, either superfluity or any part disproportioned in his whole
Composition Elementall. And though, for one thing, one good demonstration well
suffiseth: for stablishing of the verity: yet, o^ one thing diversely
demonstrated: to the diligent examiner of the diverse means, by which, that
variety arises, does grow good occasions of inuenting demonstrations, where
matter is more strange, hard, and barren. Also, though resolution were not in
all Euclide before used: yet thanks are to be given to the Greek Scholic
writter, who did leave both the definition, and also, so short and easy
examples of a Method, so ancient, and so profitable. The antiquity of it, is
above 2000. years: it is to we^e, ever since Plato his time, and the profit,
thereof so great, that thus I find in the Greek recorded. Proclus in the
Greek: in the 58. page.
(...). Proclus having spoken of some by nature, excellent in inuenting
demonstrations, pithy and brief says: Yet are there Methods given [for that
purpose]. And in deed, that, the best, which, by Resolution, reduces the thing
inquired of, to an undoubted principle. Which Method, Plato, taught Leodamas
(as i^ reported) And he is registered, thereby, to have been the inuenter of
many things in Geometry.

And, verily, in Problemes, it is the chief aid for winning and ordring a
demonstration: first by Supposition, of the thing inquired of, to be done: by
due and orderly Resolution to bring it to a stay, at an undoubted verity. In
which point of Art, great abundance of examples, are to be seen, in that
excellent and mighty Mathematici^n, Archimedes: and in his expositor, Eutocius,
in Menaechmus likewise: and in Diocles book, de Pyti^s: and in many other. And
now, for as much as, our Euclide in the last six Propositions of this thirtenth
book propounds, and concludes those Problemes, which were the end, Scope,
and principal purpose, to which all the premises of the 12. books, and the
rest of this thirtenth, are directed and ordered: It shall be artificially
done, and to a great commodity, by Resolution, backward, from these 6.
Problemes, to return to the first definition of the first book: I mean, to
the definition of a point. Which, is nothing hard to do. And I do counsel all
such, as desire to attein^, to the profound knowledge of Geometry,
Arithmeticke, or any branch of the sciences Mathematical, so by Resolution,
(discreatly and advisedly) to resolve, unloose, vnioynt and disseauer every part
of any work Mathematical, that, therby^ as well, the due placing of every
verity, and his proof: as also, what is either superfluous, or wanting, may
evidently appear. For so to invent, and there with to order their writings,
was the custom of them, who in the old time, were most excellent. And I (for
my part) in writing any Mathematical conclusion, which requires great
discourse, at length have found, (by experience) the commodity of it, such:
that to do other ways, were to me a confusion, and an vnmethodicall heaping of
matter together: besides the difficulty of inuenting the matter to be disposed
and ordered. I have occasion, thus to give you friendely advise, for your
be^ofe^ because some, of late, have inueyed against Euclide, or Theon in this
place, otherwise than I would wish they had.

The 6. Theoreme. The 6. Proposition^ If a rational right line be divided by
an extreme and mean proportion: either of the segments, is an irrational line
of that kind, which is called a residuall line.
SVppose that AB, being a rational line be deuidedly (...) extreme and mean
proportion in the point C, and let the greater segment thereof be AC. Then I
say that either of the lines AC, and CB, is an irrational line of that kind,
which is called a residuall. Extend the line AB, to the point D: Construction.
and let the line AD, be equal to half of the line AB. Now forasmuch as the
right line AB, Demonstration.
is divided by an extreme and mean proportion in the point C, and unto the
greater segme^t AC is added a line AD, equal to the half of the right line
AB: therefore (by the 1. of the thirtenth) the square of the line CD, is
quintuple to the square of the line AD. Wherefore the square of the line CD,
has to the square of the line AD, that proportion that number has to number.
Wherefore the square of the line CD is comme^surable to the square of the line
AD. But the square of the line DA is rational, for the line DA is rational;
forasmuch as it is the half of the rational line AB. Wherefore the square of
the line CD, is rational. Wherefore also the lin^ CD, is rational. And
forasmuch as the square of the line CD; has not to the square of the line AD,
that proportion that a square number has to a square number, therefore (by the
9. of the tenth) the line CD, is incommensurable in length, to the line AD.
Wherefore the lines CD, and DA are rational commensurable in power only.
Wherefore the line AC is a residuall line, by the 73. of the tenth. Again,
forasmuch as the line AB, is divided by an extreme and mean proportion, and
the greater segment thereof is AC, therefore that which is contained under the
lines AB, and. BC, is equal to the square of the line AC. Wherefore the square
of the line AC, applied to the rational line AB, makes the breadth BC. But the
square of a residuall line, applied to a rational line makes the breadth a
first residuall line (by the 97. of the tenth). Wherefore the line CB, is a
first residuall line. And it is proved that the line AC, is also a residuall
line. If therefore a rational right line be divided by an extreme and mean^
proportion, either of the segments, is an irrational line of that kind, which
is called a residuall line, which was required to be demonstrated.

A Corollary added by Campane.
Hereby it is manifest, that if the greater segment be a rational line: the
less segment shall be a residuall line.

For if the greater segment AC, of the right line ACB be divided into two
equal parts in the point D, the square of the line DB, shall be quint^pl^ to
the square of the line DC, (by the 3. of this book.) And forasmuch as the line
CD, (being the ^alfe of the rational line supposed AC) is rational by the 6.
diffinition of the tenth: And unto the square of the line DC, the square of the
line DB is commensurable, (for it is quintuple unto it) wherefore the square of
the line DB, is rational. Wherefore also the line DB is rational. And
forasmuch as the squares of the lines DB and DC, are not in proportion, as a
square number is to a square number: therefore the lines DB and DC are
incommensurable in length (by the 9. of the tenth.) Wherefore they are
commensurable in power only: Wherefore by the 73. of the tenth, the line BC,
which is the less segment, is a residuall line.

The 7. Theoreme. The 7. Proposition. If an equilater Pe^tagon have three of
his angles, whether they follow in order, or not in order, equal the one to
the other: that Pentagon shall be equiangle.
SVppose that ABCDE, be an equilater pentagon. And let the angles of the said
Pentagon, Two cases in this proposition.
namely, first, three angles following in order, which are at the points A, B,
C, be equal the one to the other. Then I say that the Pentagon ABCDE is
equiangle. Construction.
Draw these right lines AC, BE, and FD. Now forasmuch as these two lines CB,
The first case.
and BA, are equal to these two lines BA, and AE, the one to the other, and
the angle CBA is equal to the angle BAE: Demonstration.
therefore (by the 4. of the first) the base AC is equal to the base BE, and
the triangle ABC is equal to the triangle ABE, and the rest of the angles are
equal to the rest of the angles, under which are subtended equal sides.
Wherefore the angle BCA is equal to the angle BEA, and the angle ABE to the
angle CAB. Wherefore also the side AF, is equal to the side BF (by the 6. of
the first). And it was proved that the whole line AC is equal to the whole line
BE. Wherefore the residue CF is equal to the residue F^. And the line CD, is
equal to the line DE. Wherefore these two lines FC, and CD are equal to these
two lines FE, and ED, and the base FD, is common to them both. Wherefore the
angle FCD, is equal to the angle FED (by the 8. of the first). And it is
proved that the angle BCA, is equal to the angle AEB. Wherefore the whole angle
BCD is equal to the whole angle AED. But the angle BCD, is supposed to be
equal to the angles A, and B. Wherefore the angle AED, is equal to the angles
A and B. In like sort also may we prove that the angle CDE, is equal to the
angles A, and B. Wherefore the Pentagon ABCDE is equiangle.

The second case.
But now supp^se that three angles, which follow not in order, be equal the one
to the other, namely, let the angles A, C, D, be equal. Then I say that in
this case also the Pentagon ABCDE is equiangle. Draw a right line from the
point B, to the point D. Now forasmuch as these two lines BA, and A^, are
equal to these two lines BC, and CD, and they comprehend equal angles,
therefore (by the 4. of the first) the base BE, is equal to the base BD. And
the triangle ABE, is equal to the triangle BDC, and the rest of the angles are
equal to the rest of the angles, under which are subtended equal sides:
wherefore the angle AEB, is equal to the angle CDB. And the angle BED, is
equal to the angle BDE, (by the 5. of the first) for the side BE, is equal to
the side BD. Wherefore the whole angle AED, is equal to the whole angle CDE.
But the angle CDE, is supposed to be equal to the angles A, and C. Wherefore
the AED, is equal to the angles A, and C. And by the same reason also the
angle ABC, is equal to the angles A; C, and D. Wherefore the Pentagon ABCDE is
equiangle. If therefore an equilater Pentagon have three of his angles, whither
they follow in order, or not in order, equal the one to the other: that
Pentagon shall be equiangle: which was required to be proved.

The 8. Problem. The 8. Proposition. If in an equilater and equiangle Pe^tagon
two right lines do subtend two of the angles following in order: those lines
do divide the one the other by an extreme and mean proportion: and the
greater segments of those lines are each equal to the side of the Pentagon.
SVppose that ABCDE be an equilater and equiangle Pentagon. And let two right
lines AC, and BE, subtend the two angles A, and B, which follow in order. And
let them cut the one the other in the point H. Then I say that either of those
lines is divided by an extreme and mean proportion in the point H: And that
each of the greater segments of those lines are equal to the side of the
Pentagon Circumscribe (by the 14. of the fourth) about the Pentago^. ABCDE,
Construction.
a circle ABCDE. And forasmuch as these two right lines EA, and AB, are equal
to these two right lines AB, and BC, Demonstration.
and they contain equal angles: therefore (by the 4. of the first) the base
BE, is equal to the base AC: and the triangle ABE, is equal to the triangle
ABC, and the angles remaining, are equal to the angles remaynyng, the one to
the other, under which are subtended equal sides. Wherefore the angle BAC, is
equal to the angle ABE. Wherefore the angle AHE is double to the angle BAH, (by
the 32. of the first) for it is an outward angle of the triangle ABH. And the
angle EAC is double to the angle^ BAC (by the last of the sixth). For the
circumference EDC is double to the circumference CB. Wherefore the angle HAE is
equal to the angle AHE. Wherefore also the right line ^E, is (by the 6. of the
first) equal to the right line EA, that is to the line AB. And forasmuch as
the right line BA is equal to the right line AE, therefore the angle ABE is
equal to the angle AEB. But it is proved that the angle ABE is equal to the
angle BAH: wherefore also the angle BEA is equal to the angle BAH. And in the
two triangles ABE, and ABH, the angle ABE is common to them both, wherefore the
angle remaining, namely, BAE is equal to the angle remaining, namely, to AHB
(by the corollary of the 32. of the first). Wherefore the triangle ABE, is
equiangle to the triangle ABH. Wherefore proportionally as the line EB, is to
the line BA, so is the line AB to the line BH (by the 4. of the sixth). But the
line BA is equal to the line EH. Wherefore as the line B^ is to the line EH,
so is the line EH to the line H^. But the line BE is greater the^ the line BA^
wherefore the line EH, also is greater then the line HB. Wherefore the line BE^
is divided by an extreme and mean proportion in the point H (by the 3.
diffinition of the sixth) and his greater segment EH is equal to the side of
the Pentagon. In like sort also may we prove that the line AC is divided by an
extreme and mean proportion in the point H, and that his greater segment CH,
is equal to the side of the Pentagon. (For the whole line AC is equal to the
whole line BE, and it has been proved that the parts taken away BH, and AH are
equal wherefore the residue CH is equal to the residue EH (by the 10. of the
fifth). If therefore in an equilater and equiangle Pentagon two right lines
(...) sub^end two of the angles following in order: those lines do divide the
one the other by an extreme and mean proportion: and the greater segments of
those lines are each equal to the side of the Pentagon: which was required to
be demonstrated.

The 9. Theoreme. The 9. Proposition. If the side of an equilater hexagon, and
the side of an equilater decagon or ^^u^gled figure, which both are inscribed
in one and the self same circle, be added together: the whole right line made
of them is a line divided by a^ extreme and mean proportion, and the greater
segment of the same is the side of the hexagon.
SVppose that there be a circle ABC. And let the side of a decagon or tenangled
figure inscribed in the circle ABC, be BC, and let the side of an hexagon or
six angled figure inscribed in the same circle, be CD. And let the lines BC
and CD be so joined together directly that they both make one right line,
namely, BD. Then I say that the line BD is divided by an extreme and mean
proportion in the point C: and that the greater segme^t thereof is the line CD.
Construction.
Take (by the 1. of the third) the center of the circle. And let it be the
point E: and draw these right lines EB, EC, and ED. And extend the line BE to
the point A. Now forasmuch as BC is the side of an equilater decagon,
Demonstration.
therefore the circumference or semicircle ACB is quintuple to the
circumference CB. Wherefore the circumference AC is quadruple to the
circumference CB. But as the circumference AC is to the circumference CB, so is
the angle AEC to the angle CEB, by the last of the sixth. Wherefore the angle
AEC is quadruple to the angle CEB. And forasmuch as the angle EBC is equal to
the angle ECB (by the 5. of the first,) for the line EB is equal to the line
EC, by the diffinition of a circle, therefore the angle AEC is double to the
angle ECB, by the 32. of the first. And forasmuch as the right line EC is
equal to the right line CD, by the corollary of the 15. of the fourth (for
either of them is equal to the side of the hexagon inscribed in the circle
ABC) therefore the angle CED is equal to the angle CDE wherefore the angle ECB
is double to the angle EDC, by the 32. of the first. But it is proved that the
angle AEC is double to the angle ECB, wherefore the angle AEC is quadruple to
the angle EDC. And it is proved that the angle AEC is quadruple to the angle
BEC. Wherefore the angle EDC is equal to the angle BEC. And the angle EBD is
common to the two triangles BEC and BED: wherefore the angle remaining BED is
equal to the angle remaining ECB, by the corollary of the 32. of the first.
Wherefore the triangle EBD is equiangle to the triangle EBC. Wherefore, by the
4. of the sixth, proportionally, as the line BD is to the line BE, so is the
line BE to the line BC. But the line EB is equal to the line CD. Wherefore as
the line BD is to the DC, so is the line DC to the line CB. But the line BD is
greater then the line DC: wherefore also the line DC is greater then the line
CB. Wherefore the right line BD is divided by an extreme and mean proportion
in the point C: and his greater segment is DC. If therefore the side of an
equilater hexagon, and the side of an equilater decagon or tenangled figure,
which both are inscribed in one and the self same circle, be added together^
the whole right line made of them, is a line divided by an extreme and mean
proportion, and the greater segment of the same is the side of the hexagon:
which was required to be proved.

A Corollary added by Flussas.
This Corollary is the 3. proposition of the ^4. book after Campane.
Hereby it is manifest, that the side of an exagon inscribed in a circle being
cut by an extreme and mean proportion, the greater segment thereof is the
side of the decagon inscribed in the same circle. For if from the right line DC
be cut of a right line equal to the line CB, we may thus reason, as the whole
DB is to the whole DC, so is the part taken away DC to the part taken away CB:
wherefore by the 19. of the fifth, the residue is to the residue as the whole
is to the whole. Wherefore the line DC is cut like unto the line DB: and
therefore is cut by an extreme and mean proportion.

Campane puts the converse of this proposition after this manner.
If a line be divided by an (...) and ^^ane proportion, of (...) circle the
greater segment is the side of an equilater Hexagon, of the same shall the
less segment be the side of an equilater Decagon. And of what circle the less
segment is the side of an equilater Decagon, of the same is the greater segment
the side of an equilater Hexagon.

For the former figure remaining, suppose that the line BD be divided by an
extreme and mean proportion in the point C: and let the greater segment thereof
be DC. The^ I say that of what circle the line DC is the side of an equilater
Hexagon, of the same circle is the line CB the side of an equilater decagon:
and of what circle, the line BC is the side of an equilater Decagon, of the
same is the line DC the side of an equilater Hexagon. Demonstration of the
first part.
For if the line DC be the side of an Hexagon inscribed in the circle, then by
the corollary of the 15. of the fourth, the line DC is equal to the line BE.
And forasmuch as the proportion of the line BD to the line DC is as the
proportion of the line DC to the line CB, by supposition: therefore (by the 7.
of the fifth) the proportion of the line BD to the line BE, is as the
proportion of the line BE to the line BC. Wherefore (by the 6. of the sixth)
the two triangles DEB, EBC are equiangle (for the angle B is common to each
triangle). Wherefore the angle D is equal to the angle CEB: for they are
subtended of sides of like proportion. And forasmuch as the angle AEC is
quadruple to the angle D (by the 32. of the first twice taken, and by the 5. of
the same) therefore the same angle AEC is quadruple to the angle CEB. Wherefore
(by the last of the sixth) the circumference AC is quadruple to to the
circumfere^ce CB. Wherefore the line BC is the side of a decagon inscribed in
the circle ACB.

But now if the line BC be the side of a decagon inscribed in the circle ABC,
the line CD shall be the side of an Hexagon inscribed in the same circle.
Demonstration of the second part.
For let DC be the side of an Hexagon inscribed in the circle H. Now by the
first part of this proposition the line BC shall be the side of a decagon
inscribed in the same circle. Suppose that in the two circles ACB and H be
inscribed equilater decagons, all whose sides shall be equal to the line CB. And
forasmuch as every equilater figure inscribed in a circle is also equiangle,
therefore both the decagons are equiangle. And forasmuch as all the angles of
the one taken together are equal to all the angles of the other taken together,
as it is easy to be proved by that which is added after the 32. of the first,
therefore one of these decagons is equiangle to the other: and therefore the one
is like to the other by the diffinition of like superficieces. And for that if
there be two like rectiline figures inscribed in two circles, the proportion of
the sides of like proportion of those figures, shall be as the proportion of the
Diameters of those circles, as it is easy to prove by the corollary of the 20.
of the sixth, and first of this book^: but the sides of the like deca^ons
inscribed in the two circles ABC and H are equal: therefore their Diameters
also are equal. Wherefore also their semidiameters are equal. But the
s^midi^meters and the side of the Hex^gon are equal, by the ^o^ollary of the
1^. of the fourth. Wherefore the line DC is the side of an hexagon in the
circle ABC, as also it is the side of an hexagon inscribed in the circle F,
which is equal to the ci^cle ABC: which was required to be proved.

The 10. Theoreme. The 10. Proposition. If in a circle be described an
equilater Pentagon, the side of the Pentagon contains in power both the side
of an hexagon and the side of a decagon, being all described in one and the
self same circle.
SVppose that ABCDE be a circle. And in the circle ABCDE describe (by the 11.
of the fourth) a pentagon figure ABCDE. Then I say, that the side of the
pentagon ^igure ABCDE contains in power both the side of an hexagon figure,
and of a decagon figure, being described in the circle ABCDE. Construction.
Take (by the 1. of the third) the center of the circle, and let the same be F.
And drawing a right line from the point A to the point F, extend it to the
point G. And draw a right line from the point F to the point B. And from the
point F draw (by the 12. of the first) unto the line AB a perpendicular line
FH: and extend it to the point K. And draw the right lines AK and KB. And
again, from the point F draw (by the same) unto the line AK, a perpendicular
line FN: and extend FN to the point M, which line let cut the line AB in the
point L. And draw a right line from the point K to the point L. Now forasmuch
as the circumference ABCG is equal to the circumference AEDG, Dem^nstration.
of which the circumference ABC is equal to the circumference AED, therefore
the rest of the circumference, namely, CG, is equal to the rest of the
circumference, namely, to DG. But the circum^e^en^e CD is subtended of the side
of a p^n^agon: Wherefore the circumference CG is subtended of the side of a
decagon ^igure. And forasmuch as the line BH is equal to the line HA (by the
3. of the third) and the line FH is common to them both, and the angles at the
point H are right angles. Wherefore (by the 4. of the first) the angle AFK is
equal to the angle KFB. Wherefore also (by the 26. of the third) the
circumference AK, is equal to the circumference KB. Wherefore the
circumference AB is double to the circum^erence BK. Wherefore the right line AK
is the side of a decagon figure. And by the same reason also the circumference
AK is double to the circumference KM. And forasmuch as the circumference AB is
double to the circumference BK, but the circumference CD is equal to the
circumference AB: wherefore the circumference CD is double to the circumference
BK. But the circumference CD is double to the circumference CG: wherefore the
circumference CG is equal to the circumference BK. But the circumference BK is
double to the circumference KM (for that the circumference KA is double
thereunto) ^ wherefore also the circumference CG is double to the circumference
KM. But the circumference CB is also double to the circumference BK (for the
circumference CB is equal to the circum^erence BA). Wherefore the whole
circumference GB is double to the whole circumference BM, by the 12. of the
fifth. Wherefore also the angle GFB is double to the angle BFM, by the last of
the sixth. But the angle GFB is double to the angle FAB (by the 32. of the
first, or 20. of the third). For the angle FAB is equal to the angle ABF.
Wherefore the angle BFL is equal ^o the angle FAB, by the 15. of the fifth. And
the angle ABF is common to the two triangles ABF and BFL. Wherefore (by the
Corollary of the ^^. of the first) the angle remaining AFB is equal to the
angle remaining BLF. Where^ore the triangle ABF is equiangle to the triangle
BFL. Wherefore (by the 4. of the sixth) proportionally as the right line AB is
to the right line BF, so is the same right line FB to the right line BL:
wherefore that which is contained under the lines AB and BL is equal to the
square of the line BF, by the 17. of the sixth. Again forasmuch as the line AL
is equal to the line LK [for by the last of the sixth, the angle KFL is equal
to the angle AFL, which equal angles are contained under the lines FK, FL, and
FA, FL, and the line FK is equal to the line FA, and the line FL is common to
them both. Wherefore, by the 4. of the first, the line AL is equal to the line
LK] and the line LN is common to them both, and makes right angles at the
point N, and (by the 3. of the third) the base AN is equal to the base KN.
Wherefore also the angle LKN is equal to the angle LAN. But the angle LAN is
equal to the angle KBL (by the 5. of the first). Wherefore the angle LKN is
equal to the angle KBL. And the angle KAL is common to both the triangles AKB
and AKL. Wherefore the angle remaining AKB is equal to the angle remaining ALK
(by the Corollary of the 32. of the first). Wherefore the triangle KBA is
equiangle to the triangle KLA. Wherefore (by the 4. of the sixth) proportionally
as the right line BA is to the right line AK, so is the same right line KA to
the right line AL. Wherefore that which is contained under the lines BA and AL
is equal to the square of the line AK (by the 17. of the sixth). And it is
proved that that which is contained under the lines AB and BL, is equal to the
square of the line BF. Wherefore that which is contained under AB and BL
together with that which is con^^ined under BA and AL (which by the 2. of the
second, is the square of the line BA) is equal to the squares of the lines AF
and AK. But the line BA is the side of the pentagon figure, and AF the side of
the hexagon figure (by the Corollary of the 15. of the fourth), and AK the side
of the decagon figure. Wherefore the side of a pentagon figure, contains in
power both the side of an hexagon figure, and of a decagon figure, being
described all in one and the self same circle: which was required to be
demonstrated.

A Corollary added by Flussas.
A perpendicular line from any angle drawn to the base of a pentagon, passes
by the center.

For if we draw a right line from the point A to the point C, and an other
from the point A to the point D: those right lines sh^^l be equal, by the 4.
of the first: and therefore in the triangle ACD the angles at the points C and
D are, by the 5. of the first^ equal. But the angles made at the point where
the line AG cutteth the line CD, are by supposition right angles: wherefore, by
the 26. of the first, the line CD is by the line AG divided into two equal
parts, and it is also divided perpendicularly: wherefore by the corollary of
the first of the third in the line AG is the center of the circle: and
therefore the line AG passes by the center.

The 11. Theoreme. The 11. Proposition. If in a circle having a rational line
to his diameter be inscribed an equilater pentagon: the side of the pentagon is
an irrational line, and is of that kind which is called a less line.
SVppose that in the circle ABCDE having a rational line to his diameter be
inscribed a pentagon figure ABCDE. Then I say that the side of the pentagon
figure ABCDE, namely, the side AB, is an irrational line of that kind which is
called a less line. Take (by the 1. of the third) the center of the circle,
and let the same be the point F, and draw a right line from the point A to the
point F, Construstion.
and an other from the point F to the point B, and extend those lines to the
points G and H. And draw a right line from the point A to the point C. And
from the semidiameter FH take the fourth part (by the 9. of the sixth) and let
the same be FK: But the line FH is rational (for that it is the half of the
diameter which is supposed to be rational), wherefore also the line FK is
rational. And the line or semidiameter BF is rational. Wherefore the whole
line BK is rational. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the circumference ACG is equal to the circumference ADG, of
which the circumference ABC is equal to the circumference AED, wherefore the
residue CG is equal to the residue GD. Now if we draw a right line from the
point A to the point D, it is manifest that the angles ALC and ALD are right
angles. For forasmuch as the circumference CG is equal to the circumference
GD, therefore (by the last of the sixth) the angle CAG is equal to the angle
DAG. And the line AC is equal to the line AD, for that the circumferences
which they subtend are equal, and the line AL is c^mmon to them both,
therefore there are two lines AC and AL equal to two lines AD and AL, and the
angle CALL is equal to the angle DAL. Wherefore (by the 4. of the first) the
base CL is equal to the base LD, and the rest of the angles to the rest of the
angles, and the line CD is double to the line CL. And by the same reason may it
be proved, that the angles at the point M are right angles, and that the line
AC is double to the line CM. Now forasmuch as the angle ALC is equal to the
angle AMF, for that they are both right angles, and the angle LAC is common to
both the triangles ALC and AMF: wherefore the angle remaining, namely, ACL, is
equal to the angle remaining AFM, by the corollary of the 32. of the first.
Wherefore the triangle ACL is equiangle to the triangle AMF. Wherefore
proportionally, by the 4. of the sixth, as the line LC is to the line CA, so is
the line MF to the line FA. And in the same proportion also are the doubles of
the antecedents LC and MF (by the 15. of the fifth). Wherefore as the double of
the line LC is to the line CA, so is the double of the line MF to the line FA.
But as the double of the line MF is to the line FA, so is the line MF to the
half of the line FA, by the 15. of the fifth, wherefore as the double of the
line LC is to the line CA, so is the line MF to the half of the line FA, by
the 11. of the fifth. And in the same proportion, by the 15. of the fifth, are
the halues of the consequents, namely, of CA and of the halue of the line AF.
Wherefore as the double of the line LC is to the half of the line AC, so is
the line MF to the fourth part of the line FA. But the double of the line LC is
the line DC, and the half of the line CA is the line CM, as has before been
proved, and the fourth part of the line FA is the line FK (for the line FK is
the fourth part of the line FH by construction). Wherefore as the line DC is to
the line CM, so is the line MF to the line FK. Wherefore by composition (by the
18. of the fifth) as both the lines DC and CM are to the line CM, so is the
whole line MK to the line FK. Wherefore also (by the 22. of the sixth) as the
squares of the lines DC and CM are to the square of the line CM, so is the
square of the line MK to the square of the line FK. And forasmuch as (by the 8.
of the thirtenth) a line which is subtended under two sides of a pentagon
figure, as is the line AC, being divided by an extreme and mean propor^ion,
the greater segment is equal to the side of the pentagon figure, that is, unto
the line DC: and (by the 1. of the thirtenth) the greater segment having added
unto it the half of the whole, is in power quintuple to the square made of the
half of the whole: and the half of the whole line AC is the line CM.
Wherefore the square that is made of the lines DC and CM, that is, of the
greater segment and of the half of the whole, as of one line, is quintuple to
the square of the line CM, that is, of the half of the whole. But as the
square made of the lines DC and CM, as of one line, is to the square of the
line CM, so is it proved, that the square of the line MK is to the square of
the line FK. Wherefore the square of the line MK is quintuple to the square of
the line FK. But the square of the line KF is rational, as has before been
proved, wherefore also the square of the line MK is rational, by the 9.
diffinition of the tenth, for the square of the line MK has to the square of
the line KF that proportion that number, has to number, namely, that 5. has
to 1. and therefore the said squares are commensurable, by the 6. of the tenth.
Wherefore also the line MK is rational. And forasmuch as the line BF is
quadruple to the line FK (for the semidiameter BF is equal to the semidiameter
FH), therefore the line BK is quintuple to the line FK. Wherefore the square of
the line BK is 25. times so much as the square of the line KF, by the corollary
of the 20 of the sixth. But the square of the line MK, is quintuple to the
square of the FK, as is proved. Wherefore the square of the line BK is quintuple
to the square of the line KM. Wherefore ye square of the line BK, has not to ye
square of the line KM, that proportion that a square number has to a square
number, by the corollary of the 25. of the eight. Wherefore (by the 9. of the
tenth) the line BK is incommensurable in length to the line KM, and either of
the lines is rational. Wherefore the lines BK and KM are rational
commensurable in power only. But if from a rational line be taken away a
rational line being commensurable in power only to the whole, that which
remains is irrational, and is (by the 73. of the tenth) called a residuall
line. Wherefore the line MB is a residuall line. And the line conveniently
joined unto it, is the line MK. Now I say that the line BM is a fourth
residuall line. Unto the excess of the square of the line BK above the square
of the line KM, let the square of the line N be equal (which excess how to
find out, is taught in the assumpt put after the 13. proposition of the
tenth). Wherefore the line BK is in power more then the line KM by the square
of the line N. And forasmuch as the line KF is commensurable in length to the
line FB, for it is the fourth part thereof, therefore (by the 16. of the tenth)
the whole line KB is commensurable in length to the line FB. But the line FB is
commensurable in length to the line BH, namely, the semidiameter^ to the
diameter: wherefore the line BK is commensurable in length to the line BH, by
the 12. of the tenth. And forasmuch as the square of the line BK is quintuple
to the square of the line KM, therefore the square of the line BK has to the
square of the line KM that proportion that five has to one. Wherefore by
conversion of proportion (by the corollary of the 19. of the fifth) the square
of BK has to the square of the line N, that proportion that five has to
four: and therefore it has not that proportion that a square number has to a
square number, by the corollary of the 25. of the eight. Wherefore, the line BK
is incommensurable in length to the line N (by the 9. of the tenth). Wherefore
the line BK is in power more then the line KM, by the square of a line
incommensurable in length to the line BK. Now then forasmuch as the whole line
BK is in power more then the line conveniently joined, namely, then KM, by the
square of a line inco^mensurable in length to the line BK, and the whole line
BK is commensurable in length to the rational line given BH: therefore the
line MB is a fourth residuall line, by the diffinition of a fourth residuall
line. But a rectangle parallelogramme contained under a rational line and a
fourth residual line, is irrational, and the line which contains in power
the same parallelogramme is also irrational, and is called a less line (by
the 94. of the tenth). But the line AB contains in power the parallelogramme
contained under the lines HB and BM (for if we draw a right line from the
point A to the point H, the triangle ABH shall be like to the triangle ABM, by
the 8. of the sixth. For from the right angle BAH is drawn to the base BH a
perpendicular line. And therefore as the line BH is to the line BA, so is the
line AB to the line BM. this follows also of the co^ollary of the said 8. of
the sixth. Wherefore the line AB which is the side of the pentagon figure, is
an irrational line of that kind which is called a less line. If therefore in
a circle having a rational line to his diameter be inscribed an equilater
pentagon, the side of the pentagon is an irratio^all line, and is of that kind
which is called a less line: which was required to be demonstrated.

The 12. Theoreme. The 12. Proposition. If in a circle be described an
equilater triangle: the square made of the side of the triangle, is treble to
the square made of the line, which is drawn from the center of the circle to
the circumference.
SVppose that ABC be a circle, and in it describe an equilater triangle ABC.
Then I say that the square made of the side of the triangle ABC is treble to
the square made of the line drawn from the center of the circle ABC to the
circumference. Constr^yction.
Take (by the 1. of the third) the center of the circle, and let the same be D.
And draw a right line from the point A to the point D, and extend it to the
point E. And draw a right line from the point B to the point E. Demonstration.
Now forasmuch as the triangle ABC is equilater, t^^refore each of these three
circumferences AB, AC, and BEC is the third part of the whole circumference of
the circle ABC wherefore the circumference BE is the sixth part of the
circu^ference of the circle [for the circumfere^ce of the semicircle ABE is
equal to the circumference of the semicircle ACE, from which taking away equal
circumferences AB and AC, the circumference remaining BE shall be equal to the
circumference remaining EC]: wherefore the right line BE is the side of an
equilater hexagon figure described in the circle. Wherefore it is equal to the
line drawn from the center of the circle to the circumference, that is unto
the line DE (by the corollary of the 15. of the sixth). And forasmuch as the
line AE is double to the line DE, therefore the square of the line AE is
quadruple to the square of the line DE (by the 4. of the second): that is, to
the square of the line BE. But the square of the line AE is equal to the
squares of the lines AB, and BE (by the 47. of the first) for the angle ABE is
(by the 31. of the third) a right angle. Wherefore the squares of the line AB
and BE are quadruple to the square of the line BE. Wherefore taking away the
square of the line BE, the squa^e of the line AB sh^lbe treble to the square of
BE: but the line BE is equal to the line DE. Wh^r^fore the square of the line
AB is treble to the square of the line DE. Wherefore the square made of the
side of the triangle, is treble to the square made of the line drawn from the
center of the circle to the circumference: which was required to be proved.

A Corollary added by Campane.
Hereby it is manifest, that the line BC, which is the side of the equilater
triangle, divides the semidiameter DE into two equal parts. For let the point
of the division be F. And suppose a line to be drawn from the point D to the
B, and an other from the point D to the point C. Now it is manifest (by the 4.
of the first) that the line BF is equal to the line FC, and therefore (by the
3. of the third) all the angles at the point F are ^ight angles. Wherefore (by
the 47. of the first) the square of the line BD is equal to the squares o^ the
line^ ^F and FD, and by the same the square of the line BE is equal to the
squares of the lines BF, and FE: b^t the line BD is equal to the line BE (as
has before been proved). Wherefore by the common sentence the two squares of
the two lines BF and FD are equal to the two squares of the line^ BF, and FE.
Wherefore taking away the square of the line BF which is common to them both:
the residue, namely, the square of the line DF shall be equal to the residue,
namely, to the square of the line FE. Wherefore also the line FD is equal to the
line FE. Wherefore hereby it is manifest that a ^erpendicular line drawn from
the center of a circle to the side of an equilater triangle inscribed in it, is
equal to half of the line drawn from the center of the same circle, to the
circumference thereof.

A Corollary added by Flussas.
The side of an equilater triangle is in power sesquitertia to the
perpendicular line which is drawn from one of the angles to the opposite side.
For of what parts the line AB contains in power 12. of such parts the line BF
which is the half of AB contained in power 3. This Corollary is the 11.
prop^sition of the 14. book after Campane.
Wherefore the residue, namely, the perpendicular line AF contains in power
of such parts 9. (for the squares of the lines AF, and BF are by the 47. of the
first equal to the square of the line AB). Now 1^. to 9. is sesquitertia^
wherefore the power of the line AB is to the power of the line AF in
sesquitertia proportion.

Moreover the side of the triangle is the mean proportional between the
diameter and the perpendicular line: For (by the Corollary of the 8. of the
sixth) the line AE is to the line AB as the line AB is to the line AF.

Farther the perpendicular line drawn from the angle divides the base into
two equal parts and passes by the center. This Corollary is the 3. Corollary
after the 17. proposition of the 14 book after Campane.
For if there should be drawn any other right line from the point A to the
point F, the^ that which is drawn by the point D, two right lines should
include a superficies, which is impossible. Wherefore the contrary follows,
namely, that the line, which being drawn from the angle passes by the center,
is a perpendicular line to the base (by the 3. of the third).

The 1. Problem. The 13. Proposition. To make a By the name o^ a Pyramid both
here and i^ this book following, understand a Tetrahedron.
Pyramid, and to comprehend it in a sphere given: and to prove that the
diameter of the sphere is in power sesquialtera to the side of the Pyramid.
SVppose that the diameter of the sphere given be AB, and divide AB in the
point C, so that the line AC be double to the line BC (by the 9. of the sixth).
First part of the construction.
And upon the line AB, making the center the point N, describe a semicircle
ADB. And (by the 11. of the first) from the point C raise up unto the line AB a
perpendicular line CD. And draw a right line from the point D to the point A.
And describe a circle EFG having his semidiameter equal to the line CD. And
describe in the circle EFG, an equilater triangle EFG (by the 2. of the
fourth). And (by the 1. of the third) take the ce^tre of the circle, and let
the same be the point H. And draw these right lines FH, HF, and HG. And (by the
12. of the eleventh) from the point H raise up unto the plain superficies of
the circle EFG a perpe^dicular line HK, and let the line HK be equal to the
right line AC. And draw these right lines KE, KF, and KG. Now forasmuch as the
line HK is erected perpe^dicularly to the plain super^icies of the circle EFG,
First part of the demonstration.
therefore (by the 2. definition of the eleventh) it makes right angles with
all the right lines that touch it, and which are in the self same superficies
of the circle EFG. But it touches every one of these right lines, HE, HF and
HG: Wherefore the right line HK is erected perpendicularly to every one of
these lines HE, HF, and HG. And forasmuch as the line AC is equal to the line
HK, and the line CD to the line HE, and they comprehend right angles, therefore
the base DA is equal to the base KE (by the 4 of the first). And by the same
reason each of the lines KF, and KG is equal to the line DA. Wherefore the
three lines KE, KF, and KG are equal the one to the other. And forasmuch as
the line AC is double to the line CB, (by cons^ruction): therefore the line AB
is treble to the line BC: but as the line AB is to the line BC, so is the
square of the line AD to the square of the line DC. [Whiche may thus be proved.
This Assumpt is again at the end of the demonstr^tio^ of the pro^osition
proved.
It is manifest (by the Corollary of the 8. of sixth) that the line CD is the
mean proportional between the lines AC and CB. Wherefore (by the corollary of
the 20. of the same) the square of the line AC is to the square of the line CD,
as the line AC is to the line CB: wherefore by composition (by the 18. of the
fiueth) the squares of the lines AC and CD are to the square of the line CD, as
the line AB is to the line BC. But the squares of the lines AC and CD are (by
the 47. of the first) equal to the square of the line AD: wherefore (by the 7.
of the fiueth) the square of the line AD is to the square of the line DC, as
the line AB is to the line BC.] Wherefore the square of the line AD is treble
to the square of the line DC. And forasmuch as the line KE is equal to the
line AD (as it has been proved) and the line HE is put equal to the line CD^
therefore the square of the line KE is triple to the square of the line HE. But
unto the square of the same line HE is (by the 12. of the thirtenth) the square
of the line FE treble wherefore the line OF is equal to the line KE. Now the
lines KE, KF, and KG are equal the one to the other, as it has before ben
proved, and so also are the lines OF, FG and GE, for that they are the sides of
an equilater triangle. Wherefore every one of these lines OF, FG, and GE, is
equal to every one of the lines KE, KF and KG. Wherefore these four triangles
EFG, KEF, KFG and KGE are equilater. Wherefore there is made a Pyramid
consisting of four equal and equilater triangles, whose base is the triangle
EFG and top the point K.

Second part of the Constructio^.
Now it is required to comprehend the same Pyramid in the sphere given, and to
prove that the diameter of the sphere is in power sesquialtera to the side of
the pyramid. Second part of the demostratio^.
Add unto the right line HK a right line directly, namely HL, and let the line
HK be equal to the the line BC. Look at the end of this demonstration for an
other construction and demonst^ation of this second part after Flussa^.
Now for that as the line AC is to the line CD, so is the line CD to the line
CB (by the corollary of the 18. of the sixth) but the line AC is equal to the
line KH, and the line CD to the line HE, and the line CB to the line HL.
Therefore as the line KH is to the line HE, so is the line HE to the line HL.
Wherefore that which is contained under the lines HK and HL is equal to the
square of the line EH. And either of angles the HKE, and EHL is a right angle,
wherefore a semicircle described upon the line KL shall pass by the point E.
Read the two assumpts added by Campane (which are set at the end of the
demonstration of this propositi^n) for the better ^nderstanding of this reason.
For if we draw a right line from the point E to the point L, the angle LEK
shall be a right angle, for that the tria^gle ELK is equiangle to either of the
triangles ELH and EHK (by the 8. of the sixth.) Now then if the the diameter KL
abiding fixed, the semicircle be turned round about, until it return unto the
self same place from whense it began to be moved, it shall also pass by the
points F and G. For drawing a right line from the ponit F to the point L, and
an other from the point L to the point G, which also makes at the points F and
G right angles, the pyramid shall be contained in the sphere given. For the
line KL being the diameter of the sphere is equal to the line AB, which is the
diameter of the sphere given, for the line KH is put equal to the line AC, and
the line HL to the line CB.

[In the semicircle ADB of the former figure draw the line DN. And divide the
line KG into two equal parts in the point M. An other construction and
demonstration of the second part after F^ussas.
And draw a line from M to G. And forasmuch as by construction the line KH is
equal to the line AC, and the line HL to the line CB: therefore the whole line
AB is equal to the whole line KL. Wherefore also the half of the line KL,
namely, the line LM, is equal to the semidiameter BN: wherefore taking away
from those equal lines, equal parts BC and LH, the residues NC, and MH shall be
equal. Wherefore in the two triangles MHG and NCD, the two sides about the
equal right angles DCN and GHM, namely, the sides DC, CN, and GH, HM, are
equal: wherefore the bases MG and ND are equal (by the 4. of the first.) And
by the same reason may it be proved that right lines drawn from the point M to
the points E and F are equal to the line ND. But the right line ND is equal to
the line AN, which is drawn from the center to the circumference: wherefore
the line MG is equal to the line MK, and also to the lines ME, MF and ML.
Wherefore making the ce^tre the point M, and the space MK or MG describe a
semicircle KGL: and the diameter KL abiding fixed let the said semicircle KGL
be moved round about until it return to the same place from whence it began
to be moved: and there shall be described a sphere about the center M (by the 12.
diffinition of the eleventh) touching every one of the angles of the Pyramid
which are at the points K, E, F, G: for those angles are equally dista^t from
the center of the sphere, namely, by the semidiameter of the said sphere, as
has before been proved. Wherefore in the sphere given whose diameter is the
line KL, or the line AB, is inscribed a Tetrahedron EFGK.]

Now I say, that the diameter of the sphere is in power sesquialtera to the
side of the Pyramid. Third part of the demonstration.
For forasmuch as the line AC is double to the line CB (by co^structio^)
therefore the line AB is treble to the line BC. Wherefore by conversion) by the
corollary of the 19. of the fiueth) the line AB is sesquialtera to the line AC.
But as the line BA is to the line AC, so is the square of the line BA, to the
square of the line AD. For if we draw a right line from the point B, to the
point D, as the line BD is to the line AD, so is the same AD to the line AC, by
reason of the likeness of the ttriangles DAB, and DAC (by the 8. of the sixth):
and by reason also that as the first is to th third so is the square of the
first to the square of the second (by the corollary of the 20. of the sixth).
Wherefore the square of the line BA, is sesquialter to the square of the line
AD. But the line BA is equal to the diameter of the sphere given, namely, to
the line KL, as has been proved, and the line AD is equal to the side of the
pyramid inscribed in the sphere. Wherefore ye diameter of the sphere is in power
sesquialter to the side of the pyramid. Wherefore there is made a pyramid
comprehended in a sphere given, and the diameter of the sphere is sesquialtera
to the side of the pyramid: which was required to be done and proved.

An other demonstration to prove that as the line AB is to the line BC, so is
the square of the line AD to the square of the line DC.
Let the description of the semicircle ADB be as in the first description. And
upon the line AC describe (by the 46. of the first) a square EC, and make
perfect the parallelogra^me FB. Now forasmuch as the triangle DAB is equiangle
to the triangle DAC (by the 32. of the sixth: therefore as the line BA is to the
line AD, so is the line DA to the line AC, by the 4. of the sixth. Wherefore
that which is contained under the lines BA and AC, is equal to the square of
the line AD, by the 17. of the sixth. And for that as the line AB is to the line
BC, so is the parallelogramme EB to the parallelogramme FB, by the 1. of the
sixth: and the parallelogramme EB is that which is contained under the lines BA
and AC (for the line EA is equal to the line AC): and the parallelogramme BF
is that which is contained under the lines AC and BC. Wherefore as the line AB
is to the line BC, so is that which is contained under the lines BA and AC, to
that which is contained under the lines AC and CB. But that which is contained
under the lines BA and AC, is equal to the square of the line AD, by the
Corollary of the 8. of the sixth, and that which is contained under the lines AC
and CB, is equal to the square of the line CD, for the perpendicular line DC
is the mean proportional between the segmentes of the base, namely, AC and
CB, by the former Corollary of the 8. of the sixth, for that the angle ADB is a
right angle. Wherefore as the line AB is to the line BC, so is the square of
the line AD to the square of the line DC, by the 11. of the fifth: which was
required to be proved.

Two Assumptes added by Campane.
First Assumpt.
Suppose that upon the line AB be erected perpendicularly the line DC, which
line DC let be the mean proportional between the parts of the line AB,
namely, AC and CB: so that as the line AC is to the line CD, so let the line CD
be to the line CB. And upon the line AB describe a semicircle. The^ I say, that
the circumference of that semicircle shall pass by the point D, which is the
end of the perpe^dicular line. But if not, then it shall either cut the line
CD, or it shall pass above it, and include it not touching it. First let it
cut it in the point E. And draw these right lines EB and EA. Wherefore by the
31. of the third, the whole angle AEB is a right angle. Wherefore by the first
part of the Corollary of the 8. of the sixth, the line AC is to the line ^C, as
the line EC is to the line CB. But by the 8. of the fifth, the proportion of the
line AC to the line EC, is greater then the proportion of the same line AC to
the line CD (for the line CE is less then the line CD). Now for that the line
CE is to the line CB, as the line AC is to the line CE, and the line CD is to
the line CB, as the line AC is to the line CD, therefore by the 13. of the
fifth, the proportion of the line EC to the line CB, is greater then the
proportion of the line CD to the line CB. Wherefore by the 10. of the fifth, the
line EC is greater then the line DC, namely, the part greater then the whole:
which is impossible. Wherefore the circumference shall not cut the line CD. Now
I say, that it shall not pass above the line CD, and not touch it in the point
D. For if it be possible, let it pass above it, and extend the line CD to the
circu^ference, and let it cut it in the point ^. And draw the lines FB and FA,
and it shall follow as before that the line CD is greater then the line CF:
which is impossible. Wherefore that is manifest which was required to be proved.

Second Assumpt.
If there be a right angle unto which a base is subtended, and if upon the same
be described a semicircle: the circumference thereof shall pass by the point
of the right angle.

For suppose that there be a right angle ABC, unto which subtend the base AC,
and upon the line AC describe a semicircle. Then I say, that the circumference
thereof shall pass by the point B. For if not, then it shall pa^^e either
above the point B, or under the point B. First let it pass under the point B,
and l^^ the circumference be AEC. And (by the 1^. of the first) from the point
B draw unto the line AC a perpendicular line BD, which let cut the
circumference of the semicircle in the point E. And draw th^se right lines ^A
and EC. Now it is manifest, by the 31. of the third, that the angle AEC is a
right angle. But (by the 21. of the first) the angle AEC is greater then the
angle ABC: which is impossible, by the 10. common sentence. Wherefore the
circumfere^ce of the semicircle passes not under the angle B. Now I say, that
it passes not above the angle B. For if it be possible, let it pass above the
point B, and let the circumference be AFC: and produce the perpendicular line
BD till it cut the circumference AFC in the point F^. And draw these right
lines AF and FC. Wherefore again, by the 31. of the third, the angle AFC is a
right angle. But by supposition, the angle ABC is ^ right angle, and is, by the
21. of the first, greater then the right angle AFC: which again by the
foresaid common sentence, is impossible. Wherefore a semicircle described upon
the base AC, passes neither under the point ^, nor above it. Wherefore it
passes by it: which was required to be proved.

The converse of this was added after the demonstration of the 31. of the
third, out of Pelitarius. And these two Assumptes of Campane are necessary, for
the better understanding of the demonstration of the second part of this 13.
Proposition, wherein is proved that the pyramid is contained in the Sphere
given.

Certain Corollaryes added by Flussas.
First Corollary.
The diameter of the Sphere is in power quadruple sesquialtera to the line
which is drawn from the center to the circumference of the circle which
contains the base of the pyramid.

For forasmuch as it has been proved, that the diameter KL is in power
sesquialter to the side OF: and it is proved also, by the 12. of this book,
that the side OF is in power triple to the line EH (which is drawn from the
center of the circle containing the triangle EFG). But the proportion of the
extremes, namely, of the diameter to the line EH, consists of the proportions
of the means, namely, of the proportion of the diameter to the line OF, and of
the proportion of the line OF to the line EH, by the 5. definition of the sixth:
which proportions, namely, triple, and sesquialter, added together, make
quadruple sesquialter (as it is easy to prove by that which was taught in the
declaration of the 5. definition of the sixth book). Wherefore the Corollary is
manifest.

Second Corollary.
Only the line which is drawn from the angle of the pyramid to the base
opposite unto it, This Corollary is the 15. proposition of the 14. book after
Campane.
and passing by the center of the Sphere, is perpendicular to the base, and
falls upon the center of the circle which contains the base.

For if any other line (then the line KMH which is drawn by the center of the
Sphere to the center of the circle) should fall perpendicularly upon the plain
of the base, then, from one and the self same point should be drawn to one
and the self same plain two perpendicular lines, contrary to the 13. of the
eleventh: which is impossible. Farther if from the top K should be drawn to
the center of the base, namely, to the point H, any other right line not
passing by the center M, two right lives should include a superficies contrary
to the last common sentence: which were absurd. Wherefore only the line which
is drawn by the center of the Sphere to the center of the base, is
perpendicular to the said base. And the line which is drawn from the angle
perpendicularly to the base, shall pass by the center of the Sphere.

Third Corollary.
The perpendicular line which is drawn from the center of the Sphere to the
base of the pyramid, This Corollary Campane puts as a Corollary after the
17. proposition of the 14. book.
is equal to the sixth part of the diameter of the Sphere.

For it is before proved, that the line MH (which is drawn from the center of
the Sphere to the center of the base) is equal to the line NC: which line NC
is the sixth part of the diameter AB, and therefore the line MH is the sixth part
of the diameter of the Sphere. For the diameter AB is equal to the diameter of
the Sphere, as has also before been proved.

The 2. Problem. The 14. Proposition. To make an octohedron, and to comprehend
it in the sphere given, namely, that wherein the pyramid was comprehended: and
to prove that the diameter of the sphere is in power double to the side of the
octohedron.
Construction.
TAke the diameter of the former sphere given, which let be the line AB: and
divide it (by the 10. of the first into two equal parts in the point C. And
describe upon the line AB a semicircle ADB. And (by the 11. of the first) from
the point C raise up unto the line AB a perpendicular line CD. And draw a right
line from the point D to the point B. And describe a square EFGH having every
one of his sides equal to the line BD. and draw the diagonal lines FH and EG,
cutting the one the other in the point K. And (by the 12. of the eleventh) from
the point K (namely, the point where the lines FH and EG cut the one the other)
raise up to the plain superficies, wherein the square EFGH is, a perpendicular
line KL, and extend the line KL on the other side of the plain superficies to
the point M. And let each of the lines KL and KM be put equal to one of these
lines KE, KF, KH or KG. And draw these right lines LE, LF, LG, LH, ME, MF, MG,
and MH. ^rist part of the demonstration.
Now forasmuch as the line KE is (by the corollary of the 34. of the first)
equal to the line KH, and the angle For the 4. angles at the point K are
equal to four right angles by the Corollary of the 15. of the first: and
those 4. angle, are equal the one to the other by the ^. of the first: and
therefore each is a right angle.
EKH is a right angle, therefore the square of HE is double to the square of
EK, by the 47. of the first: Again forasmuch as the line LK is equal to the
line KE by position, and the angle LKE is, by the second diffinition of the
eleventh, a right angle: therefore the square of the line EL is double to the
square of the line EK: and it is proved that the square of the line HE is
double to the square of the line EK. Wherefore the square of the line LE is
equal to the square of the line EH. Wherefore also the line LE is equal to
the line EH. And by the same reason the line LH is also equal to the line HE.
Wherefore the triangle LHE is equilater. In like sort may we prove that every
one of the rest of the triangles whose bases are the sides of the square EFGH,
and tops the points L and M, are equilater. The said eight triangles also
are equal the one to the other, for every side of each is equal to the side
of the square EFGH. Wherefore there is made an octohedron contained under eight
triangles whose sides are equal. Now it is required to comprehend it in the
sphere given, and to prove that the diameter of the sphere is in power double
to the side of the octohedron.

Second part of the demo^stratio^.
Forasmuch as these three lines LK, KM, and KE are equal the one to the other,
therefore a semicircle described upon the line LM shall pass also by the point
E. And by the same reason, if the semicircle be turned round about, until it
return unto the self same place from whence first it began to be moved, it
shall pass by the points F, G, H, and the octohedron shall be comprehended in
a sphere. I say also that it is comprehended in the sphere given. For forasmuch
as the line LK is equal to the line KM, by position, and the line KE is common
to them both and they contain right angles by the 3. diffinition of the
eleventh, therefore (by the 4. of the first) the base LE is equal to the base
EM. And forasmuch as the angle LEM is a right angle, by the 31. of the third,
for it is in a semicircle, as has been proved, therefore the square of the
line LM is double to the square of the line LE by the 47. of the first. Again
forasmuch as the line AC is equal to the line BC, therefore the line AB is
double to the line BC, by the di^finition of a circle. But as the line AB is to
the line BC, so is the square of the line AB to the square of the line BD, by
the corollaries of the 8. and ^0. of the sixth. Wherefore the square of the line
AB is double to the square of the line BD. And it is proved that the square of
the line LM is double to the square of the line LE. Wherefore the square of the
line BD is equal to the square of the line LE. For the line EH which is equal
to the line LF, is put to be equal to the line DB. Wherefore the square of the
line AB is equal to the square of the line LM. Wherefore the line AB is equal
to the line LM. And the line AB is the diameter of the sphere given, wherefore
the line LM is equal to the diameter of the sphere given. Wherefore the
octoedron is contained in the sphere given: For the square of the line AB,
which is proved equal to the square of the line LM, is double to the square of
the line BD which is also equal to the square of the line LE.
and it is also proved that the diameter of the sphere is in power double to
the side of the octohedron. Wherefore there is made an octohedron, and it is
comprehended in the sphere given, wherein was comprehended the Pyramid: and it
is proved that the diameter of the sphere is in power double to the side of the
octohedrn: which was required to be done, and to be proved.

Certain Corollaries added by Flussas.
First Corollary.
The side of a Pyramid is in power sesquitertia to the side of an oct^hedron
inscribed in the same Sphere.

For forasmch as the diameter is in power double to the side of the octohedron,
therefore of what parts the diameter contains in power 6. of the same, the
side of the octohedron co^tayneth in power 3. but of what parts the diameter
contains 6. of the same, the side of the pyramid contains 4. by the 13. of
this book. Wherefore of what parts the side of the pyramid contains 4. of
the same the side of the octohedron contains 3.

Second Corollary.
An octohedron is divided into two equal and like Pyramids.

The common bases of these Pyramids are set upon every square contained of the
sides of the octohedron, upon which square are set the ^^ triangles of the
octohedron: This Corollary is the 16. proposition of the 14. book after
Campane.
which pyramids are by the ^. diffinition of the eleventh equal and like. And
the foresaid square common to those Pyramids, is the half of the square of the
diameter of the sphere, for it is the square of the side of the octohedron.

Third Corollary.
The three diameters of the octohedron, do cut the one the other
perpendicularly into two equal parts, in the center of the sphere which
contains the said octohedron.

As it is manifest by the three diameters EG, FH, and LM which cut the one
the other in the center K equally and perpendicularly.

The 3. Problem. The 15. Proposition. To make a solid called a cube, and to
comprehend it in the sphere given, namely, that Sphere wherein the former two
solides were comprehend^d^ and to prove that the diameter of the sphere, is in
power treble to the side of the cube.
TAke the diameter of the sphere given, namely, AB, and divide it in the point
C^ So that let the line AC be double to the line BC by the 9. of the sixth. And
upon the line AB describe a semicircle ADB. And (by the 11. of the first) from
the p^ynt C r^yse up unto the line AB a perpe^dicular line CD. And draw a right
lin^ DB. And describe a squar^ EFGH, having every one of his sides equal to
the line DB, And from the points E, F, G, H, raise up (by the 12. of the
eleventh) unto the plain superficies of the square EFGH perpendicular lines
EK, FL, GM, and HN: and let every one of the lines EK, FL, GM, and HN be put
equal to one of the lines OF, FG, GH, or HE, which are the sides of the
square, and draw these right lines KL, LM, MN, and NK. First part of the
demonstration.
Wherefore there is made a cube namely FN which is contained under six equal
squares. Second part of the Constructio^.
Now it is required to comprehend the same cube in the sphere given, and to
prove that ye diameter of the sphere is in power ble to the side of the cube.
Second part of the demonstra^ion.
Draw these right lines KG and EG. And forasmuch as the angle KEG is a right
angle, for that the line KE is erected perpendicularly to the plain
superficies E^, and therefore also to the right line EG, by the 2. diffinitio^
of the eleventh, wherefore a semicircle described upon the line KG shall By the
2. Assumpt of the 13. of this book.
pass by the point E. Again forasmuch as the line FG is erected
perpendicularly to either of these lines FL and FE, by the diffinition of a
square, and by the 2. diffinition of the eleventh, therefore the line FG is
erected perpendicularly to the plain superficies FK, by the 4. of the
eleventh. Wherefore if we draw a right line from the point F to the point K,
the line GF shall be erected perpendicularly to the line KF, by the 2.
diffinition of the eleventh. And by the same reason again a semicircle
described upon the line GK shall pass also by the point F. And likewise shall
it pass by the rest of the points of the angles of that cube. If now the
diameter KG abiding fixed the semicircle be turned round about until it
return into the self same place from whence it began first to be moved, the
cube shall be comprehended in a sphere. I say also that it is comprehended in the
sphere given.

Third part of the demonstration.
For forasmuch as the line GF is equal to the lin^ ^E and the angle F is a
right angle, therefore the square of the line EG is by the 47. of the first
double to the square of the line ^F. But the line OF is equal to the line EK.
Wherefore the square of the line EG is double to the square of the line EK.
Wherefore the squares of EG and EK that is the square of the line GK, by the 47.
of the first, are treble to the square of the line EK. And forasmuch as the
line AB is treble to the line BC, but as the line AB is to the line BC, so is
the square of the line AB to the square of the line BD, by the corollaries of
the 8. and 20. of the sixth. Wherefore the square of the line AB is treble to
the square of the line BD. And it is proved that the square of the line GK is
treble to the square of the line KE, and the line KE is put equal to the line
BD. Wherefore the line KG is also equal to the line AB. And the line AB is the
diameter of the sphere given. Wherefore the line KG is equal to the diameter
of the sphere given. Wherefore the cube is co^prehe^ded in the sphere given: and
it is also proved that the diameter of the Sphere is in power treble to the
side of the cube: which was required t^ ^e done, and to be proved.

An other demonstration after Flussas.
Suppose that the diameter of the Sphere given in the former Propositions, be
the line A^. And let the center be the point C, upon which describe a
semicircle ADB. And from the diameter AB cut of a third part BG, by the 9. of
the sixth. And from the point G raise up unto the line AB a perpendicular line
DG, by the 11. of the first. And draw these right lines DA, DC, and DB. And
unto the right line DB put an equal right line ZI: and upon the line ZI
describe a square EZIT. And from the points E, Z, I, T, erecte unto the
superficies EZIT perpendicular lines EK, ZH, IM, TN (by the 12. of the
eleventh): and put every one of those perpendicular lines equal to the line
ZI. And draw these right lines KH, HM, MN, and NK, each of which shall be
equal and parallels to the line ZI, and to the rest of the lines of the
square, by the 33. of the first. And moreover they shall contain equal angles
(by the 10. of the eleventh): and therefore the angles are right angles, for
that EZIT is a square: wherefore the rest of the bases shall be squares.
Wherefore the solid EZITKHMN being contained under 6. equal squares, is a
cube, by the 21. definition of the eleventh. Extend by the opposite sides KE
and MI of the cube, a plain KEIM: and again by the other opposite sides NT
and HZ, extend an other plain HZTN. Now forasmuch as each of these plains
divide the solid into two equal parts, namely, into two Prismes equal and
like (by the 8. definition of the eleventh): therefore those plains shall cut
the cube by the center, by the Corollary of the 39. of the eleventh. Wherefore
the common section of those plains shall pass by the center. Let that common
section be the line LF. And forasmuch as the sides HN and KM of the
superficieces KEIM and HZTN do divide the one the other into two equal parts,
by the Corollary of the 34. of the first, and so likewise do the sides ZT and
EI: therefore the common section LF is drawn by these sections, and divides
the plains KEIM and HZTN into two equal parts, by the first of the sixth: for
their b^ses are equal, and the altitude is one and the ^ame, namely, the
altitude of the cube. Wherefore the line LF shall divide into two equal parts
the diameters of his plains, namely, the right lines KI, EM, ZN, and NT, which
are the diameters of the cube. Wherefore those diameters shall concur and cut
one the other in one and the self same point, let the same be O. Wherefore the
right lines OK, OE, OI, OM, OH, OZ, OT, and ON, shall be equ^ll the on^ to the
other, for that they are the halfes of the diameters of equal and like
rectangle parallelogra^mes. Wherefore making the center the point O, and the
space any of these lines OE, or OK. etc. a Sphere described, shall pass by
every one of the angles of the cube, namely, which are at the points E, Z, I,
T, K, H, M, N, by the 12. definition of the eleventh, for that all the lines
drawn from the point O to the angles of the cube are equal. But the right
line EI contains in power the two equal right lines EZ, and ZI, by the 47.
of the first. Wherefore the square of the line EI is double to the square of
the line ZI. And forasmuch as the right line KI subtendeth the right angle KEI
(for that the right line KE^ is erected perpendicularly to the plai^e
^uperficies of the right lines EZ and ZT (by the 4. of the eleue^th) ^
therefore the square of the line KI is equal to the squares of the lines EI
and EK, but the square of the line EI is double to the square of the line EK
(for it is double to the square of the line ZI, as has been proved, and the
bases of the cube are equal squares). Wherefore the square of the line KI is
triple to the square of the line KE, that is, to the square of the line ZI. But
the right line ZI is equal to the right line DB, by position, unto whose
square the square of the di^meter AB is triple, by that which was demonstrated
in the 13. Proposition of this book. Wherefore the diameters KI and DB are
equal. Wherefore there is described a cube KI, and it is comprehended in the
Sphere given wherein the other solides were contained, the diameter of which
Sphere is the line AB. And the diameter KI or AB of the same Sphere, is proved
to be in power triple to the side of the cube, namely, to the line DB, or ZI.

Corollaryes added by Flussas.
First Corollary.
Hereby it is manifest, that the diameter of a Sphere contains in power the
sides both of a pyramid and of a cube inscribed in it.

For the power of the side of the pyramid is two thirdes of the power of the
diameter (by the 13. of this book). And the power of the side of the cube is,
by this Proposition, one third of the power of the said diameter. Wherefore the
diameter of the Sphere contains in power the sides of the pyramid and of the
cube..

Second Corollary.
All the diameters of a cube cut the one the other into two equal parts in
the center of the sphere which contains the cube. And moreover those
diameters do in the self same point cut into two equal parts the right lines
which join together the centres of the opposite bases.

As it is manifest to see by the right line LOF. For the angles LKO, and FIO,
are equal, by the 29. of the first: and it is proved, that they are contained
under equal sides: Wherefore (by the 4. of the first) the bases LO and FO are
equal. In like sort may be proved, that the rest of the right lines which
join together the centres of the opposite bases do cut the one the other into
two equal parts in the center O.

The 4. Problem. The 16. Proposition. To make an Icosahedron, and to
comprehend it in the Sphere given, wherein were contained the former solides,
and to prove that the side of the Icosahedron is an irrational line of that
kind which is called a less line.
First part of the construction.
TAke the diameter of the Sphere, namely, the line AB: and divide it in the
point C, so that let the line AC be quadruple to the line CB, by the 9. of the
sixth. And describe upon the line AB a semicircle ADB. And (by the 11. of the
first) from the point Craise up unto the line AB a perpendicular line CD. And
draw a right line from the point D to the point B. And describe a circle EFGHK
whose line from the center (which let be the point Z) to the circumference, let
be equal to the line DB. And in the circle EFGHK describe (by the 11. of the
fourth) an equilater and equiangle Pentagon ^igure EFGHK. And divide the
circumferences OF, FG, GH, HK, and KE, into two equal parts in the points L,
M, N, X, O. Draw also these right lines LM, MN, NX, XO, and OL: and moreover
these lines OE, EL, LF, FM, MG, GN, NH, HX, XK, and FO, and they shall be the
sides of an equilater decagon inscribed in the circle EFGHK, by the 29. of the
third. Wherefore the figure LMNXO is an equilater pentagon, by the 29. of the
third, and the right line EO is the side of a decagon ^r ten angled figure.
Raise up (by the 1^. of the eleventh) from the points E, F, G, H, K, and the
center Z, unto the plain superficies of the circle, perpendicular lines EP,
FR, GS, HT, KV, and ZW, and let each of them be put equal to the line drawn
from the center of the circle EFGHK, to the circumference, namely, to the line
ZE. Wherefore right lines drawn from W to P, from W to V, from W to T, from W
to S, from W to R, shall be equal and parallels to right lines drawn from Z
to E, from Z to K, from Z to H, from Z to G, and from Z to F, by the 6. and 7.
of the eleventh, and 33. of the first. Wherefore the plain superficieces
EFGHK, and PRSTV, which are extended by those parallel lines, are parallel
superficieces, by the 15. of the eleventh. Wherefore making the center the
point W, and the space WP, or WV, describe a circle, and it shall pass, by the
points T, S, F, and shall be equal to the circle EFGHK. For the semidiameters
of each are equal. And draw these right lines PR, RS, ST, TV, UP, and they
shall make a pentagon, whose sides shall be equal to the sides of the Pentagon
OLMNX, by the 29. of the first. For each of them does subtend two sides of the
decagon, or the fifth part of equal circles. From the upper points P, R, S, T,
V, draw these lines PO, PL, RL, RM, SM, SN, TN, TX, VX, VO: which shall subtend
right angles contained under the sides of the decagon ELFMGNHXKO, and the
perpendicular lines PE, RF, SG, TH, VK.

Now forasmuch as the perpendicular lines PE, RF, SG, TH, and VK, First part of
the demonstration.
are put equal to the line ZE drawn from the center, therefore they are
equal to the side of an equilater hexagon inscribed in the same circle (by the
Corollary of the 15. of the fourth). Wherefore the right lines PO, PL, VO, and
VX (which subtend the right angles contained under those perpendicular lines
and the sides of the decagon) contain them in power, by the 47. of the first.
But the side of a pentagon (namely, the side LO or PV) contains in power the
sides of an hexagon and of a decagon inscribed in one and the self same
circle, by the 10. of this book. Wherefore the subtending lines PO, PL, VO,
VX, TX, TN, SN, SM, RM, RL, contain in power the self same square that the
sides of the pentagon OLMNX contain, or that the sides of the pentagon PRSTV
contain: and therefore those subtending lines are equal to the sides of the
foresaid pentagons. Wherefore the triangles contained of those subtending lines
and of the sides of the pentagons, and which are ten in number, namely, PLO,
OVP, VOX, VXT, TXN, TNS, SNM, SMR, RML, and RLP, are equilater. Again produce
the right line ZW on either side to the points Q and Y and unto the side of the
decagon, namely, to the line OE, put the lines ZY and WQ equal. And forasmuch
as the right line QY is erected perpendicularly to the plain superficies
OLMNX, therefore it is also erected perpendicularly to the other plain
superficies PRSTV, Second part of the co^struction.
by the Corollay of the 14. of the eleue^th. And draw these right lines QP,
QV, QT, QS, and QR: and these lines also ILL, YM, IN, YX, and YO.

Second part of the demo^stratio^.
Now forasmuch as the lines QP, QV, QT, QS, and QR do each subtend right angles
contained under the sides of an equilater hexagon and of an equilater decagon
inscribed in the circle PRSTV or in the circle EFGHK (which two circles are
equal) therefore the said lines are each equal to the side of the pentagon
inscribed in the foresaid circle by the 10. of this book, and are equal the
one to the other, by the 4. of the first, (for all the angles at the point W
which they subtend are right angles). Wherefore the five triangles QPV, QPR,
QRS, QST, and QTV, which are contained under the said lines QV, QP, QR, QS, QT,
and under the sides of the pentagon VPRST, are equilater, and equal to the ten
former triangles. And by the same reason the five triangles opposite unto them,
namely, the triangles YML, YMN, YNX, YXO, and YOL, are equilater and equal to
the said ten triangles. For the lines ILL, YM, IN, YX, and YO do subtend right
angles contained under the sides. of an equilater hexagon and of an equilater
decago^ inscribed in the circle EFGHK, which is equal to the circle PRSTV.
Wherefore there is described a solid contained under 20. equilater triangles.
Wherefore by the last diffinition of the eleventh there is described an
Icosahedron.

Now it is required to comprehend it in the sphere given, and to prove that the
side of the Icosahedron is an irrational line of that kind which is called a
less line. Forasmuch as the line ZW is the side of an hexagon, and the line WQ
is the side of a decagon, therefore the line ZQ is divided by an extreme and
mean proportion in the point W, and his greater segme^t is ZW (by the 9. of
the thirte^th). Wherefore as the line QZ is to the line ZW, so is the line ZW to
the line WQ. But the ZW is equal to the line ZL by construction, and the line
WQ to the line ZY by construction also: Wherefore as the line QZ is to the line
ZL, so is the line ZL to the line ZY, and the angles QZL^ and LZY are right
angles (by the 2. diffinition of the eleventh): If therefore we draw a right
line from the point L to the point Q, the angle YLQ shall be a right angle, by
reason of the likeness of the triangles YLQ and ZLQ (by the 8. of the sixth).
Wherefore a semicircle described upon the line QY, shall pass also by the point
L (by the assumpts added by Campane after the 13. of this book). And by the
same reason also, for that as the line QZ is the line ZW, so is the line ZW to
the line WQ, For the line QW, is equal to the line IZ, and the line ZW, is
common to them both.

This part is again afterward demonstrated by Flussas.


but the line ZQ is equal to the line YW, and the line ZW to the line PW:
wherefore as the line YW is to the line WP, so is the line PW to the line WQ.
And therefore again if we draw a right line from the point P to the point Y,
the angle YPQ shall be a right angle. Wherefore a semicircle described upon the
line QY shall pass also by the point P, by the former assumpts: and if the
diameter QY abiding fixed the semicircle be turned round about, until it come
to the self same place from whence it began first to be moved, it shall pass
both by the point P, and also by the rest of the points of the angles of the
Icosahedron, and the Icosahedron shall be comprehended in a sphere. I say also
that it is contained in the sphere given.

Divide (by the 10. of the first) the line ZW into two equal parts in the
point a. And forasmuch as the right line ZQ is divided by an extreme and mean
proportion in the point W, and his less segment is QW, therefore the segment
QW having added unto it the half of the greater segment, namely, the line Wa,
is (by the 3. of this book) in power quintuple to the square made of the half
of the greater segment: wherefore the square of the line Qa is quintuple to the
square of the line ^W. But unto the square of the Qa, the square of the line QY
is quadruple (by the corollary of the 20. of the sixth) for the line QY is
double to the line Qa: and by the same reason unto the square of the WA the
square of the line ZW is quadruple: Wherefore the square of the line QY is
quintuple to the square of the line ZW (by the 15. of the fiueth). And
forasmuch as the line AC, is quadruple to the line CB, therefore the line AB is
quintuple to the line CB. But as the line AB is to the line BC, so is the
square of the line AB to the square of the line BD (by the 8 of the sixth, and
corollary of the 20. of the same). Wherefore the square of the line AB is
quintuple to the square of the line BD. And it is is proved that the square of
the line QY is quintuple to the square of the line ZW. And the line BD is
equal to the line ZW, for either of them is by position equal to the line
which is drawn from the center of the circle EFGHK to the circumference.
Wherefore the line AB is equal to the YQ. But the line AB is the diameter of
the sphere given: Wherefore the line YQ, which is proved to be the diameter of
the sphere containing the Icosahedron, is equal to the diameter of the sphere
given. Wherefore the Icosahedron is contained in the sphere given. Now I say
that the side of the Icosahedron is an irrational line of that kind which is
called a less line. For forasmuch as the diameter of the sphere is rational,
and is in power quintuple to the square of the line drawn from the center of
the circle OLMNX: wherefore also the line which is drawn from the center of
the circle OLMNX is rational: wherefore the diameter also being co^mensurable
to the same line (by the 6. of the tenth) is rational. But if in a circle
having a rational line to his diameter be described an equilater pentagon, the
side of the pentagon is (by the 11. of this book) an irrational line, of that
kind which is called a less line. But the side of the pentagon OLMNX is also
the side of the Icosahedron described, as has before ben proved. Wherefore the
side of the Icosahedro^ is an irrational line of that kind which is called a
less line. Wherefore there is described an Icosahedron and it is contained in
the sphere given, and it is proved that the side of the', Icosahedron is an
irrational line of that kind which is called a less line. Which was required
to be done, and to be proved.

A Corollary.
Hereby it is manifest that the diameter of the sphere, is in power quintuple
to the line which is drawn from the center of the circle to the circumference,
on which the Icosahedron is described. And that the diameter of the sphere: is
composed of the side of an hexagon, and of two sides of a decagon described in
one and the self same circle.

Flussas proves the Icosahedron described, to be contained in a sphere, by
drawing right lines from the point, a, to the points P and G after this manner.

Forasmuch as the lines ZW, WP are put equal to the line drawn from the center
to the circumference^ and the line drawn from the center to the circumference
is double to the line aW, by construction: therefore the line WP is also double
to the same line aW. Wherefore the square of the line WP is quadruple to the
square of the line aW (by the corollary of the 20. of the sixth). And those
lines PW and Wa containing a right angle PWa (as has before been proved) are
subtended of the right line aP. Wherefore (by the 47. of the first) the line aP
contains in power the lines PW, and Wa. Wherefore the right line aP is in
power quintuple to the line Wa. Wherefore the right lines aP, and aQ being
quintuple to one and the same line Wa, are (by the 9. of the flueth) equal. In
like sort also may we prove that unto those lines aP and aQ, are equal the
rest of the lines drawn from the point a to the rest of the angles R, S, T, V.
For they subtend right angles contained of the line Wa, and of the lines drawn
from the center to the circumference. And forasmuch as unto the line Wa is
equal the line Va, which is likewise erected perpendicularly unto the other
plain superficies OLMNX: therefore lines drawn from the point a to the angles
O, L, M, N, X, and subtending right angles at the point Z contained under lines
drawn from the center to the circumference, and under the line aZ, are equal
not only the one to the other, but also to the lines, drawn from the said
point a, to the former angles at the points, P, R, S, T, V^. For the lines
drawn from the center to the circumference of each circle are equal, and the
line aW is equal to the line aZ. But the line aP is proved equal to the line
aQ, which is the half of the whole QY. Therefore the residue aY is equal to
the foresaid lines aP, aQ etc. Wherefore making the center the point a, and the
space one of those lines aQ, aP, etc. extend the superficies of a sphere, and
it shall touch the 12. angles of the Icosahedron, which are at the points O, L,
M. N, X, P, K, S, T, V, Q, Y: which sphere is described, if upon the diameter
QY, be drawn a semicircle, and the said semicircle be moved about, till it
return unto the same place from whense it began first to be moved.

A Corollary added by Flussas.
The opposite sides of an Icosahedron are parallels. For the diameters of the
sphere do fall upon the opposite angles of the Icosahedron: as it was manifest
by the right line QY. If therefore there be imagined to be drawn the two
diameters PN, and OM they shall concur in the point F: wherefore the right
lines which join them together, PV, and LN, are in one and the self same
plain superficies, by the 2. of the eleventh. And forasmuch as the alternate
angles at the ends of the diameters are equal (by the 8. of the first): for
the triangles contained under equal semidiamete^s and the side of the
Icosahedron are equiangle: therefore (by the 28. of the first) the lines PV and
LN are paralles.

The 5. Problem. The 17. Proposition. To make a Dodecahedron, and to
comprehend it in the sphere given, wherein were comprehended the foresaid
solides: and to prove that the side of the dodecahedron is an irrational line
of that kind which is called a residuall line.
TAke two plain superficieces or bases of the foresaid cube, First part of
the construction.
which let be the two squares ABCD and CBEF, cutting the one the other in the
line BC perpendicularly according to the nature of a cube. And (by the 10. of
the first) divide every one of the lines AB, BC, CD, DA, OF, EB, and FC into
two equal parts in the points G, H, K, L, M, N, X. And draw these right
lines GK and HL, cutting the one the other in the point P, and likewise draw
the right lines MH and NX cutting the one the other in the point O. And divide
every one of these right lines NO, OX, HP, and LP, by an extreme and mean
proportion in the points R, S, T, ct, and let their greater segments be TO, OS,
TP, and Pct. And (by the 12. of the eleventh) from the points R, O, S, raise up
to the outward part of the plain superficies EBCF of the foresaid cube,
perpendicular lines RV, and OYSZ: and let each of those perpe^dicular lines be
equal to one of these lines TO, OS or TP, which perpendiculars shall be
parallels (by the 6. of the eleventh), and likewise from the points T, P, ct,
raise up unto the outward part of the plain superficies ABCD of the said cube,
these perpendicular lines TW, Pst, and ctl, each of which perpendicular lines
put equal also to the line OS, or OR or TP^ and the said perpendiculars shall be
parallels (by the foresaid 6. of the eleventh)^ And draw these right lines YH,
HW, BW, WC, CZ and CB. The pentagon VBWCZ^ proved equilater.
Now I say that the pentagon figure VBWCZ is equilater and in one and the self
^ame plain superficies, and moreover is equiangle. Draw these right lines TB,
^B, and ^B. And forasmuch as the right line NO is divided by an extreme and
mean proportion in the point R, and his greater segment is the line TO,
therefore the square of the lines NO and NR are treble to the square of the
line TO (by the 4. of this book). But the line ON is equal to the line NB,
and the line OR to the line RV. Wherefore the squares of the lines BN and RN
are treble to the square of the line RV. But unto the squares of the lines BN
and NR is equal the square of the line BR (by the 47. of the first). Wherefore
the square of the line BR is treble to the square of the line RV. Wherefore the
squares of the lines BR and RV are quadruple to the square of the line RV. But
unto the squares of the lines BR and RV is equal the square of the line BV (by
the 47. of the first): for the angle BRV is a right angle (by the 2.
diffinition of the eleventh). Wherefore the square of the line BV is quadruple
to the square of the line VR. Wherefore the line BV is double to the line RV
(by the Corollary of the 20. of the sixth). And the line ZV is also double to
the line RV (for The lin^ SR is equal and parallel to the line ZV (by the 33.
of the first) for they join together equal and parallel lines, and are in the
same su^e^ficies with them, by the 7. of the eleventh.
that the line SR is double to the line OR, that is, to the line RV which is
equal to the line OS). Wherefore the line BV is equal to the line VZ. And
forasmuch as the two lines BN and NR are equal to the two lines BH and HT,
namely, the wholes and the less segme^ts, and they comprehend right angles,
namely, of the squares, BO, and BP, therefore (by the 4. of the first) the
bases BR and BT are equal. And forasmuch as the lines BR, and BT are equal,
and the two lines RV, and TW are also by construction equal, and the angles
BRV, and BTW are by supposition right angles: therefore again (by the 4. of
the first) the bases BV and BW are equal: but the line BV, is proved equal to
the line VZ. Wherefore the line BW is also equal to the line VZ. In like sort
also may we prove that either of these lines WC, CZ is equal to the same line
VZ. Wherefore the pentagon figure BVZCW is equilater.

The pentagon VBWCR, proved to be in one and the self same plain superficies.
Now I say that it is in one and the self same plain super^icies. Forasmuch as
the line ZV is a parallel to the line SR (as was before proved) but unto the
same line SR, is the line CB a parallel (by the 28. of the first). Wherefore
(by the 9. of the eleventh) the line VZ is a parallel to the line CB.
Wherefore, by the seventh of the eleventh, the right lines which join the^
together are in the self same plain wherein are the parallel lines.
Wherefore the Trapesium BVZC is in one plain. And the triangle BWC is in one
plain (by the 2. of the eleventh). Now to prove that the Trapesium BVZC and
the triangle BWC are in one and the self same plain, we must prove that the
right lines YH, and HW are made directly one right line: which thing is thus
proved. Forasmuch as the line HP is divided by an extreme and mean proportion
in the point T, and his greater segment is the line PT, therefore as the line
HP is to the line PT, so is the line PT to the line TH. But the line HP is
equal to the line HO, and the line PT to either of these lines TW and OY.
Wherefore as the line HO is to the line OY, so is the line WITH to the line TH.
But the lines HO and TW being sides of like proportion are parallels (by the 6.
of the eleventh): (For either of them is erected perpendicularly to the plain
superficies BD)^ and the lines TH and OY are parallels, which are also sides of
like proportion, by the same 6. of the eleventh, (For either of them is also
erected perpendicularly to the plain superficies BF.) But when there are two
triangles, having two sides proportional to two sides, so set upon one angle,
that their sides of like proportion are also parallels (as the triangles YOH
and HTW are)^ whose two sides, OH and HT, being in the two bases of the cube
making an angle at the point H, the sides remaining of those triangles shall (by
the 32. of the sixth) be in one right line. Wherefore the lines YH and HW make
both one right line. But every right line is (by the 3. of the eleventh) in one
and the self same plain superficies. Wherefore if ye draw a right line from B
to Y, there shall be made a triangle BWY, which shall be in one and the self same
plain (by the 2. of the eleventh). And therefore the whole pentagon figure
VBWCZ is in one and the self same plain superficies.

Now also I say that it is equiangle. The pentagon VBWCZ, it proved equiangle.
For forasmuch as the right line NO is divided by an extreme and mean
proportion in the point R, and his greater segment is OR, therefore as both the
lines NO and OR added together is to the line ON, so (by the 5. of this book)
is the line ON to the line OR. But the line OR is equal to the line OS.
Wherefore as the line SN is to the line NO, so is the line NO to the line OS.
Wherefore the line SN is divided by an extreme and mean proportion in the point
O, and his greater segment is the line NO. Wherefore the squares of the lines
NS and SO are treble to the square of the line NO (by the 4. of this book).
But the line NO is equal to the NB, and the line SO to the line SZ: wherefore
the squares of the lines NS and ZS are treble to the square of the line NB:
wherefore the squares of the lines ZS, SN and NB, are quadruple to the square of
the line NB. But unto the squares of the lines SN and NB (by the 47. of the
first) is equal the square of the line SB: wherefore the squares of the lines
BS and SZ, that is, the square of the line BZ, by the 47. of the first, (for
the angle ZSB is a right angle by positio^) is quadruple to the square of the
line NB. Wherefore the line BZ is double to the line BN (by the Corollary of the
20. of the sixth). But the line BC is also double to the line BN. Wherefore the
line BZ is equal to the line BC. Now forasmuch as these two lines BV and VZ
are equal to these two lines BW and WC, and the base BZ is equal to the base
BC, therefore (by the 8. of the first) the angle BVZ is equal to the angle
BWC. And in like sort (by the 8. of the first) may we prove that the angle VZC
is equal to the angle BWC (proving first that the lines CB and CV are equal:
which are proved equal by this, that the line NS is equal to the line XR, and
therefore the line CR is equal to the line BS, by the 47. of the first: wherefore
also by the same ye line CV is equal to the line BZ, that is, to the line BC
(for the lines BC and BZ are proved equal.) Wherefore the three angles BWC,
BVZ, and VZC are equal the one to the other. But if in an equilater pentagon
figure there be three angles equal the one to the other, the pentagon is (by
the 7. of the thirte^th) equiangle: wherefore the pentagon BVZCW is equiangle.
And it is also proved that it is equilater. Wherefore the pentagon BVZCW is both
equilater and equiangle. And it is made upon one of the sides of the cube,
namely, upon BC. Look for a farther construction after Flussas at the end of
the demonstration.
If therefore upon every one of the twelve sides of the cube be used the like
construction, there shall then be made a dodecahedron contained under twelve
pentagons equilater and equiangle.

Now it is required to comprehend it in the sphere given, and to prove that the
side of the dodecahedron is an irrational line of that kind which is called a
residuall line. Extend the line YO, and let the line extended be YQ: now then
the line YQ shall light upon the diameter of the cube, and shall divide the
one the other into two equal parts. That the dodecahedron is contained in the
sphere given.
For this is manifest to se by the 39. of the eleventh. (For if by the two
lines NX and MH be drawn two playnes perpendicularly to the bases, and cutting
the cube, the common section of those playnes shall be the line YO produced: for
their common section is from the point O erected perpendicularly to the plain
EBCF, by the 19. of the eleventh). Let them cut the one the other in the point
Q: wherefore Q is the center of the sphere which comprehends the cube, and YQ
is the half diameter of the sphere by that which was demo^strated in the 15.
of this book: wherefore the right lines drawn from the center Q to all the
angles of the cube shall be equal. And draw a right line from the point V to the
point Q. Now forasmuch as the right line NS i^ divided by an extreme and mean
proportion in the point O, and his greater segment is the line NO, as has
before ben proved, therefore the squares of the lines NS and SO are treble to
the square of the line NO, by the 4. of this book. But the line NS is equal to
the line YQ (for the line NO is equal to the line OQ as has before ben proved,
and the line YO to the line OS) being both less segmentes: but the line OS is
equal to the line TV, for the line TO is equal thereunto: wherefore the
squares of the lines QY and YV are treble to the square of the line NO. But
unto the squares of the lines QY and YV the square of the line VQ is equal (by
the 47. of the first): wherefore the square of the line VQ is treble to the
square of the line NO. But the semidiameter of the sphere co^prehe^ding the
said cube is in power treble to the half of the side of the cube. For we have
before (in the 15. of this book) taught how to make a cube, and to comprehend
it in a sphere, and have proved that the diameter of the sphere is in power
treble to the side of the cube. Now in what proportion ye whole is to the
whole, in the same is the half to the half (by the 15. of the fifth). But the
line NO is the half of the side of the cube. Wherefore the line VQ is equal to
the semidiameter of the sphere co^prehe^ding the cube. But the point Q is the
center of the sphere co^prehending the cube. Wherefore the point V, which is
one of the angles of the dodecahedron, touches the superficies of the sphere
given. In like sort also may we prove, that every one of the rest of the angles
of the dodecahedron touches the superficies of the sphere. Wherefore the
dodecahedron is comprehended in the sphere given.

Now I say, that the side of the dodecahedron is an irrational line of that
kind which is called a residuall line. That the side of the dodecahedron is a
residuall line.
For forasmuch as the line NO is divided by an extreme and mean proportion in
the point R, and his greater segment is the line OR, and the line OX is also
divided by an extreme and mean proportion in the point S, and his greater
segment is the line OS. Wherefore the whole line NX is divided by an extreme
and mean proportion, and his greater segment is the line RS. (For for that as
the line ON is to the line OR, so is the line OR to the line NR, and in the
same proportion also are their doubles (for the parts of equemultiplices have
one and the self same proportion with the whole, by the 15. of the fifth).
Wherefore as the line NX is to the line RS, so is the line RS to both the lines
NR and SX added together. But the line NX is greater then the line RS, by both
the lines NR and SX added together. Wherefore the line NX is divided by an
extreme and mean proportion, and his greater segment is the line RS. But the
line RS is equal to the line VZ, as has before been proved. Wherefore the
line NX is divided by an extreme and mean proportion, and his greater segment
is the line VZ. And forasmuch as the diameter of the Sphere is rational, and
is in power treble to the side of the cube, by the 15. of this book, therefore
the line NX, being the side of the cube, is rational. But if a rational line
be divided by an extreme and mean proportion, either of the segmentes is (by
the 6. of this book) an irrational line of that kind which is called a
residuall line. Wherefore the line VZ being the side of the dodecahedron, is an
irrational line of that kind which is called a residuall line. Wherefore there
is made a dodecahedron, and it is comprehended in the Sphere given, wherein the
other solides were contained, and it is proved that the side of the
dodecahedron is a residuall line: which was required to be done, and also to be
proved.

Corollary.
Hereby it is manifest, that the side of a cube being divided by an extreme and
mean proportion, the greater segment thereof is the side of the dodecahedron.
As it was manifest by the line VZ which was proved to be the greater segment of
the right line NX, namely, of the side of the cube.

A further construction of the dodecahedron after Flussas.
Forasmuch as it has been proved that the pentagon BVZCW is equilater and
equiangle and touches one of the sides of the cube. Draw in the former figure
these lines, ctA, ctL, c^D.
Let us show also by what means upon each of the 12. sides of the cube may in
like sort be applied pentagons joining one to the other, and composing the 12.
bases of the dodecahedron. Draw in the former figure these right lines AI, ID,
IL, ctK. Now forasmuch as the line PL was in the point ct divided like unto the
lines PH, ON. or OX, and upon the points T, P, ct, were erected perpendicular
lines equal unto the line OY, and the rest: namely, unto the greater segme^t:
and the lines T W and ct I were proved parallels, therefore the lines WI and
Tct are parallels, by the 7. of the eleventh, and 33. of the first. Wherefore
also, by the 9. of the eleventh, the lines WI and DC are parallels. Wherefore
by the 7. of the eleventh CWID is a plain superficies. And the triangle AID is
a plain superficies, by the 2. of the eleventh. Now it is manifest that the
right lines ID, and IA are equal to the right line WC. For the right lines AL
and ^ct (which are equal to the right lines BH, and HT) do make the subte^ded
lines A ct and BT equal by the 4. of the first. And again forasmuch as the
lines BT and TW contain a right angle BTW, as also do the right lines Act and
ctI contain the right angle ActI (for the right lines WITH, and Ict are erected
perpendicularly unto one and the self same plain ABCD by supposition). And
the squares of the lines BT and TW are equal to the squares of the lines Act,
and ctI (for it is proved that the line BT is equal to the line Act, and the
line TW to the line ctI). And unto the squares of the lines BT and TW is equal
the square of the line BW, by the 47. of the first: likewise by the same unto
the squares of the lines Act and ctI is equal the square of the line AI.
Wherefore the square of the line BW is equal to the square of the line AI,
wherefore also the line BT is equal to the line AI. And by the same reason are
the lines ID and WC equal to the same lines. Now forasmuch as the lines AI and
ID, and the lines AL and LD are equal, and the base IL is common to them both,
the angles ALI and DLI shall be equal, by the 8. of the first: and therefore
they are right angles, by the 10. diffinition of the first. And by the same
reason are the angles WHB, and WHC right angles. And forasmuch as the two lines
HT and TW are equal to the two lines Lct and ctI, and they contain equal
angles, that is, right angles by supposition, therefore the angles WHT, and
ILct, are equal by the 4. of the first. Wherefore the plain superficies AID
is in like sort inclined to the plain superficies ABCD, as the plain
superficies BWC is inclined to the same plain ABCD, by the 4. diffinition of
the eleventh. In like sort may we prove that the plain WCDI is in like sort
inclined to the plain ABCD, as the plain BVZC is to the plain EBCF. For that
in the triangles YOH and ctPK which consist of equal sides (each to his
correspondent side), the angles YHO, and ctKP, which are the angles of the
inclination, are equal. And now if the right line ctK be extended to the point
a, and the pentagon CWIDa be made perfect, we may, by the same reason, prove
that that plain is equiangle and equilater, that we proved the pentagon BVZCW
to be equaliter and equiangle. And likewise if the other playnes BWIA and AID
be made perfect, they may be proved to be equal and like pentagons and in like
sort situate, and they are set upon these common right lines BW, WC, WI, AI,
and ID. And observing this method, there shall upon every one of the 12. ^id^s
of the cube be set every one of the 12. pentagons which compose the
dodecahedron.

Certain Corollaryes added by Flussas.
First Corollary.
The side of a cube, is equal to the right line which subtendeth the angle of
the pentagon of a dodecahedron contained in one and the self same sphere with
the cube.

For the angles BWC and AID, are subtended of the lines BC and AD. Which are
sides of the Cube^

Second Corollary.
In a dodecahedron there are six sides every two of which are parallels and
opposite, whose sections into two equal parts, are coupled by three right
lines, which in the center of the sphere which contains the dodecahedron,
divide into two equal parts and perpendicularly both them selves and also the
sides.

For upon the six bases of the cube are set six sides of the dodecahedron, as
it has been proved (by the lines ZV, WI etc.) which are cut into two equal
parts by right lines, which join together the centers of the bases of the
cube, as the line YO produced, and the other like. Which lines coupling
together the centers of the bases are three in number, cutting the one the
other perpendicularly (for they are parallels to the sides of the cube) and
they cut the one the other into two equal parts in the center of the sphere
which contains the cube (by that which was demonstrated in the 15. of this
book). And unto these equal lines, joining together the centers of the bases
of the cube, are without the bases added equal parts OY, P ct, and the other
like, which by supposition are equal to half of the side of the dodecahedron.
Wherefore the whole lines, which join together the sectoins of the opposite
sides of the dodecahedron, are equal, and they cut those sides into two equal
parts and perpendicularly.

Third Corollary.
A right line joining together the points of the sections of the opposite sides
of the dodecahedron into two equal parts, being divided by an extreme and
mean proportion: the greater segment thereof shall be the side of the cube, and
the less segment the side of the dodecahedron contained in the self same
sphere.

For it was proved that the right line YQ is divided by an extreme and mean
proportion in the point O, and that his greater segment OQ is half the side of
the cube, and his less segment OY is half of the side VZ (which is the side
of the dodecahedron). Wherefore it follows (by the 15. of the fifth) that
their doubles are in the same proportion. Wherefore the double of the line YQ
which joins the point opposite unto the line Y, is the whole: and the greater
segment is the double of the line OQ which is the side of the cube: and the
less segment is the double of the line YO, which is equal to the side of the
dodecahedron, namely, to the side VZ.

The 6. Problem. The 18. Proposition. To find out the sides of the foresaid
five bodies, and to compare them together.
TAke the diameter of the Sphere given, and let the same be AB, and divide it
in the point C, so that let the line AC be equal to CB, by the 10. of the
first: and in the point D, so that let AD be double to DB, by the 9. of the
sixth. And upon the line AB describe a semicircle AEB. And from the points C
and D, raise up (by the 11. of the first) unto the line AB perpendicular lines
CE and DF. And draw these right lines AF, FB, and BE. Now forasmuch as the line
AD is double to the line DB, therefore the line AB is treble to the line DB.
Wherefore the line BA is sesquialter to the line AD (for it is as 3. to 2.).
But as the line BA is to the line AD, so is the square of the line BA to the
square of the line AF (by the 6. of the sixth, or by the Corollary of the same,
and by the Corollary of the 20. of the same): for the triangle AFB is equiangle
to the triangle AFD. Wherefore the square of the line BA is sesquialter to the
square of the line AF. But the diameter of a sphere is in power sesquialter to
the sid^ of the pyramid, The side of a pyramid.
by the 13. of this book, and the line AB is the diameter of the sphere.
Wherefore the line AF is equal to the side of the pyramid.

Again forasmuch as the line AB is treble to the line BD: but as the line AB
is to the line BD, so is the square of the line AB to the square of the line
FB, by the Corollaries of the 8. and 20. of the sixth. Where^ore the square of
the line AB is treble to the square of the line FB. But the diameter o^ a
sphere is in power treble to the side of the cube (by the 15. of this book)
and the diameter of the sphere is the line AB. Wherefore the line BF is the
side of the cube. The side of a cube.


And forasmuch as the line AC is equal to the line CB, therefore the line AB
is double to the line CB. But as the line AB is to the line CB, so is the
square of the line AB to the square of the line BE (by the former Corollaries):
Therefore the square of the line AB is double to the square of the line BE. But
the diameter of the sphere is in power double to the side of the octohedron,
The side of ^^ octohedron.
and AB is the diameter of the sphere given: wherefore the line BE is the side
of the octohedron. Raise up (by the 11. of the first) from the point A unto the
right line AB a perpendicular line AG. And put the line AG equal to the line
AB. And draw a right line from the point G to the point C. And let the line GC
cut the circumference in the point H. And (by the 12. of the first) from the
point H draw unto the line AB a perpendicular line HK. Now forasmuch as the
line GA is double to the line AC (for GA is equal to AB). But as GA is to AC,
so is HK to KC (by the 28. of the first, and Corollary of the 2. of the sixth):
wherefore the line HK is double to the line KC. Wherefore the square of the
line HK is quadruple to the square of the line KC, by the Corollary of the 20.
of the sixth. Wherefore the squares of the lines HK and KC, which are all one
with the square of the line HC, by the 47. of the first, is quintuple to the
square of the line KC. But the line HC is equal to the line CB, by the
definition of a circle. Wherefore the square of the line BC is quintuple to the
square of the line CK. And forasmuch as the line AB is double to the line BC,
of which the line AD is double to the line DB. Wherefore the residue, namely,
BD, is double to the residue, namely, to DC (by the 19. of the fifth).
Wherefore the line BC is treble to the line CD. Wherefore the square of the
line BC is nonecuple to the square of the line CD, by the Corollary of the 20.
of the sixth. But the square of BC is only quintuple to the square of CK.
Wherefore the square of CK is greater the^ the square of CD, by the 10. of the
fifth. Wherefore also the line CK is greater then the line DC. Unto the line CK
put (by the 2. of the first) an equal line CL. And from the point L raise up
unto the line AB a perpendicular line LM. And draw a right line from the point
M to the point B. Now forasmuch as the square of the line CB is quintuple to
the square of the line CK, and the line AB is double to the line BC, and the
line KL is double to the line CK: therefore the square of the line AB is
quintuple to the square of the line KL, by the 15. of the fifth. But the
diameter of a sphere is in power quintuple to the line which is drawn from the
center of the circle to the circumference on which the Icosahedron is
described, by the Corollary of the 16. of the sixth. And the line AB is the
diameter of the sphere: wherefore the line KL is the semidiameter of the circle
on which the Icosahedron is described. Wherefore the line KL is the side of an
hexagon figure described in the same circle, by the Corollary of the 15. of the
fourth. And forasmuch as the diameter of the sphere is made of the side an
hexagon figure, and of two sides of a decagon being (...) of them described in
one and the self same circle (by the Corollary of the 16. of this book): and
the line AB is the diameter of the sphere, and the line KL is the side of the
hexagon, and the line AK is equal to the line LB: wherefore either of the
lines AK and LB is the side of a decagon described in the circle on which the
Icosahedron is described (that is, in the circle whose semidiameter is the line
KL). And forasmuch as the line LB is the side of a decagon, and the line ML of
an hexagon (for ML is equal to KL, for that it is equal to KH, by the 14. of
the third, for they are equally distant from the center, and each of the lines
HK and KL is double to KC). Wherefore the line M B is the side of a pentagon,
by the 10. of this book. But the side of the pentagon is also the side of the
Icosahedron, The side of an Icosahedron.
by that which was demonstrated in the 10^ of this book. Wherefore the line MB
is the side of an Icosahedron.

And forasmuch as the line FB is the side of a cube, let it be divided by an
extreme and mean proportion in the point N, and let the greater segment thereof
be NB. Wherefore the line NB is the side of a Dodecahedron, The sides of a
dodecahedron.
by the Corollary of the 17. of this book.

Comparison of the five sides of the foresaid bodies.
And forasmuch as it has been proved, by the 13. of this book, that the
diameter of the sphere is in power sesquialter to AF the side of the pyramid,
and is in power double to BE the side of the octohedron, by the 14. of the
same, and is in power treble to FB the side of the cube, by the 15. of the
same. Wherefore it follows, that of what parts the diameter of the sphere
contains six, of such parts the side of the pyramid contains four: and
the side of the octohedron three: and the side of the cube two. Wherefore the
side of the pyramid is in power to the side of the octohedron in sesquitertia
proportion: and is in power to the side of the cube in double proportion. And
the side of the octohedron is in power to the side of the cube in sesquialtera
proportion. Where^ore the ^oresaid sides of the three figures, that is, of the
pyramid, of the octohedron, and o^ the cube, are the one to the other in
rational proportions. Wherefore they are rational. But the other two sides,
namely, the sides of the Icosahedron and of the Dodecahedron, are neither the
one to the other, nor also to the foresaid sides, in rational proportions: ^or
they are irrational lines, namely, a less line, and a residuall line.

The side of the Ico^a^edron proved ^reater then the side o^ the dodecahedron.
But that M^ the side of the I^^sah^dron is greater then NB the side of the
Dodecahedron may thus be proved. Forasmuch a^ the triangle FDB is equiangle to
the triangle FAB, by the 8. of the sixth, therefore proportionally, as the line
BD is to the line B F, so is the line BF to the line BA. And forasmuch as there
are three right lines proportional, therefor as the first is to the third, so
is the square made of the first to the square made of the second, by the
Corollary of the 20. of the sixth. Wherefore as the line DB is to the line BA, so
is the square of the line DB to the square of the line BF. Wherefore (by
conversion, by the Corollary of the 4. of the fiueth) as the line AB is to the
line BD, so is the square of the line FB to the square of the line B D. But the
line AB is treble to the line BD, as has before been proved. Wherefore the
square of the line FB is treble to the square of the line BD. But the square of
the line AD is quadruple to the square of the line DB, by the Corollary of the
20. of the sixth, for the line AD is double to the line DB. Wherefore the square
of the line AD is greater then the square of the line FB, by the 10. of the
^ift. Wherefore also the line AD is greater then the line FB. Wherefore the
line AL is much greater then the line FB. And the line AL being divided by an
extreme and mean proportion, his greater segment is the line KL, by the 9. of
this book: (for the line LK is the side of an hexagon, and the line KA is the
side of a decagon inscribed in one and the same circle, as has before been
proved): and the line FB being divided by an extreme and mean proportion, his
greater segment is NB. Wherefore the line KL is greater then the line NB. (
This Assumpt is afterward proved in the 14. book^ and 4. proposition.
For two lines divided by an extreme and mean proportion, are every way like
proportional). But the line KL is equal to the line LM. Wherefore the line LM
is greater then the line NB. But the line MB is greater then the line LM.
Wherefore the line MB being the side of the Icosahedron, is much greater then
the line NB being the side of the Dodecahedron: which was required to be done,
and to be proved.

An other way to prove that the line MB is greater then the line NB. An other
demo^monstration to prove that the side of the Icosahedro^ is greater then the
side of the dodecahedron.
Forasmuch as the line AD is double to the line DB, therefore the line AB is
treble to the line DB. But as AB is to BD, so is the square of the line AB to
the square of the line BF, by the 8. of the sixth (for the triangle FAB is
equiangle to the triangle FDB). Wherefore the square of the line AB is treble
to the square of the line BF. And it is before proved, that the square of the
line AB is quintuple to the square of the line KL. Wherefore five squares made
of the line KL, are equal to three squares made of the line FB. But three
squares made of the line FB, are greater then six squares made of the line NB,
as is straight way proved. Wherefore five squares made of the line KL, are
greater then six squares made of the line NB. Wherefore also one square made of
the line KL, is greater then one square made of the line NB. Wherefore the line
KL is greater then the line NB. But the line KL is equal to the line LM.
Wherefore the line LM is greater then the line NB. Wherefore the line MB is
much greater then the line NB: which was required to be proved.

But now let us prove that three squares made of the line FB, That 3. squares
of the line FB are greater the^ 6. squares of the line NB.
are greater then six squares made of the line NB. Forasmuch as the line BN is
greater then the line NF, for it is the greater segment of the line BF divided
by an extreme and mean proportion, therefore that which is contained under the
lines BF, and BN, is greater then that which is contained under the lines BF
and FN, by the 1. of the sixth. Wherefore that which is contained under the
lines BF and BN, together with that which is contained under the lines BF and
FN, is greater then that which is contained under the lines BF and FN twice.
But that which is contained under the lines BF and FN; together with that which
is contained under the lines BF and BN, is the square of the line BF, by the 2.
of the second, and that which is contained under the lines BF and FN once, is
equal to the square of NB. For the line FB is divided by an extreme and mean
proportion in the point N: (and (by the 17. of the sixth) that which is
contained under the extremes, is equal to the square made of the middle line).
Wherefore the square of the line FB, is greater then the double of the square
of the line BN. Wherefore one of the squares made of the line BF, is greater
then two squares made of the line BN. Wherefore also three squares made of the
line FB, are greater then six squares made of the line BN: which was required
to be proved.

A Corollary.
Now also I say that besides the five foresaid solides there can not be
described any other solid co^prehe^ded under figures equilater and equiangle
the one to the other. That there can be no other solid besides these five,
contained under equilater and equiangle bases.
For of two triangles, or of any two other plain superficieces can not be made
a solid angle (for, that is contrary to the diffinition of a solid angle).
Under three triangles is contained the solid angle of a pyramid: under four,
the solid angle of an octohedro^: under five, the solid angle of an
Icosahedro^: of six, equilater and equiangle triangles set to one point can
not be made a solid angle. For forasmuch as the angle of an equilater triangle
is two third parts of a right angle, the six angles of the solid shall be
equal to four right angles, which is impossible. For every solid angle is
(by the 21. of the eleue^th) contained under plain angles less the^ four
right angles. And by the same reason can not be made a solid angle contained
under more the^ six plain superficial angles of equilater triangles. Under
three squares is contained the angle of a cube. Under four squares it is
impossible that a solid angle should be contained: for then again it should
be contained under four right angles. Wherefore much less can any solid
angle be contained under more squares then four. Under three equilater and
equiangle pentagons is contained the solid angle of a dodecahedron. But under
four it is impossible. For forasmuch as the angle of a pentagon is a right
angle and the fifth part more of a right angle, the four angles shall be greater
then four right angles: which is impossible. And therefore much less can a
solid angle be composed of more pentagons then four. Neither can a solid
angle be contained under any other equilater and equiangle figures of many
angles, for that that also should be absurd. For the more the sides increase,
the greater are the angles which they contain, and therefore the farther of are
the superficial angles contained of those sides from composing of a solid
angle. Wherefore besides the foresaid five figures there can not be made any
solid figure contained under equal sides and equal angles: which was
required to be proved.

An Assumpt.
But now that the angle of an equilater and equiangle pentagon is a right angle
and a fi^th part more of a right angle, may thus be proved. Suppose that ABCDE
be an equilater and equiangle pentagon. That the angle of an equilater and
equiangle Pentagon is one right angle and a (...) part (...) which thing was
also before proved in the (...) of the 32. of the first.
And (by the 14. of the fourth) describe about it a circle ABCDE. And take (by
the 1. of the third) the center thereof, and let the same be F. And draw these
right lines FA, FB, FC, FD, FE. Wherefore those lines do divide the angles of
the pentagon into two equal parts in the points A, B, C, D, E, by the 4. of
the first. And ^orasmuch as the five angles that are at the point F a^e equal
to four right angles, by the corollary of the 15. of the first, and they are
equal the one to the other by the 8. of the first: therefore one of those
angles, as ^or example sake, the angle AFB is a fi^th part less then a right
angle. Wherefore the angles remaining, namely, FAB, and ABF, are one right angle
and a fifth part over. But the angle FAB is equal to the angle FBC. Wherefore
the whole angle ABC being one of the angles of the pentagon is a right angle
and a fifth part more then a right angle: which was required to be proved.

A Corollary added by Flussas.
Now, let us teach, how those five solides, have each like inclinations of
their bases.

^i^st let us take a Pyramid, and divide one of the sides thereof into two
equal parts: and from the two angles opposite unto that side, d^aw
perpe^diculars, which shall fall upon the section, by the corollary of the 12.
of the thirtenth, The sides of the angle of the incl^^^tion of the (...) of the
(...) are (...) rational.
and at the said point of division (as may easily be proved). Wherefore they
shall contain the ang^e of the inclination of the plains, by the 4.
diffinition of the eleventh, which angle is subtended of the opposite side of
the pyramid. Now forasmuch as the rest of the angles of the inclination of the
playnes of the Pyramid, are contained under two perpe^dicular lines of the
triangles, and are subtended of the side of the Pyramid, it follows, by the 8.
of the first, that those angles are equal. Wher^fo^e (by the 5. diffinition of
the eleue^th) the superficieces are in like sort inclined the one to the other.

The sides of the angle of the inclination of the (...) ^f the (...).
One of the sides of a Cube being divided into two equal parts, if from the
said section be drawn in two of the bases thereof, two perpendicular lines,
they shall be parallels and equal to the sides of the square which co^tayne a
right angle. And forasmuch as all the angles of the bases of the Cube are right
angles: therefore those perpendiculars falling upon the section of the side
common to the two bases, shall cont^yne a right angle (by the 10. of the
eleventh): which self angle is the angle of inclination (by the 4. diffinition
of the eleventh) and is subtended of the diameter of the base of the Cube. And
by the same reason may we prove that the rest of the angles of the inclination
of the bases of the cube are right angles. Wherefore the inclinations of the
superficieces of the cube the one to the other are equal (by the 5. diffinition
of the eleventh.

In an Octohedron take the diameter which coupleth the two opposite angles.
That the plains of an octohedron are in li^e sort inclined.
And from those opposite angles draw to one and the self same side of the
Octohedron, in two bases thereof, two perpendicular lines, which shall divide
that side into two equal parts and perpendicularly (by the Corollary of the
12. of the thirtenth). Wherefore those perpendiculars shall contain the angle
of the inclination of the bases (by the 4. diffinition of the eleue^th): and
the same angle is subtended of the diameter of the Octohedro^. Wherefore the
rest of the angles after the same manner described in the rest of the bases,
being comprehended and subtended of equal sides, shall (by the 8. of the
first) be equal the one to the other. And therefore the inclinations of the
playnes in the Octohedron, shall (by the 5. diffinition of the eleventh) be
equal.

In an Icosahedron let there be drawn from the angles of two of the bases,
That the plains of an Icosahedron are in like sort inclined.
to one side common to both the said bases perpendiculars, which shall contain
the angle of the inclination of the bases (by the 4. diffinition of the
eleventh): which angle is subtended of the right line which subtendeth the
angle of the pentagon which contains five sides of the Icosahedron, by the
16. of this book: for it coupleth the two opposite angles of the triangles
which are joined together. Wherefore the rest of the angles of the inclination
of the bases being after the same manner found out, they shall be contained under
equal sides, and subtended of equal bases, and therefore (by the 8. of the
first) those angles shall be equal. Wherefore also all the inclinations of the
bases of the Icosahedron the one to the other shalb^ equal, by the 5.
diffinition of the eleventh.

In a Dodecahedron, That the plains of a D^^^^^hedron are (...) like sort
inclined.
from the two opposite angles of two next pentagons draw to their common side
perpendicular lines, passing by the centres of the said pentagons, which shall,
where they fall, divide the side into two equal parts by the 3. of the third.
(For the bases of a Dodecahedron are contained in a circle) And the angle
contayn^d under those perpendicular lines is the inclination of those bases (by
the 4. diffinition of the eleventh). And the foresaid opposite angles are
coupled by a right line equal to the right line which coupleth the opposite
sections into two equal parts of the sides of the dodecahedro^ (by the 33. of
the first). For they couple together the half sids of the dodecahedro^, which
halfes are parallels and equal, by the 3. corollary of the 17. of this book:
which coupling lines also are equal, by the same corollary. Wherefore the
angles being contained of equal perpendicular lines, and subtended of equal
coupling lines, shall (by the 8. of the first) be equal. And they are the
angles of the inclinations. Wherefore the bases of the dodecahedron are in like
sort inclined the one to the other (by the 5. diffinition of the eleventh).

Flussas after this teaches how to know the rationality or irrationality of
the sides of the triangles, which contain the angles of the inclinations of
the superficieces of the foresaid bodies.

In a Pyramid the angle of the inclination is contained under two perp^dicular
lines of the triangles, The sides of the angle of the inclination of the
supe^ficieces of the Tetrahedro^ are proved rational.
and is subtended of the side of the Pyramid Now the side of the pyramid is in
power sesquitertia to the perpendicular line, by the corollary of the 12. of
this book: and therefore the triangle contained of those perpe^dicular lines
and the side of pyramid, has his sides rational and commensurable in power the
one to the other.

Forasmuch as the two sides of a Cube (or right lines equal to them)
subtended under the diameter of one of the bases, The sides of the angle of the
inclination of the superficieces of the cube proved rational.
do make the angle of the inclination: and the diameter of the cube is in
power sesquialter to the diameter of the base, which diameter of the base is in
power double to the side (by the 47. of the first): therefore those lines are
rational and commensurable in power.

In an Octohedron, The sides of the angle etc. of the octohedron proved
rational.
whose two perpendiculars of the bases contain the angle of the inclination of
the Octohedron, which angle also is subtended of the diameter of the
Octohedron, the diameter is in power double to the side of the Octohedron, and
the side is in power sequitertia to the perpe^diclar line, by the 12. of this
book: wherefore the diameter thereof is in power duple superbipartiens tertias
to the perpendicular line. Wherefore also the diameter and the perpe^dicular
line are rational and commensu^able (by the 6. of the tenth.)

As touching an Icosahedron, it was proved in the 16. of this book, that the
side thereof is a less line, when the diameter of the sphere is rational. And
forasmuch as the angle of the inclination of the bases thereof, is contained of
the perpendicular lines of the triangles, and subtended of the right line which
subtendeth the angle of the Pentagon which contains five sides of the
Icosahedron: and unto the perpendicular lines the side is commensurable
(namely, is in power sesquitertia unto them, by the Corollary of the 12. of
this book): therefore the perpendicular lines which contain the angles are
irrational lines, namely, less lines (by the 105. of the tenth book.) And
forasmuch as the diameter contains in power both the side of the Icosahedron,
and the line which subtendeth the foresaid angle, if from the power of the
diameter which is rational, be taken away the power of the side of the
Icosahedron which is irrational, it is manifest that the residue which is the
power of the subtending line shall be irrational. For if it should be
rational, the number which measures the whole power of the diameter, and the
part taken away of the subtending line, should also, by the 4. common sentence
of the seventh measure the residue, namely, the power of the side: The sides of
the angle etc. of the Icosahedron proved irratio^all.
which is irrational for that it is a less line, which were absurd. Wherefore
it is manifest that the right lines which compose the angle of the inclination
of the bases of the Icosahedron are Irrational lines. For the subtending line
has to the line contayninge, a greater proportion, then the whole has to the
greater segment.

The angle of the inclination of the bases of a dodecahedron, is contained
under two perpendiculars of the bases of the dodecahedron, and is subtended of
that right line, whose greater segment is the side of a Cube inscribed in the
dodecahedron, which right line is equal to the line which coupleth the
sections, into two equal parts, of the opposite sides of the dodecahedron. And
this coupling line we say is an irrational line, for that the diameter of the
sphere contains in power both the coupling line, and the side of the
dodecahedron: but the side of the dodecahedron is an irrational line, namely,
a residuall line (by the 17. of this book). Wherefore the residue namely, the
coupling line is an irrational line, as it is ^asy to prove by the 4. common
sentence of the seventh. And that the perpe^dicular lines which contain the
angle of the inclination are irrational, is thus proved.

Suppose that there be a Pentagon ABCDE, and draw in it the perpendicular line,
AG, and let the line subtending the angle of the pentagon be AC. Now forasmuch
as the right line AC is the side of the cube, and CD the side the Dodecahedron
inscribed in one and the self same sphere, by the 2. Corollary of the 17. of
this book: but the line AC is commensurable to the diameter of the sphere, by
the 15. of this book, and is therefore rational, by the 6. diffinitio^ of the
tenth: and the right line CD which is the side of the dodecahedron is
irrational (by the 17. of this book). Wherefore the line CG which is the half
of the line CD is irrational by the 103. of the 10. book. And the right line
AC contains in power the two right lines AG and GC (by the 47. of the first).
If therefore from the power of the right line AC being rational, be taken away
the power of the line CG being irrational, the power remaining, namely, ^he
power of the line AG, shall of necessity be irrational. For if the power of
the line AG taken away should be rational, and the whole power of the line AC
is rational, the residue, namely, the power of the line CG should be also
rational, and should be measured by the self same numbers, by the 4. common
sentence of the seventh. But it is proved that the line CG is irrational, for
it is the half of the whole residuall line CD (by the 17. of the thirtenth):
which is impossible. Wherefore the perpendicular line AG is irrational.
Wherefore the angle of the inclination of the dodecahedron, which is contained
under two perpendicular lines of the pentagon, and is subtended of a right
line, The sides of the angle etc. of the dodecahedro^ proved irrational.
which coupleth the sections into two equal parts of the opposite sides of the
dodecahedron (by the 2. corollary of the 18. of this book) which line we have
proved to be irrational (for that it is equal to the two lines AC, and CD by
the 4. corollary of the 17. of this book) is contained under irrational right
lines.

By the proportion of the subtending line (of the foresaid angles of
inclination) to the lines which contain the angle, is found out the obliquitie
of the angle. How to know whether the angle of the inclination be a right
angle, an acute angle, or an oblique angle.
For if the subtending line be in power double to the line which contains the
angle, then is the angle a right angle (by the 48. of the first,) But if it be
in power less then the double it is an acute angle (by the 23. of the second).
But if it be in power more then the double, or have a greater proportion then
the whole has to the greater segme^t^ the angle shall be an obtuse angle (by the
12. of the second and 4. of the thirtenth). By which may be proved that the
square of the whole is greater then the double of the square of the greater
segment.

This is to be noted that that which Flussas has here taught touching the
inclinations of the bases of the ^iue regular bodies, Hypsicles teaches after
the 5 proposition of the 15. book. Where he confesses, that he received it of
one Isidorus, and seking to make the matter more clear, he endeavored himself
to declare, that the angles of the inclination of the solides are given, and
that they are either acute or obtuse, according to the nature of the solid:
although ^uclid^ in all his 15. books has not yet showed, what a thing given
is. Wherefore Flussas framing his demo^stration upon an other ground proceeds
after an other manner, which seems more plain, and more aptly hereto be placed
then there. Albeit the reader in that place shall not be frustrate of his also.

The end of the thirtenth Book of Euclides Elements.
The fourtenth book of Euclides Elements.
IN this book, which is commonly accounted the 14. book of Euclide is more at
large entreated of our principal purpose: The argument of the fourtenth book.
namely, of the comparison and proportion of the five regular bodies
(customably called the 5. figures or forms of Pythagoras) the one to the
other, and also of their sides together, each to other: which things are of
most secret use, and inestimable pleasure, and commodity to such as diligently
search for them, and attain unto them. Which things also undoubtedly for the
woorthines and hardness thereof (for things of most price are most hardest)
were first searched, and found out of Philosophers, not of the inferior or
mean sort, but of the depest and most grounded Philosophers, and best
exercised in Geometry. And albeit this book with the book following, namely,
the 15. book, has been hitherto of all men for the most part, and is also at
this day numbered and accounted amongst Euclides books, and supposed to be two
of his, namely, the 14. and 15. in order: as all exemplars (not only new and
lately set abroad, but also old monumentes written by hand) do manifestly
witness: yet it is thought by the best learned in these days, that these two
books are none of Euclides, but of some other author, no less worthy, nor of
less estimation and authority, notwithstanding, then Euclide. Apollonius a
man of deep knowledge a great Philosopher and in Geometry marvelous (whose
wonderful books written of the sections of cones, which exercise and occupy
thewittes of the wisest and best learned, are yet remaining) is thought, and
that not without just cause, to be the author of them, or as some think
Hypsicles him self. For what can be more plainly, then that which he him
self witnesses in the preface of this book. Basilides of Tire (says
Hypsicles) and my father together, scanning, and peysing a writing or books of
Apollonius, which was of the comparison of a dodecahedron to an Icosahedron
inscribed in one and the self same sphere, and what proportion these figures
had the one to the other, found that Apollonius had failed in this matter. But
afterward (says he) I found an other copy or book of Apollonius, wherein the
demonstration of that matter was full and perfect, and showed it unto them,
whereat they much reioysed. By which words it seems to be manifest that
Apollonius was the first author of this book, which was afterward set forth by
Hypsicles. For so his own words after in the same preface seem to import.

The Preface of Hypsicles before the fourtenth book.
Friend Protarchus, when that Basilides of Tire came into Alexandria, having
familiar friendship with my father by reason of his knowledge in the
mathematical sciences, he remained with him a long time, yea even all the time
of the pestilence. And sometime reasoning between themselves of that which
Apollonius had written touching the comparison of a dodecahedron and of an
Icosahedron inscribed in one and the self same sphere, what proportion such
bodies have the one to the other, they judged that Apollonius had somewhat
erred therein. Wherefore they (as my father declared unto me) diligently
weighing it, wrote it perfectly. Howbeit afterward I happened to find an other
book written of Apollonius, which contained in it the right demonstration of
that which they sought for: which when they saw, they much reioysed. As for
that which Apollonius wrote, may be seen of all men, for that it is in ^uery
man's hand. And that which was of us more diligently afterward written again, I
thought good to send and dedicate unto you, as to one whom I thought worthy
commendation, both for that deep knowledge which I know you have in all kinds
of learning, and chiefly in Geometry, so that you are able redily to judge of
those things which are spoken, and also for the great love and good will
which you bear toward my father and me. Wherefore vouchsafe gently to accept
this, which I send unto you. But now is it time to end our preface, and to
begin the matter.

The 1. Theoreme. The 1. Proposition. First proposition after Flussas.
A perpendicular line drawn from the center of a circle to the side of a
Pentagon described in the same circle: is the half of these two lines, namely,
of the side of an hexagon figure, and of the side of a decagon figure being
both described in the self same circle.
SVppose that the circle be ABC. Construction.
And let the side of an equilater Pentagon described in the circle ABC, be BC.
And (by the 1. of the third) take the center of the circle, and let the same be
D. And (by the 12. of the first) from the point D draw unto the line BC a
perpendicular line DE. And extend the right line DE directly to the point F.
Then I say, that the line DE (which is drawn from the center to BC the side of
the pentagon) is the half of the sides of an hexagon and of a decagon taken
together and described in the same circle. Draw these right lines DC and CF.
And unto the line OF put an equal line GE. And draw a right line from the
point G to the point C. Demonstration.
Now forasmuch as the circumference of the whole circle is quintuple to the
circu^ference BFC (which is subtended of the side of the pentagon) and the
circumference ACF is the half of the circumference of the whole circle, and
the circumference CF (which is subtended of the side of the decagon) is the
half of the circumference BCF: therefore the circumference ACF is quintuple to
the circumference CF (by the 15. of the ^i^t). Wherefore the circumference AC
is qradruple to the circumference FC. But as the circumference AC is to the
circumference FC, so is the angle ADC to the angle FDC, by the last of the
sixth. Wherefore the angle ADC is quadruple to the angle FDC. But the angle ADC
is double to the angle EFC, by the 20. of the third: Wherefore the angle EFC is
double to the angle GDC. But the angle EFC is equal to the angle EGC, by the
4. of the first. Wherefore the angle EGC is double to the angle EDC. Wherefore
the line DG is equal to the line GC (by the 32. and 6. of the first). But the
line GC is equal to the line CF, by the 4. of the first. Wherefore the line DG
is equal to the line CF. And the line GE is equal to the line OF (by
construction). Wherefore the line DE is equal to the lines OF and FC added
together. Unto the lines OF and FC add the line DE. Wherefore the lines DF and
FC added together, are double to the line DE. But the line DF is equal to the
side of the hexagon: and FC to the side of the decagon. Wherefore the line DE
is the half of the side of the hexagon, and of the side of the decagon being
both added together and described in one and the self same circle.

It is manifest This is manifest by the 12. proposition of the thirtenh book
as Campane well gathers in a Corollary of the same.
by the Propositions of the thirtenth book, that a perpendicular line drawn
from the center of a circle to the side of an equilater triangle described in
the same circle; is half of the semidiameter of the circle. Wherefore by this
Proposition, a perpendicular drawn from the c^ntre of a circle to the side of
a Pentag^n, is equal to the perpendicular drawn from the center to the side
of the triangle, and to half of the side of the decagon described in the same
circle.

The 2. Theoreme. The 2. Proposition. One and the self same circle
comprehends both the Pentagon of a Dodecahedron, and the triangle of an
Icosahedron, The 4. p^pos^tio^ after Flussas.
described in one and the self same Sphere.
THis Theoreme is described of Aristeus in that book whose title is, The
comparison of the five figures, and is described of Apollonius in his second
edition of the comparison of a Dodecahedron to an Icosahedron, which is, This
is afterward proved in the 4. proposition.
that as the super^icies of a Dodecahedro^ is to the superficies of an
Icosahedron, so is the Dodecahedron to an Icosahedron, for that a perpendicular
line drawn from the center of a sphere to the pentagon of a dodecahedron and
to the triangle of an Icosahedron is one and the self same. Now must we also
prove that one and the self same circle comprehends both the pentagon of a
Dodecahedron, and also the triangle of an Icosahedron described in one and the
self same sphere, first this being proved: This Assumpt is the 3. proposition
after Flussas.
If in a circle be described an equilater pentagon, the squares which are made
of the side of the pentagon, and of that right line which is subtended under
two sides of the pentagon, are quintuple to the square of the semidiameter o^
the circle. Suppose that ABC be a circle. Construction of the Assumpt.
And let the side of a pentagon in the circle ABC, be AC. And take (by the 1.
of the third) the center of the circle and let the same be D. And (by the 12.
of the first) from the point D draw unto the line AC a perpendicular line DF.
And extend the line DF on either side to the points B and E. And draw a right
line from the point A to the point B. Now I say, that the squares of the lines
BA and AC are quint^ple to the square of the line DE. Draw a right line from
the point A to the point E. Wherefore the line AE is the side of a decagon
figure. And forasmuch as the line BE is double to the line DE: Demonstration of
the Assumpt.
therefore the square of the line BE is quadruple to the square of DE (by the
20. of the sixth). But unto the square of the line BE, are equal the squares of
the lines BA and AE (by the 47. of the first, for the angle BAE is a right
angle, by the 31. of the third). Wherefore the squares of the lines BA and AE,
are quadruple to the square of the line DE. Wherefore the squares of the lines
AB, AE, and DE, are quintuple to the square of the line DE. But the squares of
the lines DE and AE, are equal to the square of the line AC (by the 10. of the
thirtenth). Wherefore the squares of the lines BA and AC, are quintuple to the
square of the line DE.

This being thus proved, now is to be demonstrated that one and the self same
circle co^prehendeth both the pentagon of a dodecahedron, and the triangle of
an Icosahedron described in one and the self same cir^le. Construction of the
proposition.
Take the diameter of the sphere, and^ let the same be AB. And in the same
sphere describe a dodecahedron, and also an Icosahedron. And let one of the
pe^tagons of the dodecahedron be CDEFG, and let one of the triangles of the
Icosahedron be KLH. Now I say that the semidiameters of the circles which are
described about them are equal, that is, that one and the self same circle
contains both the pentagon CDEFG, and the triangle KLH. Draw a right line
from the point D to the point G. Wherefore the line DG is the side of a cube (by
the corollary of the 17. of the thirte^th). Take a certain right line MN. And
let the square of the line AB be quintuple to the square of the line MN, by the
assumpt put after the 6. proposition of the tenth. But the diameter of a sphere
is in power quintuple to the square of the semidiameter of the circle, on which
is described the Icosahedro^ (by the corollary of the 16. of the thirtenth).
Wherefore the line MN is the semidiameter of the circle on which is described
the Icosahedron. Divide (by the 30. of the sixth) the line MN by an extreme
and mean proportion in the point X. And let the greater segment thereof be MX.
Wherefore the line MX is the side of a decagon described in the same circle (by
the corollary of the 9. of the thirtenth). Demonstration of the ^^op^sition.
And forasmuch as the square of the line AB is quintuple to the square of the
line MN: But the square of the line BA is treble to the square of the line DG
(by the corollary of the 15, of the thirtenth). Wherefore three squares of the
line DG are equal to five squares of the line MN. ^
But as three squares of the line DG are to ^iue squares of the line MN, so are
three squares of the line CG to five squares of the line MX. Wherefore three
squares of ye line CG are equll to five squares of the line MX. But five
squares of the line CG are equal to ^iue squares of the line MN and to five
squares of the MX. For (by the 10. of the thirtenth) one square of the line CG
is equal to one square of the line MN and to one square of the line MX.
Wherefore five squares of the line CG are equal to three squares of the line DG
and to three squares of the line CG (as it is not hard to prove, marking what
has before been proved). But three squares of the line DG, together with three
squares of the line CG, are equal to fiftene squares of the semidiameter of
the circle described about the pentagon CDEFG (for it was before proved in the
assumpt put in this proposition) that the square^ of DG and G C taken once, are
quintuple to the square of the semidiameter of the circle d^scribed about the
pentagon CDEFG). And five squares of the line KL are equal to fiftene squares
of the semidiameter of the circle described about the triangle KLH. (For by the
12. of the thirtenth, one square of the line LK is triple to one square of the
line drawn from the center to the circumference). Wherefore fiftene squares of
the line drawn from the center to the circumference (of the circle which
contains the pentagon CDEFG) are equal to fiftene squares of the line drawn
from the center to the circumference of the circle which contains the
triangle KLH): wherefore one of the squares which is drawn from the center to
the circumference of the one circle, is equal to one of the squares which is
drawn from the center to the circumference of the other circle. Wherefore the
diameter is equal to the diameter, wherefore one and the self same circle
comprehends both the pentagon of a dodecahedron and the triangle of an
Icosahedron described in one and the self same circle: which was required to
be proved.

The 3. Theoreme. The.3 Proposition. The 5. proposition a^t^r (...).
If there be an equilater and equiangle pe^tagon, and about it be described a
circle, and from the center to one of the sides be drawn a perpendicular line,
that which is contained under one of the sides and the perpendicular line
thirty times, is equal to the superficies of the dodecahedron.
SVppose that ABCD be an equilater and equiangle pentagon. And about the same
pentagon, describe (by the 14. of the fourth) a circle. Construction.
And let the center thereof be the point F. And from the point F draw (by the
12. of the first) unto the line CD a perpendicular line FG. Now I say that that
which is contained under the lines CD and GF thirty times, is equal to 12.
pentagons of the same quantity that the pentagon ABCD is. Draw these right
lines CF and FD. Demo^stration.
Now forasmuch as that which is contained under the lines CD and FG is double
to the triangle CDF (by the 41. of the first) therefore that which is contained
under the lines CD and FG five times is equal to ten of those triangles. But
ten of those triangles are two pentago^s, and six times ten of those triangles
are all the pentagons. Wherefore that which is contained under the lines CD and
FG thirty times is equal to 12. pentagons But 12. pentagons are the
superficies of dodecahedron. Wherefore that which is contained under the lines
CD and FG thirty times is equal to the superficies of the dodecahedron.

In like sort also may we prove that if there be an equilater triangle, as for
example, The 5. proposition after F^ussas.
the triangle ABC, and about it be described a circle, and the center of the
circle be the point D, and the perpendicular line be the line DE: that which is
contained under the lines BC and DE thirty times, is equal to the superficies
of the Icosahedron. Demonstration.
For again forasmuch as that which is contained under the lines DE and BC is
double to the triangle DBC (by the 41. of the first): therefore two triangles
are equal to that which is contained under the lines DE and BC, and three of
those triangles contain the whole triangle. Wherefore six such triangles as
DBC is, are equal to that which is contained under the lines DE and BC thrice.
But six such triangles as DBC is, are equal to two such triangles as ABC is.
Wherefore that which is contained under the lines DE and BC thrice, is equal
to two such triangles as ABC is. But two of those triangles taken ten times
contains the whole Icosahedron. Wherefore that which is contained under the
lines DE and BC thirty times, is equal to twenty such triangles as the
triangle ABC is, that is, to ye whole superficies of the Icosahedro^. This is
the reason of the Corollary following.
Wherefore as the superficies of the dodecahedron is to the supe^ficies of the
Icosahedron, so is that which is contained under the lines CD and FG to that
which is contained under the lines BC and DE.

Corollary.
By this it is manifest, that as the superficies of the Dodecahedron is to the
superficies of the Icosahedron, A Corollary which also Flussas puts as a
Corollary after the 5. proposition in his order.
so is that which is contained under the side of the Pentagon, and the
perpe^dicular line which is drawn from the center of the circle described
about the Pentagon to the same side, to that which is contained under the side
of the Icosahedron and the perpendicular line which is drawn from the center
of the circle described about the triangle to the same side: so that the
Icosahedron and Dodecahedron be both described in one and the self same Sphere.

The 4. Theoreme. The 4. Proposition. The 6. p^^positio^ ^^ter Flussas.
This being done, now is to be proved, that as the superficies of the
Dodecahedron is to the superficies of the Icosahedron, so is the side of the
cube to the side of the Icosahedron.
Co^struction.
TAke (by the 2. Theoreme of this book) a circle containing both the pentagon
of a Dodecahedron, and the triangle of an Icosahedron, being both described in
one and the self same sphere, and let the same circle be DBC. And in the
circle DBC describe the side of an equilater triangle, namely, CD, and the side
of an equilater pentagon, namely, AC. And take (by the 1. of the third) the
center of the circle, and let the same be E. And from the point E draw unto
the lines DC and AC, perpendicular lines OF and EG. And extend the line EG
directly to the point B. And draw a right line from the point B to the point
C. And let the side of the cube be the line H. Now I say, that as the
superficies of the Dodecahedron is to the superficies of the Icosahedron, so is
the line H to the line CD. Demonstration.
Forasmuch as the line made of the lines EB and BC added together (namely, of
the side of the hexagon, and of the side of a decagon) is (by the 9. of the
thirtenth) divided by an extreme and mean proportion, and his greater segment
is the line BE: and the line EG is also (by the 1. of the fo^retenth) the half
of the same line, and the line OF is the half of the line BE (by the Corollary
of the 12. of the thirtenth). Wherefore the line EG being divided by an extreme
and mean proportion, This is not hard to prove by the 15. 16. and 19. of the
^^^eth.
his greater segment shall be the line OF. And the line H also being divided by
an extreme and mean proportion, his greater segment is the line CA, as it was
proved In the Corollary of the 17. of the t^irte^th.
in the Dodecahedron. (...) again is required the Assumpt which is afterward
proved in this 4 proposition.
Wherefore as the line H is to the line CA, so is the line EG to the line OF.
Wherefore (by the 16. of the sixth) that which is contained under the lines H
and OF, is equal to that which is contained under the lines CA and EG. And for
that as the line H is to the line CD, so is that which is contained under the
lines H and OF, to that which is contained under the lines CD and OF (by the 1.
of the sixth). But unto that which is contained under the lines H and OF, is
equal that which is contained under the lines CA and EG. Wherefore (by the 11.
of the fifth) as the line H is to the line CD, so is that which is contained
under the lines CA and EG, to that which is contained under the lines CD and
OF, that is (by the Corollary next going before) as the superficies of the
Dodecahedron is to the superficies of the Icosahedron, so is the line H to the
line CD.

An other demonstration to prove that as the superficies of the Dodecahedron is
to the superficies of the Icosahedron, so is the side of the cube to the side
of the Icosahedron. But first the Assumpt following, the construction wh^re^f
here beginne^h, is to be proved.

LEt there be a circle ABC. And in it describe two sides of an equilater
pentagon (by the 11. of the fifth) namely, AB and AC: and draw a right line from
the point B to the point C. And (by the 1. of the third) take the center of the
circle, and let the same be D. And draw a right line from the point A to the
point D, and extend it directly to the point E, and let it cut the line BC in
the point G. And let the line DF be half to the line DA, and let the line GC
be treble to the line HC, by the 9. of the sixth. The Assumpt, which also
Flussas puts as an Assumpt after the 6. proposition.
Now I say, that that which is contained under the lines AF and BH, is equal
to the pentagon inscribed in the circle ABC. Draw a right line from the point B
to the point D. Now forasmuch as the line AD is double to the line DF,
therefore the line AF is sesquialter to the line AD. Again, Demonstration of
the Assumpt.
forasmuch as the line GC is treble to the line CH, therefore the line GH is
double to the line CHAPTER Wherefore the line GC is sesquialter to the line HG.
Wherefore as the line FA is to the line AD, so is the line GC to the line GH.
Wherefore (by the 16. of the sixth) that which is contained under the lines AF
and HG, is equal to that which is contained under the lines DA and GC. But the
line GC is equal to the line BG (by the 3. of the third). Wherefore that which
is contained under the lines AD and BG, is equal to that which is contained
under the lines AF and GH. But that which is contained under the lines AD and
BG, is equal to two such triangles as the triangle ABD is (by the 41. of the
first). Wherefore that which is contained under the lines AF and GH, is equal
to two such triangles as the triangle ABD is. Wherefore that which is contained
under the lines AF and GH ^iue times, is equal to ten triangles. But ten
triangles are two pentagons. Wherefore that which is contained under the lines
AF and GH five times, is equal to two pentagons. And forasmuch as the line GH
is double to the line HC, therefore that which is contained under the lines AF
and GH, is double to that which is contained under the lines AF and HC (by the
1. of the sixth). Wherefore that which is contained under the lines AF and CH
twice, is equal to that which is contained under the lines AF and GH once.
Take each of those parallelogrammes five times. Wherefore that which is
contained under the lines AF and HC ten times, is equal to that which is
contained under the lines AF and GH five times, that is, to two pentagons.
Wherefore that which is contained under the lines AF and HC five times, is
equal to one pentagon. But that which is contained under the lines AF and HC
five times, is equal (by the 1. of the sixth) to that which is contained under
the lines AF and HB, for the line HB is quintuple to the line HC (as it is
easy to see by the construction) and they are both under one and the self
same altitude, namely, under AF. Wherefore that which is contained under the
lines AF and BH, is equal to one pentagon.

This being proved, now let there be drawn a Circle comprehending both the
Pentagon of a Dodecahedron, and the triangle of an Icosahedron, being both
described in one and the self same Sphere.
Construction pertaining to the second d^monstration of the 4. proposition.
LEt the circle be ABC. And in it describe as before, two sides of an equilater
pentagon, namely BA and AC^ and draw a right line from the point B to the point
C: and take the center of the circle and let the same be E. And from the point
A to the point E draw a right line AE: and extend the line AE to the point F.
And let it cut the line BC in the point K. And let the line AE be doble to the
line EG, and let the line CK be treble to the line CH, by the.9. of the sixth.
And from the point G raise up (by the.11. of the first) unto the line AF a
perpendicular line GM: and extend the line GM directly to the point D. Wherefore
the line MD is the side of an equiliter tria^gle, by the corollary of the.1^.
of the thirtenth: draw these right lines AD and AM. Wherefore ADM is an
equilater triangle. Second demonstration o^ the 4. proposition.
And for as much as that which is contained under the lines AG and BH is equal
to the pentagon (by the former assump^) and that which is contained under the
lines AG and GD is equal to the triangle ADM: therefore as that which is
contained under the lines AG and HB is to that which is contained under the
lines AG and GD, so is the pentagon to the tria^gle. But as that which is
contained under the lines BH and AG is to that which is contained under the
lines AG and GD, so is the line BH to the line DG (by the.1. of the sixth)
wherefore (by the.15. of the fifth) as 12. such lines as BH is, are to.20 such
lines as DG is, so are 12. pentagons to 20. triangles, that is the superficies
of the Dodecahedron, to the superficies of the Icosahedron. And 12. such lines
as BH is, are equal to ten such lines as BC is (for the line HB is
quintuple to the line HC): and the line BC is sextuple to the line CH^ Wherefore
six such lines as BH is, are equal to five such lines as BC are: and in the
same proportion are their doubles: and 20. such lines as the line DG is, are
equal to.10. such lines as the line DM is: for the line DM is double to the
line DG. Wherefore as 10. such lines as BC is, are to 10. such lines as DM is,
that is, as the line BC is to the line DM, so is the superficies of the
Dodecahedron to the superficies of the Icosahedron. But the line BC is the side
of the cube, and the line DM the side of the Icosahedron: wherefore (by the 11.
of the fifth) as the superficies of the Dodecahedron is to the superficies of
the Icosahedron, so is the line BC to the line DM, that is, the side of the
cube to the side of the Icosahedron.

The 7^ proposition after Flussas.
Now will we prove that a right line being divided by an extreme and mean
proportion, what proportion the line co^taining in power the squares of the
whole line and of the greater segment, has to the line containing in power the
squares of the whole line and of the less segment, the same proportion has
the side of the cube to the side of the Icosahedron, being both described in
one and the self same sphere.
Construction.
SVppose that AB be a circle conta^ning both the pentagon of a Dodecahedron and
the triangle of an Icosahedron described both in one and the self same
sphere. Take the center of the circle, and let the same be C. And from the
point C extend to the circumference a right line at all auentures, and let the
same BC. And (by the 30. of the sixth) divide the line BC by an extreme and
mean proportion in the point D, and let the greater segment thereof be CD.
Wherefore the line CD is the side of a Decago^ described in the same circle (by
the corollary of the 9. of the thirtenth). Take the side of an Icosahedron, and
let the same be the line E, and the side of a Dodecahedron, and let the same be
the line F, and the side of a cube and let the same be the line G.
Demonstration.
Wherefore the line E is the side of an equilater triangle, and F of an
equaliter pentagon described in one and the self same circle. And the line G
being divided by an extreme and mean proportion, his greater segment is the
line F, by the corollary of the 17. of the thirte^th. Now forasmuch as the line
E is the side of an equilater triangle, but (by the 12. of the thirtenth) the
side of an equilater triangle is in power treble to the line BC, (which is
drawn from the center to the circumference) therefore the square of the line E
is treble to the square of the line BC: but the squares of the line BC and BD
are (by the 4. of the thirtenth) treble to the square of the line CD. Wherefore
as the square of the line E is to the square of the line CB, so are the squares
of the lines CB and BD to the square of the line CD. Wherefore alternately (by
the 16. of the fifth) as the square of the line E is to the squares of the
lines CB and BD, so is the square of the line CB to the square of the line CD.
Here again is required the Assumpt afterward proved in this 4. proposition.
But as the square of the line BC is to the square of the line CD, so is the
square of the line G (the side of the cube) to the square of the line F, the
side of Dodecahedron. For the line F is the greater segme^t of the line G (as
was before proved.) Wherefore (by the.11. of the fifth) as the square of the line
E is to the squares CB and BD, so is the square of the line G, to the square of
the line F. Wherefore alternately (by the 16. of the fifth) and also by
conversion (by the corollary of the 4. of the fifth) as the square of the line
G, is to the square of the line E, so is the square of the line F, to the
squares of the lines CB and BD. But unto the square of the line F are equal the
squares of the lines BC and CD, for the side of a pentagon contains in power
both the side of a six angled figure, and the side of a ten angled figure (by
the 10. of the thirtenth.) Wherefore as the square of the line G, is to the
square of the line E, so are the squares of the lines BC and CD to the squares
of the lines CB and BD. But as the squares of the lines CB and CD are to the
squares of the lines CB and BD, As may by the Assumpt afterward in this
proposition be plainly proved.
so (any right line what so ever it be, being divided by an extreme and mean
proportion) is the line containing in power the squares of the whole line, and
of the greater segme^t, to the line containing in power the squares of the
whole line, and of the less segment: wherefore (by the 11. of the fifth) as the
square of the line G (the side of the cube) is to the square of the line E, so
(any right line being divided by an extreme and mean proportion) is the line
containing in power the squares made of the whole line, and of the greater
segme^t, to the line containing in power the squares made of the whole line,
and of the less segment: but the line G is the side of the Cube, and the line
E of the Icosahedron (by supposition.) If therefore a right line be divided by
an extreme and mean proportion, as the line co^taining in power the squares
of the whole line, and of the greater segment, is to the line containing in
power the squares of the whole line and of the less segment: so is the side of
the cube to the side of the Icosahedron, being both described in one and the
self same sphere.

Now will we prove that as the side of the Cube is to the side of the
Icosahedron, The 8. pro^ition after Flussas.
so is the solid of the Dodecahedron to the solid of the Icosahedron.
Forasmuch as equal circles comprehend both the pentagon of a Dodecahedron,
and the triangle of an Icosahedron, being both described in one and the self
same sphere, by the 2. of this book: but in a sphere equal circles are equally
distant from the center (for the perpendicular lines drawn from the center of
the sphere to the plain superficieces of the circles are equal, and do fall
upon the centres of the circles. By the Corollary added by Flussas after has
Assumpt put after the 17. proposition of the 12. book.
Wherefore perpendicular lines drawn from the center of the sphere, to the
center of the circle, comprehending both the triangle of an Icosahedron, and
the pentagon of a Dodecahedron are equal: wherefore the pyramides, whose bases
are the pentagons of the Dodecahedron, are of equal altitude with the piramides
whose bases are the triangles of the Icosahedron. But piramids of equal
altitude, are in that proportion the one to the other, that their bases are (by
the 5. of the twelfth) wherefore as the pentagon is to the triangle, so is the
pyramid whose base is the pentagon of the Dodecahedron and top the center of
the sphere, to the pyramid whose base is the triangle and top the center also
of the sphere. Wherefore (by the 15. of the fifth) as 12. pe^tagons are to 20.
triangles, so are 12. pyramids having pentagons to their bases to 20. pyramids
having tria^gles to their bases. But 12. pentagons are the superficies of the
D^decahedron, and 20. triangles are the superficies of the Icosahedron.
Wherefore as the superficies of the Dodecahedron is to the superficies of the
Icosahedron, so are 12. pyramids having pentagons to their bases to 20.
pyramids having triangles to their bases. But 12. pyramids having pentagons to
their bases, are the solid of the Dodecahedron, and 20. pyramids having
triangles to their bases are the solid o^ the Icosahedron. Corollary of the 8.
after Flussas.
Wherefore (by the 11. of the fifthe) as the superficies of the Dodecahedron is
to the superficies of the Icosahedron ^o is the solid of the Dodecahedron to
the solid of the Icosahedron. But as the superficies of the Dodecahedron, is
to the superficies of the Icosahedron, so have we proved that the side o^ the
cube is to the side of the Icosahedron. Wherefore, by the 11. of the fifth, as
the side of the cube is to the side of the Icosahedron, so is the solid of the
Dodecahedron to the solid of the Icosahedron.

This Assumpt is the 3. proposition after ^lussas, and is it which (...) times
has been taken a^ g^aunted in this book, and o^ce also in the last
proposition of the 13. book: as we have before noted.
If two right lines be divided by an extreme and mean proportion, they shall
every way be in like proportion: which thing is thus demonstrated.
LEt the line AB be (by the 30. of the sixth) divided by an extreme and mean
proportion in the point C, and let the greater segment thereof be the line CA.
And likewise also let the line DE be divided by an extreme and mean
proportion in the point F, and let the greater segment thereof be the line DF.
Then I say that as the whole line AB is to the greater segment thereof AC, so
is the whole line DE to the greater segment thereof DF. For forasmuch as that
which is contained under the lines AB and BC is equal to the square of the
line AC (by the diffinition of a line divided be an extreme and mean
proportion): Demonstration.
and that which is contained under the lines DE and OF is also equal to the
square of the line DF (by the same diffinition): therefore as that which is
contained under the lines AB and BC is to the square of the line AC, so is that
which is contained under the lines DE and OF to the square of the line DF. For
in each is the proportion of equality. Wherefore as that which is contained
under the lines AB and BC four times, is to the square of the line AC, so is
that which is contaynd under the lines DE and OF four times to the square of
the line DF (by the 15. of the fifth). Wherefore by composition (by the 18. of
the ^i^th) as that which is contained under the lines AB and BC four times,
together with the square of the line AC, is to the square of the line AC, so is
that which is contained under the lines DE and OF four times, together with
the square of the line DF, to the square of the line DF. Wherefore as the
square which is made of the lines AB and BC added together and made one line
(which square by the 8. of the second is equal to that which is contained
under the lines AB and BC four times together with square of the line AC) is
to the square of the line AC, so is the square made of the lines DE and OF
added together and made one line (which square is also, by the same, equal to
that which is contained under the lines DE and OF four times together with the
square of the line DF) to the square of the line DF. Wherefore also as the
lines AB and BC added together are to the line AC, so are the lines DE and OF
added together to the line DF (by the 22. of the sixth). Wherefore by
composition (by the 18. of the fifth) as both the lines AB and BC added the one
to the other, together with the line AC, that is, as two such lines as AB is,
are to the line AC, so are both the lines DE and OF added the one to the other
together with the line DF, that is two such lines as DE is to the line DF. And
in the same proportion are the halues of the antecedents by the 15. of the
fifth. Wherefore as the line AB is to the line AC, so is the line DE to the
line DF. (And therefore by the 19. of the fifth, as the line AB is to the line
BC, so is the line DF to the line FE. Wherefore also by division by the 17. of
the fifth, as the line AC is to the line CB, so is the line DF to the line DE).

Now that we have proved, In the 4. section ^f this proposition.
that, any right line whatsoever being divided by an extreme and mean
proportion, what proportion the line containing in power the squares made of
the whole line and of the greater segment added together, has to the line
containing in power the squares made of the whole line and of the less segment
added together, the same proportion has the side of the cube to the side of
the Icosahedron: Now also that we have proved, In the 1. and 3 section of the
same proposition.
that as the side of the cube is to the side of the Icosahedron, so is the
superficies of the Dodecahedron to the superficies of the Icosahedron, being
both described in one and the self same sphere: and moreover seeing that we
have proved, In the 5. sectio^ of the same proposition.
that as the superficies of the Dodecahedron is to the superficies of the
Icosahedro^, so is the Dodecahedro^ to the Icosahedron, for that both the
pentagon of the Dodecahedron, and the triangle of the Icosahedron are
comprehended in one and the self same circle: A Corollary.
All these things I say being proved, it is manifest, that if in one and the
self same sphere be described a Dodecahedron, and an Icosahedron, they shall
be in proportion the one to the other, as, a right line whatsoever being
divided by an extreme and mean proportion, the line containing in power the
squares of the whole line and of the greater segment added together, is to the
line containing in power the squares of the whole line and of the less segment
added together. For for that as the Dodecahedron is to the Icosahedron, so is
the superficies of the Dodecahedron to the superficies of the Icosahedron, that
is, the side of the cube to the side of the Icosahedron: but as the side of the
cube is to the side of the Icosahedron, so, any right line what so ever being
divided by an extreme and mean proportion, is the line containing in power
the squares of the whole line and of the greater segment added together, to the
line containing in power the squares of the whole line and of the less segment
added together. Wherefore as a Dodecahedron is to an Icosahedron described in
one and the self same sphere, so, any right line what so ever being divided by
an extreme and mean proportion, is the line containing in power the squares
of the whole line and of the greater segment added together, to the line
containing in power the squares of the whole line and of the less segment
added together.

The end of the fourtenth Book of Euclides Elements after Hypsicles.
The fourtenth book of Euclides Elements after Flussas.
FOr that the fouretenth Book, as it is set forth by Flussas, contains in it
more Propositions then are found in Hypsicles, and also some of those
Propositions which Hypsicles has, are by him somewhat otherwise demonstrated,
I thought my labor well bestowed for the readers sake to turn it also all
whole, notwithstanding my travail before taken in turning the same book after
Hypsicles. Where note ye, that here in this 14. book after Flussas, and in the
other books following, namely, the 15. and 16. I have in alleging of the
Propositions of the same 14. book, followed the order and number of the
Propositions, as Flussas has placed them.

The first Proposition. A perpendicular line drawn from the center of a
circle, to the side of a Pentagon inscribed in the same circle: The first
proposition after Campane.
is the half of these two lines taken together, namely, of the side of the
hexagon, and of the side of the decagon inscribed in the same circle.
TAke a circle ABC, and inscribe in it the side of a pentagon, which let be BC,
and take the center of the circle, which let be the point D: Construction.
and from it draw unto the side BC a perpendicular line DE: which produce to
the point ^. And unto the line E F put the line EG equal. And draw these right
lines CG, CD, and CF. Then I say, that the right line DE (which is drawn from
the center to BC the side of the pentagon) is the half of ^he side^ of the
decagon and hexagon, taken together. Demonstration.
Forasmuch as the line DE is a perpendicular unto the line BC: therefore the
sections BE and EC shall be equal (by the 3. of the third): and the line OF is
common unto them both; and the angles FEC and FEB, are right angles, by
supposition. Wherefore the bases BF and FC are equal (by the 4. of the first).
But the line BC is the side of a pentagon, by construction. Wherefore FC which
subtendeth the half of the side of the pentagon, is the side of the decagon
inscribed in the circle ABC. But unto the line FC is, by the 4. of the first,
equal the line CG, for they subtend right angles CEG, and CEF, which are
contained under equal sides. Wherefore also the angles CGE, and CFE, of the
triangle CFG, are equal, by the 5. of the first. And forasmuch as the arc FC
is subtended of the side of a decagon, the arc CA shall be quadruple to the
arc CF: Wherefore also the angle CDA shall be quadruple to the angle CDF (by
the last of the six^). And forasmuch as the same angle CDA, which is set at the
center, is double to the angle CFA, which is set at the circumference, by the
20. of the third: therefore the angle CFA, or CFD, is double to the angle CD^,
namely, the half of quadruple. But unto the angle CFD or CFG, is proved equal
the angle CGF: Wherefore the outward angle CGF, is double to the angle CDF.
Wherefore the angles CDG and DCG, shall be equal. For unto those two angles
the angle CGF is equal, by the 32. of the first. Wherefore the sides GC and
GD, are equal, by the 6. of the first. Wherefore also the line GD is equal to
the line FC, which is the side of the decagon. But unto the right line FE is
equal the line EG, by construction. Wherefore the whole line DE is equal to
the two lines C^ and FE. Wherefore those lines taken together (namely, the
lines DF and FC) shall be double to the line DE. Wherefore the line DE (which
is drawn from the center perpendicularly to the side of the pentagon) shall be
the half of both these lines taken together, namely, of DF the side of the
hexagon, and CF the side of the decagon. For the line DF which is drawn from
the center, is equal to the side of the hexagon, by the Corollary of the 15.
of the fourth. Wherefore a perpendicular line drawn from the center of a
circle, to the side of a pentagon inscribed in the same circle: is the half of
these two lines taken together, namely, of the side of the hexagon, and of the
side of the decagon inscribed in the same circle: which was required to be
proved.

A Corollary.
If a right line drawn perpendicularly from the center of a circle to the side
of a pentagon, be divided by an extreme and mean proportion: the greater
segment shall be the line which is drawn from the same c^^tre to the side of
an equilater triangle inscribed in the same circle. For, that li^^ (drawn to
the side of the triangle) is (by the Corollary of the 12. of the thirtenth) the
half of the line drawn from the center to the circumference, that is, of the
side of the hexagon: Wherefore the residue shall be the half of the side of
the decagon. For the whole line is the half of the two sides, namely, of the
side of the hexagon, and of the side of the decagon. But of the side of a
decagon and of an hexagon taken together, the greater segment is the side of
the hexagon (by the 9. of the thirtenth). Wherefore the greater segment of
their halfes shall be the half of the hexagon, by the 15. of the fifth: which
half is the perpendicular line drawn from the center to the side of the
triangle, by the Corollary of the 12. of the thirtenth.

The second Proposition. If two right lines be divided by an extreme and mean
proportion: The 2. proposition after Campane.
they shall be divided into the self same proportions.
SVppose that these two right lines AB and DE be each cut by an extreme and
mean proportion in the points F and Z. Then I say, that these two lines are
divided into the self same proportions, that is, that the line AB is in the
point F divided in like sort as the line DE is in the point Z. For if they be
not in like sort cut, let one of them, namely, DE, be cut like unto the line AB
in the point C. Demonstration leading to an impossibility.
So that let the line DE be to DC the greater part, as the greater part DC is
to CE the less part, by the 3. definition of the sixth. But (by suppositition)
the line DE is to the line DZ, as the line DZ is to the line ZE. Wherefore the
right line DE is divided by an extreme and mean proportion in two points C
and Z. But the proportion of DE to DC the less line, is greater then the
proportion of the same DE to DZ the greater line, by the 2. part of the 8. of
the fifth. But as DE is to DC, so is DC to CE: Wherefore the proportion of DC to
CE, is greater then the proportion of DZ to ZE. And forasmuch as DZ is greater
then DC, the proportion of DZ to CE shall be greater then the proportion of DC
to CE, by the 8. of the fifth. Wherefore the proportion of DZ to CE, is much
greater then the proportion of DZ to ZE. Wherefore one and the self same
magnitude, namely, DZ, has to CE the greater line, a greater proportion then
it has to ZE the less line, contrary to the second part of the 8. of the
fifth: which is impossible. Wherefore the right lines AB and DE, are not cut
unlike. Wherefore they are cut like, and into the self same proportions. And
the same demonstration also will serve, if the point C fall in any other place.
For always some one of them shall be the greater. If therefore two right lines
be cut by an extreme and mean proportion: they shall be cut into the self
same proportions: which was required to be proved.

The third Proposition. If in a circle be described an equilater Pentagon: The
4. proposition after Campane.
the squares made of the side of the Pentagon and of the line which subtendeth
two sides of the Pentagon, these two squares (I say) taken together, are
quintuple to the square of the line drawn from the center of the circle to the
circu^ference.
SVppose that in the circle BCG the side of a Pentagon be BG: and let the line
BC subtend two sides thereof. Constru^t^on.
And let the line BG be divided into two equal parts by a right line drawn
from the center D: namely, by the diameter CDE produced to the point Z. And
draw the right line BZ. Then I say, that the right lines BC and BG, are in
power quintuple to the right line DZ, which is drawn from the center to the
circumference. For forasmuch as (by the 47. of the first) the squares of the
lines CB and BZ, Demonstration.
are equal to the square of the diameter CZ: therefore they are quadruple to
the square of the line DZ, by the 20. of the sixth (for the line CZ is double to
the line DZ). Wherefore the right lines CB, BZ, and ZD, are in power quintuple
to the line ZD. But the right line BG contains in power the two lines BZ and
ZD, by the 10. of the thirtenth. For DZ is the side of an hexagon, and BZ the
side of a decagon. Wherefore the lines BC and BG (whose powers are equal to
the powers of the lines CB, BZ, ZD) are in power quintuple to the line DZ. If
therefore in a circle be described an equilater Pentagon: the squares made of
the side of the Pentagon and of the line which subtendeth two sides of the
Pentagon, th^se two squares (I say) taken together, are quintuple to the square
of the line drawn from the center of the circle to the circumference.

A Corollary.
If a Cube and a Doderahedron be contained in one and the self same Sphere:
This Corollary Campane also ^utteth after the 4. proposition in his order.
the side of the Cube, and the side of the Dodecahedron, are in power quintuple
to the line which is drawn from the center of the circle which contains the
Pentagon of the Dodecahedron. For it was proved in the 17. of the thirtenth,
that the side of the Cube subtendeth two sides of the Pentagon of the
Dodecahedron, where the said solides are contained in one and the self same
Sphere. Wherefore the side of the Cube subtending two sides of the Pentagon, and
the side of the same Pentagon, are contained in one and the self same circle.
Wherefore, by this Proposition, they are in power quintuple to the line which
is drawn from the center of the same circle which contains the Pentagon of
the Dodecahedron.

The 4. Proposition. One and the self same circle contains both the Pentagon
of a Dodecahedron, The 5. proposition after Campane.
and the triangle of an Icosahedron described in one and the self same sphere.
LEt the diameter of the sphere given be AB, and let the bases of the
Icosahedron and Dodecahedron described in it, Construction.
be the triangle MNR, and the pentagon FKH, and about them let there be
described circles. by the 5. and 14. of the fourth. And let the lines drawn
from the centres of those circles to the circumferences be LN and OK. Then I
say that the lines LN and OK are equal, and therefore one and the self same
circle contains both those figures. Let the right line AB, be in power
quintuple to some one right line, as to the line CG (by the Corollary of the 6.
of the tenth.) And making the ce^tre the point C, and the space CG, describe a
circle DZG. And let the side of a pentagon inscribed in that circle (by the 11.
of the fourth) be the line ZG. And let EG (subtending half of the arc ZG) be
the side of a Decagon inscribed in that circle. And by the 30. of the sixth,
divide the line CG by an extreme and mean proportion in the point I.
Demonstration.
Now forasmuch as in the 16. of the thirtenth, it was proved, that this line
CG (unto whom the diameter AB of the sphere is in power quintuple) is the line
which is drawn from the center of the circle, which contains five angles of
the Icosahedron, and the side of the pentagon described in that circle DZG,
namely the line ZG is side of the Icosahedron described in the Sphere, whose
diameter is the line AB: therefore the right line ZG, is equal to the line MN,
which was put to be the side of the Icosahedro^, or of his tria^gular base.
Moreover, by the 17. of the thirtenth, it was manifest that the right line ^H
(which subtendeth the angle of the pentagon of the Dodecahedron inscribed in
the foresaid sphere) is the side of the Cube, inscribed in the self same
sphere. (For upon the angles of the cube, were made the angles of the
Dodecahedron.) Wherefore the diameter AB is in power triple to FH, the side of
the Cube (by the 15. of the thirtenth). But the same line AB is (by
supposition) in power quintuple to the line CG. Wherefore five squares of the
line CG, are equal to three squares of the line FH: (for each is equal to one
and the self same square of the line AB). And forasmuch as EG the side of the
Decagon, cutteth the right line CG by an extreme and mean proportion (by the
corollary of the 9. of the thirtenth): Likewise the line HK, cutteth the line
FH, the side of the Cube by an extreme and mean proportion (by the Corollary
of the 17. of the thirtenth): therefore the lines CG and FH, are divided into
the self same proportions, by the second of this book: and the right lines CI
and EG, which are the greater segmentes of one and the self same line CG, are
equal: And forasmuch as five squares of the line CG are equal to three squares
of the lines FH: therefore five squares of the line GE, are equal to three
squares of the line HK (for the lines GE and HK are the greater segme^ts of the
lines CG and FH). Wherefore five squ^re^ of the line^ CG and GE are equal to
the squares of the (...) ^H and HK, by the 1^ of the ^ift. But unto the squares
of the lines CG and GE^ is ^qual the squ^re of the ^ine ZG, by the 10. of the
thirte^th: and unto the line ZG the line MN was equal: wherefore five squares of
the line MN, are equal to three squares of the lines FH, HK. But the squares
of the lines ^^ and HK, (...) quintuple to the square of the line OK (which is
drawn from the center) by the third of this book. Wherefore three squares of
the lines FH and HK make 15. squares of the line OK. And forasmuch as the
square of the line MN is triple to the square of the line LN (which is drawn
from the center) by the 12. of the thirtenth, therefore five squares of the line
MN are equal to 15. squares of the line LN. But five squares of the line MN are
equal unto three squares of the lines FH and HK. Wherefore one square of the
line LN is equal to one square of the line OK (being each the fiuetenth part
of equal magnitudes) by the 15. of the fif^^. Wherefore the lines LN and OK,
which are drawn from the centers, are equal. Wherefore also the circles NRM,
and FKH which are described of those lines, are equal. And those circles
contain (by supposition) the b^ses of the Dodecahedron and of the Icosahedron
described in one and the self same sphere. Wherefore one and the self same
circle, etc. a^ in the pro^^sition: which was required to be proved.

The 5. Proposition. If in a circle be inscribed the pentagon of a
Dodecahedron, and the triangle of an Icosahedron, This is the 6. and 7.
propositions after Campane.
and from the center to one of their sides, be drawn a perpendicular line:
That which is contained 30. times under the side, and the perpendicular line
falling upon it, is equal to the superficies of that solid, upon whose side
the perpendicular line falls.
SVppose that in the circle AGE, be described the pentagon of a Dodecahedron,
which let be ABGDE, and the triangle of an Icosahedron described in the same
sphere, which let be AFH. Construction.
And let the center be the point C. ^^on which draw perpendicularly the line CI
to the side of the Pentagon, and the line CL to the side of the triangle. Then
I say that the rectangle figure contained under the lines CI and GD 30. times,
is equal to the superficies of the Dodecahedron: and that that which is
contained under the lines CL and AF 30. times is equal to the super^icies of
the Icosahedro^ described in the same sphere. Draw these right lines CA, CF, CG
and CD. Demons^ration.
Now forasmuch as that which is contained under the base GD and the altitude
IC, is double to the triangle GCD, by the 41. of the first: And five triangles
like and equal to the triangle GCD do make the pentagon ABGDE of the
Dodecahedron: wherefore that which is contained under the lines GD and IC five
times is equal to two pentago^s. Wherefore that which is contained under the
lines GD and IC ^0. times is equal to the 12. pentagons, which contain the
superficies of the Dodecahedron.

Again that which is contained under the lines CL and AF, is double to the
triangle ACF: wherefore that which is contained under the lines CL and AF three
times is equal to two such triangles as AFH is, which is one of the bases of
the Icosahedron (for the triangle ACF, is the third part of the triangle AFH,
as it is easy to prove, by the 8. and 4. of the first.) Wherefore that which is
contained under the lines CL and AF. 30 times times, is equal to 10. such
triangles as AFH i^, which contain the superficies of the Icosahedron. And
forasmuch as one and the self same spher^ contains the Dodecahedron of this
pentagon, and the Icosahedron of this triangle (by the 4. of this book ^) and
the line CL falls perpendicula^ly upon the side of the Icosahedron, and the
line CI upon the side of the Dodecahedron: that which is 30. times contained
under the side, and the perpendicular line falling upon it, is equal to the
^uperficies of that solid, upon whose side the perpendicul^r falls. If
therefore in a circle etc. as in the proposition: which was required to be
demonstrated.

A Corollary.
This Corollary Campane also adds after the 7. proposition i^ his order.
The superficieces of a Dodecahedron and of an Icosahedron described in one and
the self same sphere are the one to the other, as that which is contained
under the side of the one and the perpendicular line drawn unto it from the
center of his base, to that which is contained under the side of the other, and
the perpendicular line drawn to it from the center of his base. For a^ thirty^
tim^s is to thirty times, so is once to once by the 15. of the fifth.

The 6. Proposition. The superficies of a Dodecahedron, is to the superficies
of an Icosahedron described in one and the self same sphere, The 5.
proposition after Campane.
in that proportion, that the side of the Cube is to the side of the
Icosahedron contained in the self same sphere.
Construction.
SVppose that there be a circle ABG, and in it (by the 4. of this book) let
there be inscribed the side^ of a Dodecahedron and of an Icosahedron contained
in on^ and the self same sphere. And let the side o^ the Dodecahedron be AG,
and the side of the Icosahedron be DG. And let the center be the point E: from
which draw unto those s^des, perpendicular lines EI and EZ. And produce the
line EI to the point B, and draw the lin^ BG. And let the side of the cube
contained in the self same sphere be GC. Then I say that the superficies of the
Dodecahedron i^ to the superficies of the Icosahedron, as the line ^G, i^ to
the li^^ GD. For forasmuch as the line EI being divided by an extreme and
mean proportion, the greater segment th^rof shall be the lin^ EZ, by the
corollary of the first of this book: Demonstration.
and the line CG being divided by an extreme and mean proportion, his greater
segment is the line AG, by the corollary of the 17. of the thirtenth: Wherefore
the right lines EI and CG ^r^ cut proportionally by the second of this b^oke.
Wh^r^fore as the line CG, is to the line AG, so is the line EI to the line EZ.
Wher^fore that which it contained under the extremes CG and EZ, is ^quall to
that which i^ contayn^d under the means AG and EI. (by the 16. of the sixth.)
But as that which i^ contained under the lin^^ CG and ^Z is to that which is
contained under the lines DG and EZ, so (by the first of the sixth) i^ the lin^
CG to the line DG, for both those parallelogrames have o^^ and the self same
altitude, namely the line EZ. Wherefore as that which is contained under the
lines EI and AG (which i^ proved equal to that which is contained under the
line^ CG and EZ) is to that which is contained under the lines DG and EZ, so is
the line CG to the li^^ DG. But as that which is contained under the lines EI
and AG is to that which is contained under the lines DG and EZ, so (by the
corollary of the former proposition) is the superficies of the Dodecahedron, to
the superficies of the Icosahedron. Wherefore as the superficies ^^ the
Dodecahedron is to the superficies of the Icosahedron, so is CG the side of the
cube, to GD the side of the Icosahedron. The superficies therefore of a
Dodecahedron is to the superficies^ etc. as in the proposition, which was
required to be proved.

An Assumpt.
The Pentagon of a Dodecahedron, This Assumpt Campane also has after the 8.
proposition, in his order.
is equal to that which is contained under the perpendicular line which
falls upon the base of the triangle of the Icosahedron, and five sixth parts
of the side of the cube, the said three solides being described in one and the
self same sphere.

Suppose that in the circle ABEG, the pentagon of a Dodecahedron be A^CIG, and
let two sides thereof AB and AG be subtended of the right line BG. And let the
triangle of the Icosahedron inscribed in the self same sphere, Construction.
by the 4. of this book, be AFH. And let the center of the circle be the point
D, and let the diameter be ADE, cutting FH, the side of the triangle in the
point Z, and cutting the line BG in the point K. And draw the right line BD.
And from the right line KG cut of a third part TG, by the 9. of the sixth. Now
then the line BG subtending two sides of the Dodecahedron, shall be the side of
the cube inscribed in the same sphere, Demonstration.
by the 17. of the thirtenth: and the triangle of the Icosahedron of the same
sphere shall be A^H by the 4. of this book. And the line AZ which passes by the
center D shall fall perpendicularly upon the side of the triangle. For
forasmuch as the angles GAE and BAE are equal (by the 27. of the third^ for
they are see upon equal circumferences): therefore the ^ases BK and KG are (by
the ^. of the first) equal. Wherefore the line BT contains 5. sixth parts
of the line BG. Then I say that that which is contained under the lines AZ and
BT, is equal to the pentagon A^C^G. For forasmuch as the line ^Z is
sesq^ialter to the line AD (for the line D^ is divided into two equal parts
in the point Z, by the corollary of the ^2^ of the thirtenth). Likewise by
construction, the line KG is sesquialter to the line KNIGHT: therefore as the line
AZ is to the line AD, so is the line KG to the (...) ^T. Wherefore that which
is contained vnde^ the (...) AZ and KNIGHT, is equal to that which is contained
under the means AD and KG, by the 16. of the sixth. But unto the line KG is
the line ^K ^roued equal. Wherefore that which is contained under the lines AZ
and KNIGHT is equal to that which is contained under the lines AD and BK. But that
which is contained under the lines AD and BK is (by the 41. of the first)
double to the triangle ABD. Wherefore that which is contained under the lines
AZ and KNIGHT is double to the same triangle ABD. And forasmuch as the pentagon
ABCIG contayneth^ (...) equal ^o the triangle ABD, and that which is contained
under the lines AZ and KNIGHT contains two such triangles: therefore the pentagon
ABCIG is duple sesquialter to the rectangle parallelogramme contained under the
lines AZ and KNIGHT. And (...) 1. of the sixth, that which is contained under the
lines AZ and BT is to that which is contained under the lines AZ and KNIGHT, as the
base BT is to the base ^^T^ therefore that which is contained under the lines
AZ and BT is duple sesquialter to that which is contained vn^^r the line AZ and
KNIGHT. But unto that which is contained under the lines AZ and KNIGHT the pentagon
ABCIG is proved duple sesquialter. Wherefore the pentagon ABCIG of the
Dodecahedron is equal to that which is contained under the perpendicular line
AZ, and under the line BT which is five six parts of the line BG.

The 7. Proposition. The 9. proposition after Campane.
A right line divided by an extreme and mean proportion: what proportion the
line containing in power the whole line and the greater segment, has to the
line containing in power the whole and the less segment: the same has the
side of the cube to the side of the Icosahedron contained in one and the same
sphere.
Construction.
TAke a circle ABE: and in it (by the 11. of the fourth) inscribe an equilater
pentagon BZECH: and (by the second of the same) an equilater triangle ABI. And
let the center thereof be the point G. And draw a line from G to B. And divide
the line GB by an extreme and mean proportion in the point D (by the 30. of
the sixth). And let the line ML contain in power both the whole line GB and
his less segment BD (by the corollary of the 13. of the tenth). And draw the
right line B^ sub^e^di^g the angle of the pentagon, which shall be the side of
the cube (by the corollary of the 17. of the thirtenth) ^ and the line BY shall
be the side of the Icosahedron, and the line ^Z the side of the Dodecahedron by
the 4. of this book. Then I say that BE the side of the cube is to BY the side
of the Icosahedron, as the line containing in power the lines BG and GD is to
the line containing in power the lines GB and BD. Demonstration.
For forasmuch as (by the 12. of the thirtenth) the line BY is in power triple
to the line BG, and (by the 4. of the same) the squares of the line GB and BD
are triple to the square of the line GD. Wherefore (by the 15. of the fifth)
the square of the line BY is to the squares of the lines GB and BD (namely,
triple to triple), as the square of the line B^ is to the square of the line GD
(namely, as one is to one). But as the square of the line BG is to the square
of the GD, so is the square of the line BE to the square of the line BZ. (For
the lines BG, GD, and BE, BZ are in one and the same proportion, by the second
of this book. For BZ is the greater segment of the line BE, by the corollary
of the 17. of the thirtenth). Wherefore the square of the line BE is to the
square of the line BZ, as the square of the line BY is to the squares of the
lines BG and BD. Wherefore alternately the square of the line BE is to the
square of the line BY, as the square of the line BZ is to the squares of the
lines GB and BD. But the square of the line BZ is equal to the squares of the
lines BG and GD (by the 10. of the thirtenth). For the line BG is equal to the
side of the hexagon, and the line GD to the side of the decagon, by the
corollary of the 9. of the same. Wherefore the squares of the lines BG and GD,
are to the squares of the lines G^ and BD, as the square of the line BE is to
the square of the line BY. But the line ZB contains in power the lines BG and
GD, and the line ML contains in power the lines GB and BD by construction.
Wherefore as the line ZB (which contains in power the whole line BG and the
greater segment GD) is to the line ML (which contains in in power the whole
line GB and the less segment BD) so is BE the side of the cube to BY the side
of the Icosahedron, by the 22. of the sixth. Wherefore a right line divided by
an extreme and mean proportion: what proportion the line containing in power
the whole line and the greater segment, has to the line containing in power
the whole line and the less segment: the same has the side of the cube to the
side of the Icosahedron contained in one and the same sphere which was required
to be proved.

The 8. Proposition. This Campane puts a^ a Corollary in the 9. proposition
after his order.
The solid of a Dodecahedron is to the solid of an Icosahedron: as the side of
a Cube is to the side of an Icosahedron, all those solides being described in
one and the self same Sphere.
FOrasmuch as in the 4. of this book, it has been proved, that one and the
self same circle contains both the triangle of an Icosahedron, and the
pentagon of a Dodecahedron described in one and the self same Sphere:
Wherefore the circles, which co^taine those bases, being equal, the
perpendiculars also which are drawn from the center of the Sphere to those
circles, shall be equal (by the Corollary of the Assumpt of the 16 of the
twelfth). And therefore the Pyramids set upon the bases of those solides have
one and the self same altitude: For the altitudes of those Pyramids concurr^
in the center. Wherefore they are in proportion as their bases are, by the 5.
and 6. of the twelfth. And therefore the pyramids which compose the
Dodecahedron, ar^ to the pyramids which compose the Icosahedron, as the bases
are, which bases are the superficieces of those solides. Wherefore their
solides are the one to the other, as their superficieces are. But the
superficies of the Dodecahedron is to the superficies of the Icosahedron, as
the side of the cube is to the side of the Icosahedron, by the 6. of this
book. Wherefore by the 11. of the fifth, as the solid of the Dodecahedron is
to the solid of the Icosahedron, so is the side of the cube to the side of the
Icosahedron, all the said solides being inscribed in one and the self same
Sphere. Wherefore the solid of a Dodecah^dron is to the solid of an
Icosahedron: as the side of a cube is to the side of an Icosahedron, all those
solides being described in one and the self same Sphere: which was required to
be proved.

A Corollary.
The solid of a Dodecahedron is to the solid of an Icosahedron, This
Corollary is the 9. proposition after Campane.
as the superficieces of the one are to the superficieces of the other, being
described in one and the self same Sphere: Namely, as the side of the cube is
to the side of the Icosahedron, as was before manifest: for they are resolved
into pyramids of one and the self same altitude.

The 9. Proposition. If the side of an equilater triangle be rational: the
superficies shall be irrational, The 12. proposition after Campane.
of that kind which is called Mediall.
SVppose that ABG be an equilater triangle: and from the point A draw unto the
side BG a perpendicular line AD: and let the line AB be rational. Then I say,
that the superficies ABG is mediall. Construction.
Forasmuch as the line AB is in power sesquitertia to the line AD (by the
Corollary of the 12. of the thirtenth): of what parts the line AB contains
in power 12, of the same parts the line AD contains in power 9:
Demonstration.
wherefore the residue BD contains in power of the same parts 3. (^or the
line AB contains in power the lines AD and BD, by the 47. of the first).
Wherefore the lines AD and DB are rational and commensurable to the rational
line set AB, by the 6. of the tenth. But forasmuch as the power of the line AD
is to the power of the line DB in that proportion that 9. a square number is to
3. a number not square: therefore they are not in the proportion of square
numbers, by the Corollary of the 25. of the eight. And therefore they are not
commensurable in length, by the 9. of the tenth. Wherefore that which is
contained under the lines AD and DB, which are rational lines commensurable in
power only, is mediall, by the 22. of the tenth. But that which is contained
under the lines AD and DB, is double to the triangle ABD, by the 41. of the
first. Wherefore that which is contained under the lines AD and DB, is equal
to the whole triangle ABG (which is double to the triangle ABD, by the 1. of
the sixth). Wherefore the triangle ABG is mediall. If therefore the side of an
equilater triangle be rational: the superficies shall be irrational, of that
kind which is called Mediall: which was required to be proved.

A Corollary.
If an Octohedron and a Tetrahedron be inscribed in a Sphere whose diameter is
rational: The 13. proposition after Campane.
their superficieces shall be mediall. For those superficieces consiste of
equilater triangles, whose sides are commensurable to the diameter which is
rational, by the 13. and 14. of the thirtenth, and therefore they are
rational. But they are commensurable in power only to the perpendicular line,
and therefore they contain a mediall triangle, as it was before manifest.

The 10. Proposition. The 14. proposition after Campane.
If a Tetrahedron and an Octohedron be inscribed in one and the self same
Sphere: the base of the Tetrahedron shall be sesquitertia to the base of the
Octohedron, and the supersicieces of the Octohedron shall be sesquialtera to
the superficieces of the Tetrahedron.
Demonstration of the first part.
FOrasmuch as the diameter of the Sphere is in power sesquialtera to the side of
the Tetrahedron (by the 13. of the thirtenth) and the same diameter is in power
duple to the side of the Octohedron (by the 14. of the same book): therefore
of what parts the diameter contains in power six, of the same the side of
the Tetrahedron contains in power 4, and of the same the side of the
Octohedron contains in power 3. Wherefore the power of the side of the
Tetrahedron, is to the power of the side of the Octohedron in the same
proportion that 4. is to 3: which is sesquitertia. And like triangles (which
are the bases of the solides) described of those sides, shall have the one to
the other the same proportion that the squares made of those sides have. For
both the triangles are the one to the other, and also the squares are the one
to the other, in double proportion of that in which the sides are, by the 20.
of the sixth. Demonstration of the second part.
Wherefore of what parts one base of the Tetrahedron was 4: of the same are
four bases of the Tetrahedron 16: likewise of what parts of the same one base
of the Octohedron was 3: of the same are 8. bases of the Octohedron 24.
Wherefore the bases of the Octohedron are to the bases of the Tetrahedron, in
that proportion that 24. is to 16: which is sesquialtera. If therefore a
Tetrahedron and an Octohedron be inscribed in one and the self same Sphere:
the base of the Tetrahedron shall be sesquitertia to the base of the
Octohedron, and the superficieces of the Octohedron shall be sesquialtera to
the superficieces of the Tetrahedron: which was required to be proved.

The 11. Proposition. A Tetrahedron is to an Octohedron inscribed in one and
the self same Sphere, The 17. proposition after Campane.
in proportion, as the rectangle parallelogra^me contained under the line,
which contains in power 27. sixty four parts of the side of the
Tetrahedron, and under the line which is subsesquiocta^a to the same side of
the Tetrahedron, is to the square of the diameter of the sphere.
First part of the construction.
LEt us suppose a Sphere, whose diameter let be the line AB, and let the center
be the point H. And in it let there be inscribed a Tetrahedron ADC, and an
Octohedron AEKBG. And let the line NL contain in power ^7/64 of AC the side of
the Tetrahedron. And let the line ML be in length subsesquioctaua to the same
side. The^ I say, that the Tetrahedron ACD is to the Octohedron AEB, as the
rectangle parallelogramme contained under the lines NL and LM, First part of
the Demonstration.
is to the square of the line AB. Forasmuch as the line drawn from the angle A
by the center H perpe^dicularly upon the base of the Tetrahedron, falls upon
the ce^ter T of the circle which contains that base, and makes the right
line HT the sixth part of the diameter AB (by the Corollary of the 13. of the
thirtenth): therefore the line HA (which is drawn from the center to the
circu^ference) is triple to the line HT: and therefore the whole line AT is to
the line AH, (...). Let the Tetrahedron ADC be cut by a plain GHK passing by
the centr^ H, and being parallel unto the base DTC, by the Corollary of the 11.
of the eleventh. Now then the triangle ADC of the Tetrahedron, shall be cut by
the right line KG, which is parallel to the line DC, by the 16. of the
eleventh. Wherefore as the line AT is to the line AH, so is the line AC to the
line AG (by the 2. of the sixth). Wherefore the line AC is to the line AG
sesquitertia, that is, as 4. to 3. And forasmuch as the triangles ADC, AKG, and
the rest which are cut by the plain KHG, are like the one to the other, by the
5^ of the sixth: the pyramids ADC and AKG, shall be like the one to the other,
by the 7. definition of the ^leuenth. Wherefore they are in triple proportion
of that in which the sides AC and AG are, by the 8. of the twelfth. But the
proportion of the sides AC to AG is, as the proportion of 4. to 3. Now then,
if, by the 2. of the eight, ye find out 4. of the lest numbers in continual
proportion, and in that proportion that 4. is to 3: which shall be 64.48.36.
and 27: it is manifest, by the 15 definition of the fifth, that the extremes
^4. to 27. are in triple proportion of that in which the proportion given 4. to
3. is: Or the quantity of the proportion of 4. to 3. (which is 1. and 1/^)
being twice multiplied into it self, there shall be produced the proportion of
64. to 27. Wherefore the Pyramid or Tetrahedron ADC is to the pyramid AKG, as
64. is to ^7: which is triple to the proportion of 4. to 3. And forasmuch as
the line AC is unto the line AG in length sesquitertia: of what parts the line
AC contains in power 64: of the same parts does the line AG contain in
power 36. For (by the 2. of the sixth) the proportion of the powers or squares,
is duple to the porportion of the sides which are as 64. is to 48.

Now then upon the line RS which let be equal to the line AG, let there be an
equilater triangle QRS described (by the first of the first). Second part of
the c^nstruction.
And from the angle Q, draw to the base RS a perpendicular line QT. And extend
the line RS to the point X. And as 27. is to 64. (so by the corollary of the 6.
of the tenth) let the line RS be to the line RX. And divide ^he line RX into
two equal parts in the point V, and draw the line QV. And forasmuch as the
line RS is equal to the line AG, of what parts the line AC contains in
power 64. of the same part the line RS contains in power 36. for it is proved
that the line AG contains in power 36. of those parts: Second part of the
D^monstration.
And of what parts the line RS contains in power 36 of the same parts the
(...) QT contains in power ^7. by the corollary of the 12. of the thi^tenth.
Wherefore of what parts the line AZ contains in power 64. of the same parts
the line QT contains in power 27. Wherefore the right line QT shall be equ^ll
to the right line LN by supposition. Again forasmuch as the line RS is put
equal to the line AG: and of what parts the line RS contains in length 27.
of the same parts is the line RX put to contain in length 64. and of what
parts the line RX contains in length 64. of the same the line AC (which is
in length sesquitertia to the line AG or RS) contains 36. Wherefore the line
RV (which is the half of the line RX) contains in length of the same parts
32. of which the line AC contained in length 36. Wherefore the line RV is to
the line AC subsesquioctaua: and therefore the line RV is equal to the line LM
which is also subsesquioctaua to the same line AC. And forasmuch as the line NL
is equal to the line QT, and the line LM to the line RV (as before has been
proved) the rectangle parallelogramme contained under the lines QT and RV,
shall be equal to the rectangle parallelogramme, contained under the line NL
which is in power ^7/64 to the side AC, and under the line LM, which is in
length subsesquioctaua to the same side AC. But that which is contained under
the lines QT and RV is double to the triangle QVR by the 41. of the first: and
to the same triangle QVR is the triangle QXR duple by the first of the sixth.
Wherefore the whole triangle QXR is equal to that which is contained under the
lines QT and RV, and therefore is equal to the parallelogramme MN. And
forasmuch as the line RX by supposition contains in length 64. of those
parts of which the line RS contains 27: and the triangles QRX, and QRS are,
by the first of the sixth, in the proportion of their bases, that is, as 64. is
to 27: but as 64. is to 27. so is the pyramid or tetrahedron ADC to the pyramid
AKG: wherefore as the parallelogramme NM or the triangle QRX, is to the
triangle QRS, so i^ the pyramid ADC to the pyramid AKG. And forasmuch as the
semidiameter AH is the altitude of the pyramid AKG, and also of the two equal
and like pyramid^ of the octohedron which have their common base in the square
of the octohedron (by the corollary of the 14. of the thirtenth): therefore as
the base of the pyramid AKG (which is the triangle QRS) is to two squares of
the octoh^dron, that is, to the square of the diameter AB, which is equal to
those squares (by the 47. of the first), so is the pyramid AKG to the
octohedron AEB, by the 6. of the twelfth. And forasmuch as the parallelogramme
MN is to the base QRS, as the pyramid ADC is to the pyramid AKG, and the base
QRS is to the square of the line BE, as the pyramid AKG is to the octohedron
AEB: therefore by p^oportion of ^quality ta^ing away the meane^ (by the 22. of
the fifth) as the parallelogramme NM is to the square of the line BE, so is the
pyramid ADC to the octohedron AEB inscribed in one and the self same sphere.
But the parallelogramme NM is contained under the line NL which by supposition
is in power ^7/^^ to AC the side of the tetrahedron ADC, and under the line LM
which is also by supposition in length subsesquioctaua to the same line AC.
Wherefore a tetrahedron and an octohedron inscribed in one and the self same
sphere, are in proportion, as the rectangle parallelogramme contained under the
line, which contains in power 27. sixty four parts of the side of the
Tetrahedron, and under the line which is subsesquioctaua to the same side of
the Tetrahedron, is to the square of the diameter of the sphere: which was
required to be proved.

The 12. Proposition. The 18. proposition after Campane.
If a cube be contained in a sphere: the square of the diameter doubled, is
equal to all the superficieces of the cube taken together. And a perpendicular
line drawn from the center of the sphere to any base of the cube, is equal to
half the side of the cube.
Demonstration of the first part.
FOr forasmuch as (by the 15. of the thirtenth) the diameter of the sphere is in
power triple to the side of the cube: therefore the square of the diameter
doubled is sextuple to the base of the same cube. But the sextuple of the power
of one of the sides contains the whole superficies of the cube (...) or the
cube is composed of six square superficieces (by the 2^. diffinition of the
eleventh) whose sides therefore are equal: wherefore the square of the
di^meter ^oubled is equal to the whole superficies of the cube. And forasmuch
as the diameter of the cube, and the line which falls perpendicularly upon
the opposite bases of the cube, Demonstration of the second part.
do cut the one the other into two equal parts in the center of the sphere
which contains the cube (by the 2. corollary of the 15. of the thirtenth) and
the whole right line which coupleth the centres of the opposite bases, is
equal to the side of the cube by the 33. of the first, for it coupleth the
equal and parallel semidiameters of the bases: therefore the half thereof
shall be equal to the half of the side of the cube by the 15. of the fifth.
If therefore a cube be contained in a sphere: the square of the diameter
doubled is equal to all the superficieces of the cube taken together. And a
perpendicular line drawn from the center of the sphere to any base of the
cube, is equal to half the side of the cube: which was required to be prou^d.

A Corollary.
If two thirds of the power of the diameter of the sphere be multiplied into
the perpendicular line equal to half the side of the cube, The Corollary of
the 8. proposition after Campane.
there shall be produced a solid equal to the solid of the cube. For it is
before manifest that two third parts of the power of the diameter of the
sphere are equal to two bases of the cube. If therefore unto each of those two
thirds be applied half the altitude of the cube, they shall make each of those
solides equal to half of the cube, by the 31. of the eleventh: for they have
equal bases. Wherefore two of those solides are equal to the whole cube.

You shall understand (gentle reader) that Campane in his 14. book of Euclides
Elements has 18. propositio^s with diverse corollaries following of them. Some
of which propositions and corollaries I have before in the twelfth and
thirtenth books added out of Flussas as corollaries (which thing also I have
noted on the side of those corollaries, namely, with what proposition or
corollary of Campanes 14. book they do agree). The rest of his 18.
propositions and corollaries are contained in the twelve former propositions
and corollaries of this 14. book after Flussas: where ye may see on the side
of each proposition and corollary with what proposition and corollary of
Campanes they agree. But the eight propositions following together with their
corollaries, Flussas has added of him self, as he him self affirms.

The 13. Proposition. One and the self same circle contains both the square
of a cube, and the triangle of an Octohedron described in one and the self
same sphere.
SVppose that there be a cube ABG, and an Octohedron DEF described in one and
the self same sphere, whose diameter let be AB, or DH. And let the lines
drawn from the ce^tres (that is the semidiameters of the circles which
cto^aine the bases of those solides)^ be CA and ID. Then I say that the lines
CA and ID are equal. Forasmuch as AB the diameter of the sphere which
contains the cube, Dem^nstration.
is in power triple to BG the side of the cube (by the 15. of the thirtenth)
unto which side, AG the diameter of the base of the cube, is in power double
(by the 47. of the first): which line AG is also the diameter of the circle,
which contains the base (by the 9. of the fourth:) therefore AB the diameter
of the sphere is in power sesquialter to the line AG: namely, of what parts
the line AB, contains in power 12. of the same the line AG, shall contain in
power 8. And therefore the right line AC which is drawn from the ce^tre of the
circle to the circumference, contains in power of the same parts 2.
Wherefore the diameter of the sphere is in power sextuple to the line which is
drawn from the center to the circumference of the circle which contains the
square of the cube But the Diameter of the self same Sphere which contains
the Octohedron, is one and the self same with the diameter of the cube,
namely, DH, is equal to AB: and the same diameter is also the diameter of the
square which is made of the sides of the Octohedron: wherefore the said
diameter is in power double to the side of the same Octohedron, by the 14. of
the thirtenth. But the side DF is in power triple to the line drawn from the
center to the circumference of the circle which contains the triangle of the
octohedron (namely to the line ID) by the 12. of the thirtenth. Wherefore the
self same diameter AB or DH, which was in power sextuple to the line drawn
from the center to the circumference of the circle which contains the square
of the cube, is also sextuple to the line ID drawn from the center to the
circumference of the circle, which contains the triangle of the Octohedron:
Wherefore the lines drawn from the centres of the circles to the
circumferences which contain the bases of the cube and of the octohedron are
equal. And therefore the circles are equal, by the first diffinition of the
third. Wherefore one and the self same circle contains etc. as in the
proposition: which was required to be proved.

A Corollary.
Hereby it is manifest, that perpendiculars coupling together in a sphere, the
centres of the circles which contain the opposite bases of the cube and of the
Octohedron, are equal. For the circles are equal, by the second corollary of
the assumpt of the 16. of the twelfth: and the lines which passing by the
center of the sphere, couple together the centres of the bases, are also equal,
by the first corollary of the same. Wherefore the perpendicular which coupleth
together the opposite bases of the Octohedron, is equal to the side of the
cube. For either of them is the altitude erected.

The 14. Proposition. An Octohedron is to the triple of a Tetrahedron contained
in one and the self same sphere, in that proportion that their sides are.
SVppose that there be an octohedron ABCD, and a Tetrahedron EFGH: upon whose
base FGH erect a Prisme, Construction.
which is done by erecting from the angles of the base perpendicular lines
equal to the altitude of the Tetrahedron: which prisme shall be triple to the
Tetrahedron EFGH, by the first corollary of the 7. of the twelfth. Then I say
that the octohedron ABCD is to the prisme which is triple to the Tetrahedron,
EFGH, as the side BC is to the side FG. For forasmuch as the sides of the
opposite bases of the octohedron, Demonstration.
are right lines touching the one the other, and are parellels to other right
lines touching the one the other, for the sides of the squares which are
composed of the sides of the octohedro^, are opposite: Wherefore the opposite
plain triangles, namely, ABC and KID, shall be parallels, and so the rest by the
15. of the eleventh. Let the diameter of the Octohedron, be the line AD. Now
then the whole Octohedron is cut into four equal and like pyramids set upon
the bases of the octohedron, and having the same altitude with it, and being
about the Diameter AD: namely the pyramid set upon the base BID, and having his
top the point A, and also the pyramid set upon the base BCD, having his top
the same point A. Likewise the pyramid set upon the base IKD, and having his
top the same point A: and moreover the pyramid set upon the base CKD, and
having his top the former point A: which pyramids shall be equal by the 8.
diffinition of the eleventh (for they each consist of two bases of the
octohedron, and of two triangles contained under the diameter AD and two sides
of the octohedro^). Wherefore the prisme which is set upon the base of the
Octohedron, and having the same altitude with it, namelye, the altitude of the
parallel bases, as it is manifest by the former, is equal to three of those
pyramids of the Octohedron, by the first corollary of the seventh of the
twelft. Wherefore that prisme shall have to the other prisme under the same
altitude, composed of the 4. pyramids of the whole octohedron, the proportion
of the triangular bases, by the 3. corollary of the same. And forasmuch as 4.
pyramids are unto 3. pyramids in sesquitercia proportion, therefore the
trianguler base of the prisme which contains 4. pyramids, is in sesquitertia
proportion to the base of the prisme which contains three pyramids of the same
octohedron, and are set upon the base of the Octohedron and under the altitude
thereof: that is, in sesquitercia proportion to the base of the Octohedron. But
the base of the same octohedron is in sesquitertia proportion to the base of
the pyramid, by the ^enth of this book: Wherefore the triangular bases,
namely, of the prisme which contains four pyramids of the octohedron, and is
under the altitude thereof, are equal to the triangular bases of the prisme,
which contains three pyramids under the altitude of the pyramid EFGH. But the
prisme of the octohedron is equal to the octohedron: and the prisme of the
pyramid EFGH is proved triple to the same pyramid EFGH. Now then the prismes
set upon equal bases, are the one to the other as their altitudes are (by the
corollary of the 25. of the eleventh) namely, as are the parallelipidedons
their doubles, by the corollary of the 31. of the eleventh. But the altitude of
the Octohedron is equal to the side of the cube contained in the same sphere,
by the corollary of the 13. of this book. And the side of the cube is in power
to the altitude of the Tetrahedon in that proportion that 12. is to 16, by the
18. of the thirtenth: And the side of the octohedron is to the side of the
pyramid in that proportion that 18. is to 24. (by the same 18. of the
thirte^th) which proportion is one and the self same with the proportion of 12.
to 16. Wherefore that prisme which is equal to the Octohedron, is to the prisme
which is triple to the Tetrahedron, in that proportion that the altitudes, or
that the sides are. Wherefore an octohedro^ is to the triple of a Tetrahedron
contained in one and the self same sphere, in that proportion that their sides
are: which was required to be demonstrated.

A Corollary.
The sides of a Tetrahedron and of an Octohedro^ are proportional with their
altitudes. For the sides and altitudes were in power sesquitercia. Moreover the
diameter of the sphere is to the side of the Tetrahedron, as the side of the
Octohedron is to the ^^de of the cube^ namely, the powers of each is in
sesquialter proportion, by the 18. of the thirtenth.

The 15. Proposition. If a rational line containing in power two lines, make
the whole and the greater segment, and again containing in power two lines,
make the whole and the less segment: the greater segment shall be the side of
the Icosahedron, and the less segment shall be the side of the Dodecahedron
contained in one and the self same sphere.
SVppose that AG be the diameter of the sphere which contains the Icosahedron
ABGC. And let BG subtend the sides of the pentagon described of the sides of
the Icosahedron (by the 16. of the thirte^th.) Moreover upon the same diameter
AG, or DF equal unto it, Construction.
let there be described a dodecahedron DEFH, by the 1^. of the thirtenth, whose
opposites sides ED and FH let be cut into two equal parts in the points I and
K, and draw a line from I to K. And let the line OF couple two of the opposite
angles of the bases which are joined together. The^ I say that AB the side of
the Icosahedron is the greater segment which the diameter AG contains in
power together with the whole line, and line ED is the less segment, which the
same diameter AG or DF contains in power together with the whole.
Demonstration.
For forasmuch as the opposite sides AB and GC of the Icosahedron being
coupled by the diameters AG and BC, are equal and parallels, by the 2.
corollary of the 16. of the thirte^th: the right lines BG and AC which couple
the^ together are equal and parallels by the 33. of the first. Moreover the
angles BAC and ABG being subtended of equal diam^ters, shall by the 8. of the
first be equal, and by the 29 of the (...), they shall be right angles. Wherefore
the right line AG (...) in power the ^wo lines AB and BG, by the 47. of (...).
And forasmuch as the line BG subtendeth the angle of the pentagon composed of
the sides of the Icosahedron, the greater segment of the right line BG, shall be
the right line AB, by the ^. of the thirtenth: which line AB, together with the
whole line BG, the line AG contains in power. And forasmuch a^ the line IK
coupling the opposite and parallel sides ED and FH of the Dodecahedron, makes
at those points right angles, by the 3. corollary of the 17. of the thirtenth:
the right line OF which coupleth together equal and parallel lines EI and FK,
shall be equal to the same line IK, by the 33. of the first. Wherefore the angle
DEF shall be ^ right angle by the 29. of the first. Wherefore the diameter DF
contains in power the two lines ED and OF. But the less segment of the line
IK is ED the side of the Dodecahedron, by the 4. corollary of the 17^ of the
thirtenth. Wherefore the same line ED is also the less segment of the line OF
(which is equal unto the line IK): wherefore the diam^ter DF containing in power
the two lines ED and OF (by the 47. of the first) contains in pow^r^ ED the
side of the dodecahedron, the less segment, together with the whole. If
therefore a rational line AG or DF containing in power two lines AB and BG, do
make the whole line and the greater s^gment, and agai^e containing in power two
lines OF and ED, do make the whole line and the less segment: the greater
segment AB, shall be the side of the Icosahedron, and the less segment ED
shall be the side of the Dodecahedron contained in one and the self same
sphere.

The 16. Proposition. If the power of the side of an Octohedron be expressed by
two right line^ joined together by an extreme and me^ne proportion: the side of
the Icosahedron contained in the same sphere, shall be duple to the less segment.
LEt AB the side of the Octohedron ABG contain in power the two lines C and H,
which let have that proportion that the whole has to the greater segment (by
the corollarye of the first proposition added by Flussas after the last
proposition of the sixth book). Construction.
And let the Icosahedron contained in the same sphere be DEF, whose side let be
DE, and let the right line subtending the angle of the pentagon made of the
sides of the Icosahedron be the line OF. Then I say that the side ED is in
power double to the line H the less of those segmentes. Forasmuch as by that
which was demonstrated in the 15. of this book, Demonstration.
it was manifest that ED the side of the Icosahedron is the great^r segment of
the line EF^ and that the diameter DF contains in power the two lines ED and
OF, namely, the whole and the greater segment: but by suppo^ition the side AB
contains in power the two lines C and H joined together in the self same
proportion. Wherefore the line OF is to the line ED, as the line C, is to the
line H, by the ^. o^ this boke^ And alt^rna^^y by the 16. of the fiueth, the
line OF is to the line C, as the line ED, is to the line H. And forasmuch as
the line DF contains in power the two lines ED and OF, and the line AB
contains in power the two lines C and H: therefore the squares of the lines
OF and ED are to the square of the line DF, as the squares of the lines C and H
to the square AB. And alternately, the squares of the lines OF and ^D, are to
the squares of the lines C and H, as the square of the line DF is to the square
of the line AB^ But DF the diameter is (by the 14. of the thirten^h) i^ power
double to AB the side of the octohedron inscribed (by supposition) in the same
sphere. Wherefore the squares of the lines OF and ED, are double to the squares
of the lines C and H. And therefore one square of the line ED is double to one
square of the line H by the 12. of the fifth. Wherefore ED the side of the
Icosahedron is in power duple to the line H, which is the less segment. If
therefore the power of the side of an octohedron be expressed by two right lines
joined together by an extreme and mean proportion: the side of the Icosahedron
contained in the same sphere, shall be duple to the less segment.

The 17. Proposition. If the side of a dodecahedron, and the right line, of
whom the said side is the less segment, be so set that they make a right
angle: the right line which contains in power half the line subtending the
angle, is the side of an Octohedron contained in the self same sphere.
SVppose that AB be the side of a Dodecahedron, and let the right line of which
that side is the less segment be AG, namely which coupleth the opposite sides
of the Dodecahedron, by the 4. corollary of the 17. of the thirtenth:
Construction.
and let those lines be so set that they make a right angle at the point A. And
draw the right line BG. And let the line D contain in power half the line BG
(by the first proposition added by Flussas after the last of the sixth). Then
I say that the line D is the side of an Octohedron contained in the same
sphere. Forasmuch as the line AG makes the greater segment GC the side of the
cube contained in the same sphere (by the same 4. corollary of the 17. of the
thirtenth): Demonstration.
and the squares of the whole line AG. and of the less segment AB are triple
to the square of the greater segment GC, by the 4. of the thirtenth: Moreover
the diameter of the sphere, is in power triple to the same line GC the side of
the cube (by the 15. of the thirtenth: Wherefore the line BG is equal to the
(...). For it con^^ineth in power the two lines AB and AG (by the 47. of the
first,) and therefore it contains in power the triple of the line GC. But the
side of the Octohedron contained in the same sphere, is in power triple to
half the diameter of the sphere by the 14. of the thirtenth. And by
suppo^^tion the line D contai^^^^ in pow^^ the half of the line BG. Wherefore
the line D (containing in power the half of the same diameter) is the side of
an octohedron. If therefore the side of a Dodecah^dron and the right line of
whom the said side is the less segment, be so set that they make a right
angle: the right line which contains in power half the line subtending the
angle, is the side of an Oc^^^edron contained in the self same sphere: Which
was required to be proved.

A Corollary.
Unto what right line the side of the Octo^edron is in power sesquialter: unto
the same line the side of the Dodecahedron inscribed in the same sphere, is the
greater segment. For the side of the Dodecahedron is the greater segment of the
segment CG, unto which D the side of the Octohedron is in power sesqui^lter,
that is, is half of the power of the line BG, which was triple unto the line
CG.

The 18. Proposition. If the side of a Tetrahedron contain in power two right
lines joined together by an extreme and mean proportion: the side of an
Icosahedron described in the self same Sphere, is in power sesquialter to the
less right line.
SVppose that ABC be a Tetrahedron, and let his side be AB, Construction.
whose power let be divided into the lines AG and GB, joined together by an
extreme and mean proportion: namely, let it be divided into AG the whole line,
and GB the greater se^ment (by the Corollary of the first Proposition added by
Flussas after the last of the sixth). And let ED be the side of the Icosahedron
EDF contained in the self same Sphere. And let the line which subtendeth the
angle of the Pentagon described of the sides of the Icosahedron be OF. Then I
say, that ED the side of the Icosahedron is in power sesquialter to the less
line GB. Demonstration.
Forasmuch as (by that which was demonstrated in the 15. of this book) the
side ED is the gre^ter segment of the line OF which subtendeth the angle of the
Pentagon. But as the whole line OF is to the greater segment ED, so is the same
gr^^ter segment to the less (by the 30. of the sixth): and by supposition, AG,
was the whole line, and G^ the greater segment: Wherefore as OF is to ED, so is
AG to G^, by the second of the fouretenth. And alternately, the line OF is to
the line AG, as the line ED is to the line GB. And forasmuch as (by
supposition) the line AB contains in power the two lines AG and GB: therefore
(by the 4^. of the first) the angle AGB is a right angle. But the angle DEF is
a right angle, by that which was demonstrated in the 15. of this book.
Wherefore the triangles AG^ and FED, are equiangle, by the ^. of the sixth.
Wherefore their sides are proportional: namely, as the line ED is to the line
GB, so is the line FD to the line AB, by the 4. of the sixth. But by that which
has before been demonstrated, FD is the diameter of the Sphere which
contains the Icosah^dron: which diameter is in power sesquialter to AB the
side of the Tetrahedron inscribed in the^ same Sphere, by the 13. of the
thirtenth. Wherefore the line ED the side of the Icosahedron, is in power
sesquialter to G^ the greater segment or less line. If therefore the side of a
Tetrahedron contain in power two right lines joined together an extreme and
mean proportion: the side of an Icosahedron described in the self same
Sphere, is in power sesquialter to the less right line.

The 19. Proposition. The superficies of a Cube is to the superficies of an
Octohedron inscribed in one and the self same Sphere, in that proportion that
the solides are.
Construction.
SVppose that ABCDE be a Cube, whose four diameters let be the lines AC, BC,
DC, and EC produced on each side. Let also the Octohedron inscribed in the self
same Sphere be FGHK: whose three diameters let be FH, GK, and ON. Then I say,
that the cube ABD is to the Octohedron FGH, as the superficies of the cube is
to the superficies of the Octohedron. Draw from the center of the cube to the
base ABED, a perpendicular line CR. And from the center of the Octohedron draw
to the base GNH, a perpendicular line ^L. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as the three diameters of the cube do pass by the (...) C,
therefore, by the 2. Corollary of the 15. of the thirtenth, ^here shall be made
of the cube six pyramids, as this pyramid ABDEC, equal to the whole cube. For
there are in the cube ^ixe bases, upon which fall equal perpendiculars from
the cen^^^ by the Corollary of the Assump^ of the 16. of the twelfth, for the
bases are contained in equal circl^ of the Sphere. But in the Octohedron the
three diameters do make upon the 8. bases, 8. pyramids, having their tops in
the center, by the 3. Corollary of the 14^ of the thirtenth. Now the bases of
the cube and of the Octohedron are contained in equal circles of the Sphere,
by the 13. of this book. Wherefore they shall be equally distant from the
center, and the perpendicular lines CR and ^, shall be equal, by the Corollary
of the Assumpt of the 16. of the twelfth. Wherefore the pyramids of the cube
shall be under one and the self same altitude with the pyramids of the
Octohedron, namely, under the perpendicular line drawn from the center to the
bases. Wherefore six pyramids of the cube, are to 8. pyramids of the Octohedron
being under one and the same altitude, in that propo^tion that their bases are,
by the 6. of the twelfth: that is, one pyramid set upon six bases of the cube,
and having to his altitude the perpendicular line, which pyramid is equal to
the six pyramids, by the same 6. of the twelfth, is to one pyramid set upon
the 8. bases of the Octohedron, being equal to the Octohedron, and also under
on^ and the self same altitude, in that proportion that six bases of the
cube, which contain the whole superficies of the cube, are to 8. bases of the
Octohedron^ which contain the whole superficies of the Octohedron. For the
solides of those pyramids are in proportion the one to the other, as their
bases are, by the self same 6. of the twelfth. Wherefore ^he superficies of
the cube is to the superficies of the Octohedron inscribed in one and the self
same Sphere, in that proportion, that the solides are: which was required to be
proved.

The 20. Proposition. If a Cube and an Octohedron be contained in one and the
self same Sphere: they shall be in proportion the one to the other, as the
side of the Cube is to the semidiameter of the Sphere.
SVppose that the Octohedron AECDB be inscribed in the Sphere ABCD: and let the
cube inscribed in the same Sphere be FGHIM: whose diameter let be HI,
Construction.
which is equal to the diameter AC, by the 15. of the thirtenth: let the half
of the diameter be AE. Then I say, that the cube FGHIM is to the Octohedron
AECDB, as the side MG is to the semidiameter AE. Forasmuch as the diameter AC
is in power double to BK the side of the Octohedron (by the 14. of the
thirtenth) and is in power triple to MG the side of the cube (by the 15. of the
same): therefore the square BKDL shall be sesquial^er to FM the square of the
cube. From the line AE cut of a third part AN, and from the line MG cut of
likewise a third part GO, by the 9. of the sixth. Demonstration.
Now then the line EN shall be two third parts of the line AE, and so also
shall the line MO be of the line MG. Wherefore the parallelipipedon set upon
the base BKDL, and having his altitude the line EA, is triple to the
parallelipipedon set upon the same base, and having his altitude the line AN,
by the Corollary of the 31. of the eleventh: but it is also triple to the
pyramid ABKDL which is set upon the same base, and is under the same altitude
(by the second Corollary of the 7. of the twelfth). Wherefore the pyramid ABKDL
is equal to the parallelipipedon, which is set upon the base BKDL, and has to
his altitude the line AN. But unto that parallelipipedo^, is double the
parallelipipedon which is set upon the same base BKDL, and has to his
altitude a line double to the line EN, by the Corollary of the 31. of the first
and unto the pyramid is double the Octohedron ABKLDC, by the 2. Corollary of
the 14. of the thirtenth. Wherefore the Octohedron ABKDLC is equal to the
parallelipipedon set upon the base BKLD, and having his altitude the line EN
(by the 15. of the fifth). But the parallelipipedon set upon the base BKDL,
which is sesquialter to the base FM, and having to his altitude the line MO,
which is two third parts of the side of the cube MG, is equal to the cube FG:
by the 2. part of the 34. of the eleventh. (For it was before proved that the
base BKDL is sesquialter to the base FM). Now then these two parallelipipedons,
namely, the parallelipipedon which is set upon the base BKDL (which is
sesquialter to the base of the cube) and has to his altitude the line MO
(which is two third parts of MG the side of the cube) which parallelipipedon
is proved equal to the cube, and the parallelipipedon set upon the same base
BKDL, and having his altitude the line EN (which parallelipipedon is proved
equal to the Octohedron): these two parallelipipedons (I say) are the one to
the other, as the altitude MO, is to the altitude EN (by the Corollary of the
31. of the eleventh). Wherefore also as the altitude MO, is to the altitude EN,
so is the cube FGHIM, to the Octohedron ABKDLC, by the 7. of the fifth. But as
the line MO is to the line EN, so is the whole line MG to the whole line EA, by
the 18. of the fifth. Wherefore as MG the side of the cube, is to EA the
semidiameter, so is the line FGHIM to the Octohedron ABKDLC inscribed in one
and the self same Sphere. If therefore a cube and an Octohedron be contained
in one and the self same Sphere. they shall be in proportion the one to the
other, as the side of the cube is to the semidiameter of the Sphere: which was
required to be demonstrated.

A Corollary.
Distinctly to notefie the powers of the sides of the five solides by the power
of the diameter of the sphere.

The sides of the tetrahedron and of the cube do cut the power of the diameter
of the sphere into two squares which are in proportion double the one to the
other. The octohedron cutteth the power of the diameter into two equal
squares. The Icosahedron into two squares, whose proportion is duple to the
proportion of a line divided by an extreme and mean proportion, whose less
segme^t is the side of the Icosahedron. And the dodecahedron into two squares,
whose proportion is quadruple to the proportion of a line divided by an
extreme and mean proportion, whose less segment is the side of the
dodecahedron. For AD the diameter of the sphere, contains in power AB the
side of the tetrahedron, and BD the side of the cube, which BD is in power
half of the side AB. The diameter also of the sphere contains in power AC
and CD two equal sides of the octohedron. But the diameter contains in power
the whole line AE and the greater segment thereof ED, which is the side of the
Icosahedron, by the 15. of this book. Whe^fore their powers being in duple
proportion of that in which the sides are, by the first corollary of the 20. of
the sixth, have their proportion duple to the proportion of an extreme and
mean proportion. Farther the diameter co^tayneth in power the whole line AF,
and his less segment FD, which is the side of the dodecahedron, by the same
15. of this book. Wherefore the whole having to the less, ^ double proportion
of that which the extreme has to the mean, namely, of the whole to the
greater segment, by the 10. diffinition of the fifth, it follows that the
proportion of the power is double to the doubled proportion of the sides, by
the same first corollary of the 20. of the sixth: that is, is quadruple to the
proportion of the extreme and of the mean, by the diffinition of the sixth.

An aduertisment added by Flussas.
By this means therefore, the diameter of a sphere being given, there shall be
given the side of every one of the bodies inscribed. And forasmuch as three of
those bodies have their sides commensurable in power only, and not in length,
unto the diameter given (for their powers are in the proportion of a square
number to a number not square: wherefore they have not the proportion of a
square number to a square number, by the corollary of the 25. of the eight:
wherefore also their sides are incommensurabe in length by the 9. of the
tenth): therefore it is sufficient to compare the powers and not the lengths of
those sides the one to the other^ which powers are contained in the power of
the diameter: namely, from the power of the diameter, let there ble taken away
the power of the cube, and there shall remain the power of the Tetrahedron:
and taking away the power of the Tetrahedron, there remains the power of the
cube: and taking away from the power of the diameter half the power thereof,
there shall be left the power of the side of the octohedron. But forasmuch as
the sides of the dodecahedron and of the Icosahedron are proved to be
irrational (for the side of the Icosahedron is a less line, by the 16. of the
thirtenth: and the side of the dedocahedron is a residuall line, by the 17. of
the same) therefore those sides are unto the diameter which is a rational line
set, incommensurable both in length and in power. Wherefore their comparison
can not be diffined or described by any proportion expressed by numbers, by the
8. of the tenth: neither can they be compared the one to the other: for
irrational lines of diverse kinds are inco^me^surable the one to the other: for
if they should be commensurable, they should be of one and the self same
kind, by the 103. and 105. of the tenth, which is impossible. Wherefore we
seking to compare them to the power of the diameter, thought they could not be
more aptly expressed, then by such proportions, which cut that rational
power of the diameter according to their sides: namely, dividing the power of
the diameter by lines which have that proportion, that the greater segment has
to the less, to put the less segment to be the side of the Icosahedron: and
dividing the said power of the diameter by lines having the proportion of the
whole to the less segment, to express the side of the dodecahedron by the
less segment: which thing may well be done between magnitudes incommensurable.

The end of the fourtenth Book of Euclides Elements after Flussas.
The fiftenth book of Euclides Elements.
THis finetenth and last book of Euclide, or rather the second book of
Appollonius or Hypsicles, The argument of the 15. book.
teaches the inscription and circumscriptio^ of the five regular bodies one
within and about an other: a thing undoubtedly pleasant and delectable in mind
to contemplate, and also profitable and necessary in act to practice. For
without practice in act, it is very hard to se and conceive the constructions
and demonstrations of the propositions of this book, unless a man have a very
deep, sharp, and fine imagination. Wherefore I would wish the diligent stude^t
in this book, (to make the study thereof more pleasant unto him) to have
presently before his eyes, the bodies formed and framed of pasted paper (as I
taught after the diffinitions of the eleventh book.) And then to draw and
describe the lines and divisions, and superficieces, according to the
constructions of the propositions. In which descriptions if he be wary and
diligent, he shall find all things in these solid matters, as clear and as
manifest unto the eye, as were things before taught only in plain or
superficial figures. And although I have before in the twelfth book admonished
the reader hereof, yet because in this book chiefly that thing is required, I
thought it should not be irksome unto him, again to be put in mind thereof.

Farther this is to be noted, that in the Greek exemplars are found in this 15.
book only 5. propositions, which 5. are also only touched and set forth by
Hypsicies: unto which Campane adds 8. and so makes up the number of 13.
Campane undoubtedly although he were very well learned, and that generally in
all kinds of learning, yet assuredly being brought up in a time of rudenes,
when all good letters were darkened, and barberousnes had overthrown and
overwhelmed the whole world, he was utterly rude and ignorant in the Greek
tongue, so that certainly he never read Euclide in the Greek, nor (of like)
translated out of the Greek: but had it translated out of the Arabike tongue.
The Arabians were men of great study, and industry, and commonly great
Philosophers, notable Physicians, and in mathematical Arts most expert, so
that all kinds of good learning flourished and reigned amongst them in a manner
only. These men turned whatsoever good author was in the Greek tongue (of what
Art and knowledge so ever it were) into the Arabike tongue. And from thence were
many of the^ turned into the Latin, and by that means many Greek authors
came to the hands of the Latins, and not from the first fountain the Greek
tongue, wherein they were first written. As appears by many words of the
Arabike tongue yet remaining in such books: as are Zenith, nadir, helmuayn,
helmuariphe, and infinite such other. Which Arabians also in translating such
Greek works, were accustomed to add, as they thought good, and for the fuller
understanding of the author, many things: as is to be seen in diverse authors,
as, namely, in Theodosius de Sphera, where you see in the old translation
(which was vndoubteldy out of the Arabike) many propositions, almost every
third or fourth leaf. Some such copye of Euclide, most likely, did Campanus
follow, wherein he found those propositio^s, which he has more and above
those which are found in the Greek set out by Hypsicles: and that not only in
this 15. book, but also in the 14. book, wherein also ye find many propositions
more the^ are found in the Greek, set out also by Hypsicles. Likewise in the
books before, ye shall find many propositions added, and many inuerted, and
set out of order far otherwise, then they are placed in the Greek examplars.
Flussas also a diligent restorer of Euclide, a man also which has well
deserved of the whole Art of Geometry, has added moreover in this book (as
also in the former 14. book he added 8. pro^ositio^s) 9. propositio^s of his
own, touching the inscription, and circumscript^on (...) bodies, very si^gular
^ndoubtedly and wittye. All which, for that nothing should want to the desirous
lover of knowledge, I have faithfully with no small pains turned. And whereas
Fl^ss^^ in the beginning of the eleventh book, namely, in the end of the
diffinitions there ^e^, puts two diffinitions, of the inscription and
circumscription of solides or corporal figures, within or about the one the
other, which certainly are not to be rejected: yet for that until this
present 15. book, there is no mention made of the inscription or
circumscription of these bodies, I thought it not so convenient th^r^ to place
them, but to refer the^ to the beginning of this 15. book: where they are in
manner of necessity required to the elucidation of the Proposi^ions and
d^monstration^ of the same. The diffinitions are these.

Diffinition. 1.
A solid figure, is then said to be inscribed in a solid figure, when the
angles of the figure inscribed touch together at one time, either the angles
of the figure circumscribed, or the superficieces, or the sides.

Diffinition. 2.
A solid figure is then said to be circumscribed about a solid figure: when
together at one time either the angles, or the superficieces, or the sides of
the figure circumscribed, ^ouch the angles of the figure inscribed.

IN the four^^ book in the diffinitions of the inscription or circumscription
of plain rectiline figures one with in or about an other, was requ^red that
all the angles of the figu^^ inscribed, should at one time touch all the sides
of the figure circumscribed: but in the five regular solides (^o whom chefely
these two diffinitions pertain) for that the number of their angles,
superficieces, and sides are not equal, one compared to an other: it is not of
necessity, that all the angles of the solid inscribed should together at one
time touch either all the angles, or all the superficieces, or all the sides of
the solid circumscribed: but it is sufficient, that those angles of the
inscribed solid which touch, do at one time together each touch some one
angle of the figure circumscribed, or some one base, or some one side: so that
if the angles of the inscribed figure do at one time touch the angles of the
figure circumscribed, none of them may at the same time touch either the bases
or the sides of the same circumscribed figure: and so if they touch the bases,
they may touch neither angles nor sides: and likewise if they touch the
sides, they may touch neither angles nor bases. And although sometimes all the
angles of the figure inscribed can not touch either the angles, or the bases,
or the sides of the figure circumscribed, by reason the number of the angles,
bases or sides of the said figure circumscribed, wants of the number of the
angles of the ^igure inscribed yet shall those angles of the inscribed figure
which touch, so touch, that the void places left between the inscribed and
circumscribed figures shall on every side be equal and like. As ye may
afterward in this fiftenth book most plainly perceive.

The 1. Proposition. The 1. Problem. In a Cube given to describe In this
proposition as also in all the other following, by the name of a pyramid
understand a tetrahedron: as I have before admonished.
a trilater equilater Pyramid.
SVppose that the cube given be ABCDEFGH. In the same cube it is required to
inscribe a Tetrahedron. Draw these right lines AC, Construction.
CE, AE, AH, EH, HC. Demonstration.
Now it is manifest, that the triangles AEC, AHE, AHC, and CHE, are equilater,
for their sides are the diameters of equal squares. Wherefore AECH is a
trilater equilater pyramid, or Tetrahedron, and it is inscribed in the cube
given (by the first definition of this book): which was required to be done.

The 2. Proposition. The 2. Problem. In a trilater equilater Pyramid given to
describe an Octohedron.
SVppose that the trilater equilater pyramid given be ABCD, whose sides let be
divided into two equal parts in the points E, Z, I, K, L, T. Construction.
And draw these 12. right lines EZ, ZI, IE, KL, LT, TK, EK, KZ, ZL, LI, IT, and
TE. Which 12. right lines are, Demonstration.
by the 4. of the first, equal. For they subtend equal plain angles of the
bases of the pyramid, and those equal angles are contained under equal sides,
namely, under the halfes of the sides of the pyramid. Wherefore the triangles
TKL, TLI, TIE, TEK, ZKL, ZLI, ZIB, ZEK, are equilater: and they limitate, and
contain the solid TKLEZI. Wherefore the solid TKLEZI is an Octohedron: by
the 23. definition of the eleventh. And the angles of the same Octohedron do
touch the sides of the pyramid ABCD in the points E, Z, I, T, K, L. Wherefore
the Octohedron is inscribed in the pyramid (by the 1. definition of this
book). Wherefore in the trilater equilater pyramid given, is inscribed an
Octohedron: which was required to be done.

A Corollary added by Flussas.
Hereby it is manifest, that a pyramid is cut into two equal parts, by every
one of the three equal squares, which divide ye Octohedron into two equal
parts and perpendicularly. For the three diameters of those squares do in the
center cut the one the other into two equal parts and perpendicularly, by the
third Corollary of the 1^. of the thirtenth, which squares, as for example, the
square EKLI, do divide in sunder the pyramids and the prismes, namely, the
pyramid KLTD and the prisme KLTEIA from the pyramid EKZB, and the prisme
EKZILG, which pyramids are equal the one to the other, and so also are the
prismes equal the one to the other: by the 3. of the twelfth. And in like sort
do the rest of the squares, namely, KZIT and ZLTE: which squares, by the second
Corollary of the 14. of the thirtenth, do divide the Octohedron into two equal
parts.

The 3. Proposition. The 3. Problem. In a cube given, to describe an
Octohedron.
TAke a Cube, namely, ABCDEFGH. And divide every one of the sides thereof into
two equal parts. Construction.
And draw right lines coupling together the sections, as for example, these
right lines, PQ and RS, which shall be equal unto the side of the cube (by the
33. of the first) and shall divide the one the other into two equal parts in
the midst of the diameter AG in the point I (by the Corollary of the 34. of
the first). Wherefore the point I is the center of the base of the cube. And by
the same reason may be found out the centres of the rest of the bases, which
let be the points K, L, O, N, M. And draw these right lines LI, IM, MO, OL,
KI, KL, KM, KO, NI, NL, NM, and NO. Demonstr^tion.
And now forasmuch as the angle IPL is a right angle (by the 10. of the
eleventh, for the lines IP and PL are parallels to the lines RA and AB). And
the right line IL subtendeth the right angle IPL, namely, it subtendeth the
half sides of the cube which contain the right angle IPL, and likewise the
right line IM subtendeth the angle IQM which is equal to the same angle IPL,
and is contained under right lines equal to the right lines which contain the
angle IPL. Wherefore the right line IM is equal to the right line IL (by the
4. of the first). And by the same reason may we prove, that every one of the
right lines MO, OL, KI, KL, KM, KO, NI, NL, NM, and NO, which subtend angles
equal to the self same angle IPL, and are contained under sides equal to the
sides which contain the angle IPL, are equal to the right line IL. Wherefore
the triangles KLI, KLO, KMI, KMO, and NLI, NLO, NMI, NMO, are equilater and
equal: and they contain the solid IKLONM. Wherefore IKLONM is an Octohedron,
by the 23. definition of the eleventh. And forasmuch as the angles thereof do
altogether in the points I, K, L, O, N, M, touch the bases of the cube which
contains it, it follows that the Octohedron is inscribed in the cube (by
the first definition of this book.) Wherefore in the cube given, is described
an Octohedron: which was required to be done.

A Co^ollary a^ded by ^luss^^.
Hereby it is manifest, that right lines joining together the ^entres of the
opposite bases of the cube, do cut the one the other into two equal parts, and
perpendicularly, in the center of the cube, or in the center of the Sphere
which contains the cube.

For forasm^ch as the right lines LM and IO which kn^^ together the centres of
the opposite bases of the cube, do also knit together the opposite angl^s of
the Oct^hedron inscribed in the cube, it follows (by the 3. Corollary of the
14. of the thirtenth) that those lines LM and IO, do cut the one the other into
two equal parts in a point. But the diameters of the cube do also cut the one
the other into two equal parts, by the 39. of the eleventh. Wherefore that
point shall be the center of the sphere which contains the c^^^. For making
that point the center, and the space some one of the semidiameters, describe a
sphere, and it shall pass by the angles of the cube: and likewise making the
same point the center, and the space half of the line LM, describe a sphere,
and it shall also pass by the angles of the Octohedron.

The 4. Proposition. The 4. Problem. In an Octohedron given, to describe a
Cube.
SVppose that the Octohedron given be ABGDEZ. And let the two pyramids thereof
be ABGDE, and ZBGDE. Construction.
And take the centres of the triangles of the pyramid ABGDE, that is, take the
centres of the circles which contain those triangles: and let those centres be
the point^s T, I, K, L. And by these centres let there be drawn parall^l lines
^o the sides of the square BGDE: which parallel ^ig^^ lin^^ let be MTN, NLX,
XKO, and OIM. Demonstration.
And forasmuch as th^se parallel right lines do (by the 2. of the sixth) cut
the equal right lines AB, AG, AD, and AE, proportionally, therefore they
concur in the points M, N, X, O. Wherefore the right lines MN, NX, XO, and
OM, which subtend equal angles set at the point A, and contained under ^quall
right lines, are equal (by the 4. of the first). And moreover, seeing that they
are parallels unto the lines BG, GD, DE, E^, which make a square, therefore
MNXO is also a square, by the 10. of the eleventh. Wherefore also, by the 15.
of the ^ame, the square MNXO is parallel to the squar^ BGDE. For all the right
lines touch the one the other in the points of their sections. From the
centres T, I, K, L, draw these right lines TI, IK, KL, LT^ And draw the right
line AIC. And forasmuch as I is the center of the equilater triangle ABE,
therefore the right line AI being extended, cutteth the right line BE into two
equal parts (by the Corollary of the 12. of the thirtenth). And forasmuch as
MO is a parallel to BE, therefore the triangle AIO is like to the whole
triangle ACE (by the Corollary of the 2. of the sixth). And the right line MO
is divided into two equal parts in the point I (by the 4. of the sixth). And
by the same reason may we prove, that the right lines MN, NX, XO, are divided
into two equal parts in the points T, L, K. Wherefore also again, the bases
TI, IK, KL, LT, which subtend the angles set at the points M, O, X, N, which
angles are right angles, and are contained under equal sides, those bases, I
say, are equal. And forasmuch as TIM is an Isosceles triangle, therefore the
angles set at the base, namely, the angles MTI and MIT, are equal (by the ^^ of
the first). But the angle M is a right angle: wherefore each of the angles MIT
and MTI, is the half of a right angle. And by the same reason the angles OIK
and OKI, are equal. Wherefore the angle remaining, namely, TIK, is a right
angle (by the 13. of the first). For the right lines TI and IK are set upon the
line MO. And by the same reason may the rest of the angles, namely, IKL, KLT,
LTI, be proved right angles, and they are in one and the self same plain
superficies, namely, MNXO (by the 7. of the eleue^th). Wherefore the right
lines which join together the centres of the plain superficial triangles
which make the solid angle A, do make the square ITKL. And by the same reason
may be proved, that the plain superficial triangles of the rest of the five
solid angles of the Octohedron set at the points B, G, Z, D, E, do in the
centres of their bases receive squares, So that there are in number six
squares, for every Octohedron has six solid angles: and those squares are
equal: for their sides do contain equal angles of inclinations contained
under equal sides, namely, under those sides which are drawn from the center
to the side of the equal triangles (by the 2. Corollary of the 18. of the
thirtenth). Wherefore ITKLRPVS is a cube (by the 21. definition of the
eleventh) and has his angles in the centres of the bases of the Octohedron,
and therefore is inscribed in it (by the first definition of this book).
Wherefore in an Octohedron given is described a cube: which was required to be
done.

The 5. Proposition. The 5. Problem. In an Icosahedron given, to describe a
Dodecahedron.
TAke an Icosahedron, one of whose solid angles let be Z. Construction.
Now forasmuch as (by those things which have been proved in the 16. of the
thirtenth) the bases of the triangles which contain the angle of the
Icosahedron do make a pentagon inscribed in a circle, let that pentagon be
ABGDE, which is made of the five bases of the triangles, whose plain
superficial angles remaining make the solid angle given, namely, Z. And take
the centres of the circles which contain the foresaid triangles, which centers
let be the points I, T, K, M, L: and draw these right lines IT, TK, KM, ML,
LI. Demonstration.
Now then a perpendicular line drawn from the point Z to the plain
superficies of the pentagon ABGDE, shall fall upon the center of the circle
which contains the pentagon ABGDE (by those things which have been proved in
the self same 16. of the thirtenth). Moreover perpendicular lines drawn from
the center to the sides of the pentagon ABGDE shall in the points C, N, O
where they fall cut the right lines AB, BG, GD into two equal parts (by the
3. of the third). Draw these right lines CN and NO. And forasmuch as the angles
CBN and NGO are equal, and are contained under equal sides, therefore the
base CN is equal to the base NO (by the 4. of the first). Moreover
perpendicular lines dr^^^e from the point Z to the b^s^^ of the pentagon ABGDE,
shall likewise cut the bases into two equal parts (by th^^ of the third).
For the perpendiculars pass by the center (by the corollary of the 12. of the
thirte^th): Wherefore th^se perpendicular lines shall fall upon the points C, N,
O. And now forasmuch as the right lines ZI, IG are equal to the right lines
ZT, TN, and also to the right lines ZK, KO (by reason of the likeness of the
equal triangles): therefore the line IT is a parallel to the line CN, and so
also is the line TK to the line NO (by the 2. of the sixth). Wherefore the angles
ITK, and CNO are equal (by the 11. of the eleventh). Again forasmuch as the
triangles CBN, and NGO are Isoscels triangles, therefore the angles BCN and BNC
are equal (by the 5. of the first). And by the same reason the angles GNO, and
GONE are equal. And moreover the angles BCN and BNC are equal to the angles
GNO, and GONE, for that the triangles CBN and NGO are equal and like. B^^ the
three angles BNC, CNO, ONG, are equal to two right angles (by the 13. of the
first): for that upon the right line B^ are set the right lines CN and ON. And
the three angles of the triangle CBN, namely, the angles BNC, BCN or GNO (for
the angle GNO is equal to the angle BCN as it has been proved) and NBC are
also equal to two right angles (by the 32. of the first). Wherefore taking
away the angles BNC and GNO, the angle remaining, namely, CNO is equal to the
angle remaining, namely, to CBN. Wherefore also the angle ITK (which is proved
to be equal to the angle CNO) is equal to the angle CBN. Wherefore ITK is the
angle of a pentagon. And by the same reason may be pro^ed that the rest of the
angles, namely^ the angles TIL, ILM, LMK, MKT, are equal to the rest of the
angles, namely to BAE, AED, EDG, DGB. Wherefore ITKML is an equilater and
equiangle pentagon (by the 4. of the first) For the equal bases of the
pentagon ITKML do subtend equal angles set at the point Z, and comprehended
under equal sides. Moreover it is manifest that the pentagon I TKML is in one
and the self same plain superficies. For foras^uch as the angles ONC and NCP
are in one and the self some plain superficies, namely in the superficies
ABGDE: But unto the same plain superficies the plain superficieces of the
angles KTI and TIL are parallels (by the 15. of the eleventh). And the
triangles KTI and TIL concur: wherefore they are in one and the self same
plain superficies (by the corollary of the 16. of the eleue^th). And by the
same reason so may we prove that the triangles ILM, LMK, MKT are in the self
same plain superficies wherein are the triangles KTI and TIL. Wherefore the
pentagon ITKML is in one and the self same plain superficies. Wherefore the
solid angle of the Icosahedron, namely the solid angle at the point Z
subtendeth an equilater and equiangle pentagon plain superficies, which
pentagon has his plain superficial angles in the centres of the triangles
which make the solid angle Z. And in like sort may we prove that the other
eleven solid angles of the Icosahedron, each of which eleven solid angles are
equal and like to the solid angle Z (by the 16. of the thirtenth) are
subtended unto pentagons equal, and like, and in like sort set to the pentagon
ITKML. And forasmuch as in those pe^tagons the right lines, which join
together the centers of the bases, are common sides, it follows that those
12. pentagons include a solid which solid is therefore a d^dec^hedron (by the
24. diffinition of the eleventh): and is, by the first diffinition of this
book, described in the Icosahedron, five sides wh^reof (...) set upon the
pentagon ABGDE. Wherefore in an Icosahedron given i^ inscribed a dodecahedron:
which was required to be done.

An annotation of Hypsi^les.
This is to be noted, that if a man should demand (...) many sides an
Icosahedron has, we may thus answer: It is manifest that an Icosah^r^n is
contained under 20. triangles, and that every triangle consists of three
right lin^s. Now then multiply the 20. triangles into the sides of one of the
triangles, and so shall there be produced 6^. ^he half of which is 30. And so
many sides has an Icosahedron. And in like sort in a dodecahedron, forasmuch
as 12. pentagons make a dodecahedron, and every pentagon contains ^. right
lines^ multiply ^^ into 12. and there shall be produced 60. the half of which
is 30. And so many are the sides of a dodecahedron. And the reason why we take
the half, i^, for that every side whether it be of a triangle or of a
pentagon, or of a square as in a cube, ^s taken twice. And by the same reason
may you find out how many sides are in a cube, and in a pyramid, and in an
octohedron.

But now again if ye will find out the number of the angles of every one of
the solid figures, when ye have done the same multiplication that ye did
before, di^id^ the same sides, by the number of the plain superficieces which
comprehend one of the angles of the solides As for example, forasmuch as 5.
triangles contain the solid angle of an Icosahedron, divide 60. by 5. and
there will come forth 12. and so many solid angles has an Icosahed^on. In a
dodecahedron, forasmuch as three pentagons comprehend an angle, divide 60. by
3. and there will come forth 20: and so many are the angles of a dodecahedron.
And by the same reason may you find out how many angles are in each of the
rest of the solid figures.

That which here follows concerning the inclination of the plains of the
five solides, was before tought (though not altogether after the same manner)
out of Flussas in the latter ^nde of the 13 book.
If it be required to be known, how one of the plains of any of the five
solides being given, there may be found out the inclination of the said plains
the one to the other, which contain each of the solides. This (as says
Isidorus our great master) is fo^^d out after this manner. It is manifest that
in a cube, the plains which contain i^, do^ (...) the one the other by a
right angle. But in a Tetrahedron, one of the triangles being given, let the
ends of one of the sides of the said triangle be the centers, and let the
space be the perpendicular line drawn from the top of the triangle to the
base, and describe circumfer^nces of a circle, which shall cut the one the
other: and from the intersection to the centers draw right lines, which shall
contain the inclination of the plains co^tayning the Tetrahedron. In an
Octo^edron, take one of the sides of the triangle ther^of, and upon it describe
a square, and draw the diagonall line, and making the centres, the ends of the
diagonall line, and the space likewise the perpendicular line drawn from the
top of the triangle to the base, describe circumferences: and again from the
common section to the centres draw right lines, and they shall contain the
inclination sought for. In an Icosahedron, upon the side of one of the
triangles thereof, describe a pentagon, and draw the line which subtendeth one
of the angles of the said pentagon, and making the centres the ends of that
line, and the space the perpendicular line of the triangle, describe
circumferences: and draw from the common intersectio^ of the circumferences,
unto the centres right lines: and they shall contain likewise the inclination
of the plains of the icosahedron. In a dodecahedron, take one of the
pentagons, and draw likewise the line which subtendeth one of the angles of the
pentagon, and making the centres the ends of that line, and the space, the
perpendicular line drawn from the section into two equal parts of that line
to the side of the pentagon, which is parallel unto it, describe
circumferences: and from the point of the intersection of the circumferences
draw unto the centres right lines: and they shall also contain the inclination
of the plains of the dodecahedron. Thus did this most singular learned man
reason, thinking the de^onstration in every one of them to be plain and
clear. But to make the demonstration of them manifest, I think it good to
declare and make open his wordes^ and first in a T^trahedron^

Suppose that there be a Pyramid or Te^rahedro^ ABCD contained under 4.
equilater triangles: and let the top thereof be the point D. And (by the 10^
of the first) divide the side AD into two equal parts in the poi^t E^ and draw
the lines BE and EG. And forasmuch as ADB and ADC are equilater triangles, and
the line AD is divided into two equal parts, therefore the lines BE and EC
fall perpendicularly upon the line AD, by the 8. of the first. Now I say that
the angle BEC is an acute angle. For forasmuch as the line AC is double to the
line AE (for by construction the line AD, which is equal to the line AC, is
divided into two equal parts in the point E): therefore the square of the
line AC is quadruple to the square of the line AE (by the c^rollary of the 20.
of the sixth). But the square of the line AC is equal to the squares of the
lines AE and EC (by the 47. of the first): and the square of the line AC is to
the square of the line CE (sesquitertia) as 4. to 3: (for the square of the
line AC is proved quadruple to the square of the line AE): wherefore the square
of the line BC (which is equal to the square of the line AC) is less then the
squares of the two perpendiculars BE and EC (for it is unto them in
subsesquialter proportion, namely, as 4. to 6. or 2. to 3.) Wherefore (by the
13. of the second) the angle ^ EC is an acute angle. Now forasmuch as the line
AD is the common intersection of the two plains ABD, and ADC, and in either of
those plains to one point of the common section are drawn perpendicular lines
^E and EC which contain an acute angle BEC^ therefore (by the 5. diffinition
of the eleventh) the angle BEC is the inclination of the plains, and it is
given. For the line BC, which is the side of the triangle, being given, and any
one of the lines BE or EC, which is the perpendicular of the equilater
triangle, being also ge^e^: make the centres the poynte^ B and C, that is, the
ends of one of the sides, and the space the perpendicular of the triangle, and
describe circumferences, and they shall cut the one the other in the point ^.
And from the point B draw to the centres B and C right lines, and they shall
contain the inclination of the plain^^: and this is it which Isidorus before
said. And now that making the centres the points B and C, and the space the
perpendicular of the triangle, the circl^s described shall cut the one the
other, it is manifest, for either of the lines BE and EC i^ greater then half^
of the line BC. The reason of this ^ou shall most plainly see in that which is
added out of ^roclus after the 22. proposition of the first book.
Now if the centers were the points B and C, and the space the half of the
line BC, the circles described shall touch the one the other. But if the space
^e less then the half, they shall neither touch nor cut the one the other: but
if it be greater, they shall undoubtedly cut.

Again suppose that upon the square ABCD be set a pyramid, having his altitude
the point E, and let the triangles which contain it, be equilater: wherefore
the pyramid ABCDE shall be the half of the Octohedron (by the 2 corollary of the
14. of the thirtenth.) Divide by the 10^ of the first) one side of one of the
triangles, namely, the line AE, into two equal parts in the point F: and draw
the lines BF and DF: wherefore the li^es BF and DF are equal and fall
perpendicularly upon the line AE (by the 4. and 8. of the first) Then I say
that the angle BFD, is an ^^tuse angle. For draw the line BD. And forasmuch as
AC is a square, and the diameter is ^D: therefo^^ the s^uare of the line BD is
double to the square of the line DA) by the 47. of the first.) But the square
of the li^^ DA is to the square of the line DF, as ^. is to 3.) as was in the
former proved.) Wherefore the square of the line DB is to the square of the
line FD, as 8. is to 3. (namely, as 2. to 1. and 4. to 3. added together), but
the line DF is equal to the line FB. Wherefore the square of the line DB, is
greater then the squares of the lines DF and FB (for it is to them, as 8. is to
6.) Wherefore the angle BFD, is an obtuse angle (by the 12. of the second.) And
forasmuch as the line AE is the common section of the two plains ABE and ADE
cutting the one the other, and in either of those plains to a point in the
common section are drawn perpendicular lines, BF and DF, containing an obtuse
angle BFD: wherefore the angle BFD (contained of the right lines BF and DF) is
the angle of the inclination of the plains ABE and ADE. If therefore the angle
BFD be given, the said inclination also is g^uen. For forasmuch as the
triangle of the Octohedron is given, and one of the sides of the Octohedron is
the line AD, and upon it is described the square AC, and BD the diameter of
that square being given, and the lines BF and FD are the perpendiculars of that
triangle: wherefore also the angle BFD is given. Now then if upon the side of
the triangle be described a square: as the square AC, and the diameter BD be
drawn, if also making the centres the points B and D, and the space, the said
perpendicular of the triangle, we describe circles, they shall cut the one the
other in the point F. And the right lines which are drawn from the centres to
the point F shall contain that inclination, which is comprehended under the
angle BFD, which is the angle of the inclination of those plains. And it is
manifest that either of the lines BF and FD, is greater then the half of the
line. For for that, by the demonstration, it was proved that the square of the
line BD is to the square of the line FD, as 8. is to 3: therefore the square of
half the line BD, is to the square of the line FD, as ^. is to three (for the
square of half the line BD is the fourth part of the square of the whole line
BD, by the 4. of the second). Wherefore either of the lines BF and FD, is
greater then the line BD: wherefore the circles which are described by those
lines BF and FD, and having their centres the points B and D shall cut the one
the other. And thus much touching the octohedron.

As touching the Icosahedron, suppose an equilater pe^tagon ABCDE, and upon it
let there be set a pyramid having his top the point F: and let the triangles
which co^taine it, be equilater. Now the^ the pyramid ABCDEF, shall be a part of
the Icosahedro^. Let FC one side of one of the triangles be divided into two
equal parts in the point G. And draw the lines BG and GD, which shall be equal
and fall perpe^dicularly upon the line FC (as it is easy to se by the
demo^stratio^ of the former). The^ I say that ye angle BGD is an obtuse angle:
which thing is manifest. For drawing the line BD, it shall subtend the obtuse
angle BCD of the pentagon (which is obtuse, by that which was demonstrated in
the end of the first corollary of the 18. of the 13. book:) But the angle BGD
is greater then the angle BCD, for the lines BG and GD, are less then the
lines BC and CD: wherefore likewise as in the former the angle BGD is the
inclination of the triangles BFC, and CFD. Wherefore the angle BGD being given,
the inclination also of the plains of the Icosahedron shall be given. For if
upon the side of the triangle of the Icosahedron be described an equilater
pentagon, and then be drawn the line which subtendeth two sides of the
pentagon, as in this figure the line BD, if also the perpendiculars BG and GD
of the triangles be drawn, the angle BGD shall be given. For if ye make the
centres the ends of the line which subtendeth two sides of the pentagon, as
the points B and D, and the space the perpendicular of the triangle, and so
describe circles, they shall cut the one the other in the point G, and from the
point of the inters^ction G, dra^e unto the centres B and D right (...) they
shall contain the angle of the inclination BGD. And it is manifest, by the
description of the figure, that either of the lines BG and GD is greater then
(...) line BD. Which (...) may also thus be proved. Suppose an equilater HKL,
and upon K^ (one of the sides (...)) describe an equilater pentagon KMNXL, and
draw the line ML. And divide (^y the 10. of the first) the side KL into two
equal parts in the point O^ and draw the line H^, which shall be the
perpendicular of the triangle HKL (by the 8. of the first.) Then I say that the
line HO is greater then half of the line ML, which subtendeth the inclination
of the plains. For from the point K draw (by the 1^. of the first) unto the
line ML a perpendicular line KP: and forasmuch as the angle KLP is greater
then the third part of a right angle, that is, then the angle KHO^ (For the
angle KLM is two fi^^th parts of a righ^ angle, by the 4. of the first, and by
the assumpt put after the first corollary of the 18. of the thirtenth book,
and the angle K^O is one third part of one right angle; for the whole angle
^HL, whereof the angle KHO is the half, by the 4. of the first, is one third
part of two right angles, by the ^^. of the first^) upon the line ^L, and at
the point L put unto the angle KHO an equal angle PL^ (by the 23. of the
first.) Wherefore the triangles PLR and OHK, shall be equiangle, by the corollary
of the 32. of the first. Wherefore also the line PL shall be the perpendicular of
the (...) triangle described upon the line RL. Wherefore (by the (...) added by
Flussas after the 12. proposition of the thirtenth book) the line RL is in
power sesquitercia, that is, as 4. is to 3. to the perpendicular LP. But the
(...) LR (by the 19. of the first. Wherefore ye square of the li^e KL has to
the square of the line LP a greater proportion the^ has 4. to 3: but it has
to the square of the line HO that proportion that 4. has to 3. Wherefore the
line KL has to the line LP a greater proportion then it has to the line HO.
Wherefore the line HO is greater then the line LP, by the 10. of the fifth.

As concerning a Dodecahedron. Take one of the squares of the cube whereon the
Dodecahedron is described (by the 17. of the thirtenth): and let the same be
ABCD: and let the two plains of the Dodecahedron set upon it be AEBFG, and
GFDHC. Then I say that here also is given the inclination of the two pentagons.
Divide (by the 10. of the first) the side FG into two equal parts in the point
K. And from the point K draw unto the line FG in either of the plains AEBFG
and GFDHC perpendicular lines KL and KM (by the 11. of the first.) And draw the
line ML. First I say that the angle MKL is an obtuse angle. For, by the
discourse of the demonstration of the 17. proposition of the 13. book, where is
taught the description of the Dodecahedron, it is manifest, that the line
drawn perpendicularly from the point K to the square ABCD, is equal to half
the side of the pentagon. Wherefore it is less then half of the line ML.
Wherefore the angle MKL is an obtuse angle. Moreover by the former discourse of
the 17. proposition of the 13. book, it was manifest that the square of the
line KL is equal to the square of half the side of the cube, and to the square
of half the side of the pentagon. And forasmuch as the lines KL and KM are
equal, and a^e ^^he greater then half of the line ML^ wherefore the angle MKL
being given, there shall also be (...) the inclination of the two plains of
the Dodecahedron. For forasmuch as the side of the square ABCD subtendeth two
sides of the pentagon given, the pentagon also is given, and therefore also is
given the line ML. But there is also given either of the lines MK and KL: for
they are drawn perpendicularly from the section into two equal parts of the
line AB, which subtendeth two sides of the pentagon unto the side of the
pentagon, which is a parallel unto the line AB: namely, to the side FG:
Wherefore there is given the angle LKM, which is the angle of the inclination
sought for. And now touching Isidorus words, he says, that the pentagon
being given, we must draw the line which subtendeth two sides of the pentagon,
which line 15 equal to the side of the cube: and making the centres the ends
of that line, and the space the perpendicular line, which is drawn from the
section of the same line into two equal parts to the side of the pentagon which
is parellel to the said line, as in the former description the line KL, or the
line KM, describe circumferences, and from the point of the intersection of the
circumferences draw unto the centres right lines which shall contain the angle
of the inclination. For by that which was said before, namely; touching the
Icosahedron, it is manifest that the perpendicular KL, is greater then half of
the (...) ML or CD, which is equal unto it. And therefore the circles described
by those perpendiculars and having to their centres the end of the line CD,
shall cut the one the other, as was before proved.

The end of the fiuetenth Book of Euclides Elements after (...)
The 6. Proposition. The 6. Problem. In an Octohedron given, to inscribe a
trilater equilater Pyramid.
SVppose tha^ the Octohedron where^^ the Tetrahedron is required to be
ins^ri^^^, be ABGDEI. Take (...) bases of the Octo^^dron, that is, Construction.
(...) close in the lowe^^ triangle BGD, namely, AE^, HEAD, IGD: and let the
fourth be AIB, which is opposite to the lowest triangle before put, namely, to
EGD. And take the centres of those four bases, which let be the points H, C,
N, ^. And upon the triangle HCN erecte a pyramid HCNL. Now ^orasmuch as these
two bases of the Octohedron, namely, AGE and ABI are set upon the right lines
EG and BY which are opposite the one to the other^ in the square GEBI of the
Octohedron, from the poin^ A dra^e by the centres of the bases, namely, by the
centres H, L, perpendicular lines AHF, ALK, cutting the lines EG and BY (...)
two equal parts in the points F, K (by the Corollary of the 1^ of the
thirtenth). Wherefore a right line drawn from the point F to the point K,
Demonstration.
shall be a parallel and equal to the sides of the Octohedron, namely, to ^^
and GI (by the 33. of the first). And the right line HL which cutteth the (...)
AF, AK, proportionally (for AH and AL are drawn from the centres of equal
circles to the circumferences) is a parallel to the right line FK (by the 2. of
the sixth) and also to the sides of the Octohedron, namely, to E^ and IG (by
the 9. of the eleventh). Wherefore as the line AF is to the line AH, so is the
line FK to the line HL (by the 4. of the sixth): For the triangles AFK and AHL
are like (by the Corollary of the 2. of the sixth). But the line AF is in
sesquialter proportion to the line AH: (for the side EG makes HF the half of
the right line AH, by the Corollary of the 12. of the thirtenth). Wherefore FK
or GI the side of the Octohedron, is sesquialter to the righ^line HL. And by
the same reason may we prove that the sides of the Octohedron are sesquialter
to the rest of the right lines which make the pyramid HNCI, namely, to the
right line^ ^, N, NC, CI, LN, and CH: wherefore those right lines are equal,
and therefore the triangle^ which are described of them, namely, the triangles
HCN, HNL, NCL, and CHL. which make the pyramid HNCL, are equal and equilater.
And forasmuch as the angles of the same pyramid, namely, the angles H, C, N, L,
do end in the centres of the bases of the Octohedron, therefore it is inscribed
^o the same Octohedron, by the first definition of this book. Wherefore in an
Octohedron ^euen, is inscribed a tril^ter equila^^^ ^^^amis^ which was required
to ^e done.

A Corollary.
The bases of a Pyramid inscribed in an Octohedron, are parallels to the bases
of the Octohedron. For forasmuch as the sides of the bases of the Pyramid
touching the one the other, are parallels to the sides of the Octohedron which
also touch the one the other, as for example, HL was proved to be a parallel to
GI, and LC to DI, therefore, by the 15. of the eleventh, the plain superficies
which is drawn by the lines HL and LC, is a parallel to the plain superficies
drawn by the lines GI and DI. And so likewise of the rest.

Second Corollary.
A right line joining together the centres of the opposite bases of the
Octohedron, is sesquialter to the perpendicular line drawn from the angle of
the inscribed pyramid to the base thereof. For forasmuch as the pyramid and the
cube which contains it do in the self same points end their angles (by the
1. of this book): therefore they shall both be enclosed in one and the self
same Octohedron (by the 4. of this book). But the diameter of the cube joins
together the centres of the opposite bases of the Octohedron, and therefore is
the diameter of the Sphere which contains the cube and the pyramid inscribed
in the cube (by the 13. and 14. of the thirtenth): which diameter is
sesquialter to the perpendicular which is drawn from the angle of the pyramid
to the base thereof: for the line which is drawn from the center of the sphere
to the base of the pyramid, is the sixth part of the diameter (by the 3.
Corollary of the 13. of the thirtenth). Wherefore of what parts the di^meter
contains six, of the same parts the perpendicular contains four.

The 7. Proposition. The 7. Problem. In a dodecahedron given, to inscribe an
Icosahedron.
SVppose that the dodecahedron given, be ABCDE. And let the centres of the
circles which co^tayne six bases of the same dodecahedron be the polnes L, M,
N, P, Q, O. Construction.
And draw these right lines OL, OM, ON, OP, OQ, and moreover these right lines
LM, MN, NP, PQ, QL. And now forasmuch as equal and equilater pentagons are
contained in equal circles, therefore perpendicular lines drawn from their
centres to the sides shall be equal (by the 14. of the third), and shall
divide the sides of the dodecahedron into two equal parts (by the 3. of the
same). Wherefore the foresaid perpendicular lines shall co^outre in the point
of the section, Demonstration.
wherein the sides are divided into two equal parts, as LF and MF do. And
they also contain equal angles, namely, the inclination of the bases of the
dodecahedron, (by the 2. corollary of the 18. of the thirtenth). Wherefore the
right lines LM, MN, NP, PQ, QL, and the rest of the right lines which join
together two centres of the bases, and which subtende the equal angles
^ontayned under the said equal perpendicular lines, are equal the one to the
other (by the 4. of the first). Wherefore the triangles OLM, OMN, ONP, OPQ,
OQL, and the rest of the triangles which are set at the centres of the
pentagons, are equilater and equal. Now forasmuch as the 12. pentagons of a
dodecahedron contain 60. plain superficial angles, of which 60. eue^y ^hre
make one solid angle of the dodecahedron, it follows that a dodecahedron
has 20. solid angles: but each of those solid angles is subte^ded of each of
the triangles of the Icosahedron, namely, of each of those triangles which join
together the centres of the pentago^s which make the solid angle, as we have
before proved. Wherefore the 20, equal and equilater triangles which subtende
the 20. solid angles of the dodecahedron, and have their sides which are
drawn from the centres of the pentagons common, do make an Icosahedron (by
the 25. diffinition of the eleventh): and it is inscribed in the dodecahedron
given (by the first diffinition of this book) for that the angles thereof do
all at one time touch the bases of the dodecahedron. Wherefore in a
dodecahedron geuen^ i^ inscribed an Icosahedron: which was required to be done.

The 8. Proposition. The 8. Problem. In a dodecahedron given, to include a
cube.
DEscribe (by the 17. of the thirtenth) a dodecahedron. Construction.
And by the same, take the 12. sides of the cube, each of which subtend one
angle of each of the 12. bases of the dodecahedron: for the side of the cube
subtendeth the angle of the pentagon of the dodecahedron, by the 2. corollary
of the 17. of the thirtenth. If therefore in the dodecahedron described (by the
self same 17. proposition) we draw the 12. right lines sub^ended under the
foresaid 12. angles, and ending in 8. angles of the dodecahedron, and
concurring together in such sort that they be in like sort situate, as it was
plainly proved in that proposition, then shall it be manifest, that the right
lines drawn in this dodecahedron from the foresaid 8. angles thereof do make
the foresaid cube, which therefore is included in the dodecahedron, for that
the sides of the cube are drawn in the sides of the dodecahedron, and the
angles of the same cube are set in the angles of the said dodecahedron. As for
example take 4. pentagons of a dodecahedron, Demonstration.
namely AGIBO, BHCNO, CKEDN and DFAON. And draw these right lines AB, BC, CD,
DA. Which four right lines make a square: for that each of those right lines
do subtend equal angles of equal pentagons, and the angles which those 4.
right lines co^taine are right angles, as we proved in the construction of the
dodecahedron, in the 17. proposition before alleged. Wherefore the six bases
being squares, do make a cube (by the 21. diffinition of the eleventh) and for
that the 8. angles of the said cube are set in 8. angles of the dodecaheeron,
therefore is the said cube inscribed in the dodecahedron (by the first
diffinition of this book). Wherefore in a dodecahedron is inscribed a cube:
which was required to be done.

The 9. Proposition. The 9. Problem. In a Dodecahedron given to include an
Octohedron.
SVppose that the dodecahedron given be ABGD. Construction.
Now (by the 3. correllary of the 17. of the thirte^th take the 6. sides which
are opposite the one to the other, those 6. sides, I say whose sections wherein
they are divided into two equal parts, are coupled by three right lines which
in the center of the sphere, wherein the Dodecahedron is contained, do cut the
one the other perpendicularly. And let the points wherein the forsayde sides
are cut into two equal parts be A, B, G, D, C, I. And let the foresaid three
right lines joining together the said sections be AB, GD and CI. And let the
center of the sphere be E. Demonstration.
Now forasmuch as (by the foresaid correllary) those three right lines are
equal, it follows (by the 4. of the first) that the right lines subte^ding the
right angles which they make at the center of the sphere, which right angles
are contained under the halues of the said three right lines, are equal the one
to the other: that is, the right lines AG, GB, BD, DA, CA, CG, CB, CD, and IA,
IG, IB, ID are equal the one to the other. Wherefore also the 8. triangles CAG,
CGB, CBD, CDA, IAG, IGB, IBD and IDA are equal and equilater. And therefore
AGBDCI is an Octohedron by the 23. definition of the eleue^th.) And the said
Octahedron is included in the dodecahedron (by the first definition of this
book:) for that all the angles thereof do at one time touch the sides of the
dodecahedron. Wherefore in the dodecahedron given, is included an Octohedron:
which was required to be done.

The 10. Proposition. The 10. Problem: In a Dodecahedron given, to inscribe an
equilater trilater Pyramid.
SVppose that the Dodecahedron given, be ABCD, of which Dodecahedron take three
bases meting at the point S, namely these three bases ALSIK, DNSLE and SIBRN:
Construction.
and of those three bases take the three angles at the points A, B, D: and draw
these right lines AB, BD and DA: and let the diameter of the sphere containing
the dodecahedron, be SO, and then draw thse right lines AO, BO and DO: Now
forasmuch as (by the 17. of the thirtenth) the angles of the dodecahedron are
set in the superficies of the sphere described about the Dodecahedron^
Demonstration.
therefore if upon the diameter SO, and by the point A, be described a
semicircle, it shall make the angle SAO a right angle (by the 31. of the
third.) And likewise if the same semicircle be drawn by the points D and B,
it shall also make the angles SBO, and SDO right angles. Wherefore the diameter
SO contains in power both the lines SA, AO, or the lines SB, BO, or else SD,
DO, but the lines SA, SD, SB are equal the one to the other, for they each
subtend one of the angles of equal pentago^s. Wherefore the other lines
remaining, namely, AO, BO, DO are equal the one to the other. And by the same
reason may be proved that the diameter HD which subtendeth the two right lines
HA, AD, contains in power both the said two right lines, and also contains
in power both the right lines HB and BD, which two right lines it also
suhtendeth. And moreover by the same reason the diameter AC, which subtendeth
the right lines CB and BA, contains in power both the said right lines C^ and
BA. But the right lines HA, HB and CB are equal the one to the other, for that
each of them also subtendeth one of the angles of equal pentagons^ wherefore the
right lines remaining, namely, AD, BD, and BA are equal the one to the other.
And by the same reason may be proved that each of those right lines AD, BD and
BA is equal to each of the right lines AO, BO and DO. Wherefore the six right
lines AB, BD, DA, AO, BO, and DO are equal the one to the other. And therefore
the triangles which are made of the^, namely, the triangles ABD, AOB, AOD and
BOD are equal and equilater: which triangles therefore do make a pyramid ABDO,
whose base is ABD and top the point O. Each of the angles of which pyramid,
namely, the angles at the points A, B, D, O, do in the self same points
touch the angles of the Dodecahedron. Wherefore the said pyramid is inscribed
in the Dodecahedron, (by the first diffinition of this book.) Wherefore in a
Dodecahedron given, is inscribed a trilater equilater pyramid: which was
required to be done.

The 11. Proposition. The 11. Problem. In an Icosahedron given, to inscribe a
cube.
IT was manifest by the 7. of this book, that the angles of a Dodecahedron are
set in the centres of the bases of the Icosahedron. And by the 8. of this book,
it was proved, that the angles of a cube are set in the angles of a
Dodecahedron. Wherefore the self same angles of the cube, shall of necessity
be set in the centres of the bases of Icosahedron. Wherefore the cube shall be
inscribed in the Icosahedron (by the first diffinition of this book). Wherefore
in an Icosahedron given, is included a cube: which was required to be done.

The 12. Proposition. The 12. Problem. In an Icosahedron given, to inscribe a
trilater equilater pyramid.
BY the former proposition it was manifest, that the angles of a cube are set
in the centres of the bases of the Icos^hedron. And (by the first of this
book) it was plain that the four angles of a pyramid are set in four angles
of a cube. Wherefore it is evident, by the first diffinition of this book,
that a pyramid described of right lines joining together these four centres of
the bases of the Icosahedron, shall be inscribed in the same Icosahedron.
Wherefore in an Icosadron given, is inscribed an equilater trilater pyramid:
which was required to be done.

The 13. Problem The 13. Proposition. In a Cube given, to inscribe a
Dodecahedron.
TAke a Cube ADFL. First part of the construction.
And divide every one of the sides thereof into two equal parts in the points
T, H, K, P: G, L, M, F: and pkQs. And draw these right lines TK, GF, pQ, Hk,
Ps, and LM: which lines again divide into two equal parts in the points N,
V, Y, I, Z, X. And draw these right lines NY, VX, and IZ: Now the three lines
NY, VX, and IZ, together with the diameter of the cube, shall cut the one the
other into two equal parts in the center of the cube, by the 3^. of the
eleventh: let that center be the point O. And not to stand long about the
demonstration, understand all these right lines to be equal and parallels to
the sides of the cube and to cut the one the other right angled wise, by the
29. of the first. Let their halfes, namely, FV, GV, HI, and kI, and the rest
such like, be divided by an extreme and mean proportion, by the 30. of the
sixth: whose greater segme^ts let be the lines FS, GB, HC, and kE, etc. and
draw these right lines GI, GE, BC, and BE. Now forasmuch as the line GI is
equal to the whole line GV, which is the half of the side of the cube: First
part of the demons^ration.
and the line IE is equal to the line BV, that is, to the less segme^t:
therefore, the squares of the lines GI and IE, are triple to the square of the
line GB, by the 4. of the thirtenth: But unto the squares of the lines GI and
IE, the square of the line GE is equal, by the 47. of the first^ for the angle
GIE is a right angle: Wherefore the square of the line GE is triple to the
square of the line GB. And forasmuch as the line FG is erected perpendicularly
to the plain AGkL, by the 4. of the eleventh: for it is erected
perpendicularly to the two lines AG and GI: therefore the angle BGE is a right
angle: for the line GE is drawn in the plain AGkL. Wherefore the line BE,
containing in power the two lines BG and GE, by the 47. of the first, is in
power quadruple to the line GB (for the line GE was proved to be in power
triple to the same line GB): Wherefore the line BE is in length double to the
line BG, by the ^0. of the sixth. But (by construction) the line CE is double
the line IE: Wherefore the halfes GB and IE, are in proportion the one to the
other, as their doubles BE and CE: by the 15. of the fifth. Wherefore the line
CE is the greater segment of the line BE divided by an extreme and mean
proportion. And forasmuch as the self same thing may be proved touching the
line BC: therefore the lines BE and BC, are equal, making an Isosceles
triangle. Now let us prove that three angles of the Pentagon of the
Dodecahedron are set at the points B, C, E: and the other two angles are set
between the lines BC and BE.

Forasmuch as the circle which contains the triangle BCE circumscribeth the
Pentagon whose side is the line CE, by the 11. of the fourth: Second part of
the construction.
Extend the plain of the triangle BCE, by the parallel lines dB and HE,
cutting the line AD, namely, the diameter of AD the base of the cube in the
point I: and let it cut the line Ah the diameter of the cube in the point m.
And by the point I draw in the base AD, a parallel line unto the line Ad:
which let be Il. And forasmuch as from the triangle AHN is, by the parallel
line lI, taken away the triangle AlI, like unto the whole triangle AHN, Second
part of the Demonstration.
by the Corollary of the 2. of the sixth: the lines Al, and lI, shall be
equal. But as the line HA is to the line Ad, so (by the 2. of the sixth) is
the line Hl to the line lI, or to the line lA, which is equal to the line lI.
And the greater segment of the line HA. (which is half the side of the cube)
is, as before has been proved, the line Ad, that is, the line GB, which is
equal to the line Ad (by the 33. of the first). Wherefore the (...) segment of
the line Hl is the line ^A. And as the whole line Hl is to the greater segment,
so shall the same greater segment Hl be to the less segment lA, by the 5. of
the thirtenth. Wherefore the line HA is divided by an extreme and mean
proportion in the point l. But in the triangle AHN, the line NA, which is
drawn from the center of the base AD, is in the point I cut like unto the line
All, by thu parallel line lI (by the same second of the sixth): for the lines
HN and Il, are parallels, by construction. Wherefore the line NA is in the
point I divided by an extreme and mean proportion by the superficies dBEH. And
forasmuch as the line YON which coupleth the centres of the opposite bases, is
a parallel to the line HE: A plain superficies extended by the line YON,
parallel wise to the plain dBEH: the two plains shall cut the lines AO and AN
(the semidiameter of the cube, and the semidiameter of the base AD) into the
self same proportions in the points m and I, by the 17. of the eleue^th. But
the line AN is in the point I divided by an extreme and mean proportion:
Wherefore the semidiameter of the cube is in the point m divided by an extreme
and mean proportion by the plain of the triangle BCE. And forasmuch as the
rest of the triangles described in the cube after the like manner, may by the
same reasons be proved to be in a plain which cutteth the semidiameter of the
cube by an extreme and means proportion: it is manifest that three plains of
the Dodecahedron shall under every angle of the cube concur in one and the
self same point o^ the semidiameter being cut by an extreme and mean
proportion. Now rests to prove that the right lines which couple that point
of the semidiameter with the angles of the triangle BEC, are equal: whereby
may be proved that the Pentagons are equilater, and equiangle.

Take the two bases of the cube. Whereon are set the triangle BCE, Third part
of the construction.
namely, the bases AF and Ak, take also the same diameter of the cube that was
before, namely, Ah: and let the side set at the point n, of the section of the
diameter by an extreme and mean proportion, be the line Cn or Bn: and let the
center of the cube be as before the point O. And extend the line Cn to the line
Bd, and let it concur with it in the point a. And forasmuch as the plain
which passes by the line HCE and the center O (cutting the cube into two
equal parts) is parallel to AF the base of the cube by construction: imagine
that by the point n, be extended a plain superficies parallel to the former
parallel playnes, Third part of the demonstration.
which shall cut the semidiameter OA and the line Ca, proportionally in the
point n, by the 17. of the eleventh: For those lines do touch the extreme
parallel plains extended by the lines HE and EO, and by the lines Ad and dB.
But it is proved that the line OA is divided by an ex^^eame and mean
proportion in the point n: wherefore the line Ca, is also (...) by an extr^ame
and mean proportion in the point n. Again forasmuch as BCE is an Isoscels
triangle, and it is proved that the line BY cutteth the base CE into two equal
parts in the point I, the angles BIC and BIE^ shall be right angles. Imagine
by the line BY and the center O a plain to pass (cutting the cube into two
equal parts) parallel to the base AD. And unto those plains let there be
imagined an other parallel plain passing by the point n: which let be ne:
which shall cut the semidiameter AO and the half side of the cube, namely,
the line lH, like, in the points n and c by the 17. of the eleventh. Wherefore
the line IH is in the point e divided by an extreme (...) mean proportion.
Wherefore the line He is equal to the line CI or IE: namely, each are less
segme^ts. And forasmuch as the line Ie is to the line IC (which is equal ^o
the ^ine EH) as the whole is to the greater segment, take away from the whole
line Ie the greater segm^^ IC: there shall remain the less segment Ce by the
5. of the thirtenth: Wherefore the line I^ is divided by an extreme and mean
proportion in the point C. Again unto the same playnes imagine an other plain
to pass by the point a, parallel wise, and let the same be ag. Now then (by
the same 17. of the eleventh) the lines Ca and Cg are in like sort cut in the
points n and e. But the line Ca was in the point n cut by an extreme and
mean proportion, wherefore the line Cg shall be cut in the point e, by an
extreme and mean proportion. But the line IC is to the line Ce, as the
greater segment is to the less: wherefore the line Ce, is to the line eg, as
the greater segment to the less: and therefore their proportion is as the
whole line IC is to the greater segment Ce, and as the greater segment Ce is to
the less segment eg: wherefore the whole line Ceg which, makes the greater
segment and the less, is equal to the whole line IC or IE. And forasmuch as
two parallel plain superficieces (namely, that which is extended by JOB and
that which is extended by the line ag) are cut by the plain of the triangle
BCE, which passes by the lines ag and IB, their common sections ag and IB
shall be parallels (by the 16. of the eleventh). But the angle BIE or BIC is a
right angle, wherefore the angle agC is also a right angle (by the 29. of the
first) and those right angles are contained under equal sides, namely, the
line gC is equal to the line CI, and the line ag to the line BY, by the 33. of
the first: wherefore the bases Ca and CB are equal, by the 4. of the first. But
of the line CB the line CE was proved to be the greater segment: wherefore the
same line CE is also the greater segment of the line Ca: but cn was also the
greater segment of the same line Ca. Wherefore unto the line CE, the line cn
which is the side of the dodecahedron, and is set at the diameter, is equal.
And by the same reason the rest of the sides, which are set at the diameter may
be proved e^uall to lines equal to the line CE. Wherefore the pentagon
inscribed in the circle where in is contained the triangle BCE is, by the 11.
of the fourth equiangle, and equilater. And forasmch as two pentagons, set upon
every one of the bases of the cube do make a dodecahedron, and six bases of
the cube do receive twelve angles of the dodecahedron: and the 8.
semidiameters do in the points where they are cut by an extreme and mean
proportion receive the rest: therefore the 12. pentagon bases containing 20.
solid angles do inscribe the dodecahedron in the cube: by the 1. diffinition
of this book. Wherefore in a cube given is inscribed a dodecahedron: which was
required to be done.

First Corollary.
The diameter of the sphere, which contains the dodecahedron, contains in
power these two sides, namely, the side of the Dodecahedron, and the side of
the cube wherein the Dodecahedron is inscribed. For in the first figure a line
drawn from the center O, to the point B the angle of the Dodecahedron, namely
the line OB, contains in power these two lines OV the half side of the cube,
and VB the half side of the dodecahedron, by the 47. of the first. Wherefore
by the 15. of the fiueth, the double of the line OB, which is the diameter of
the sphere containing the Dodecahedron, contains in power the double of the
other lines OV and VB, which are the sides of the cube, and of the dodecahedron.

Second Corollary.
The side of a cube divided by an extreme and mean proportion, makes the
less segment the side of the dodecahedron inscribed in it: and the greater
segment the side of the cube inscribed in the same Dodecahedron: For it was
before proved, that the side of the dodecahedron is the greater segment of BE
the side of the triangle BEC^ but the side BE (which is equal to the line^ GB
and SF) is the greater segme^t of GF the side of the cube: which line ^E
(subtending the angle of the pentagon) was (by the ^. of this book) the side
of the cube inscribed in the dodecahedron.

Third Corollary.
The side of a cube, is equal to the sides of a Dodecahedron inscribed in it,
and circumscribed about it. For it was manifest by this proposition, that the
side of a cube makes the less segment, the side of a Dodecahedron inscribed
in it, namely, as in the first figure the line BS the side of the Dodecahedron
inscribed, is the less segme^t of the line GF the side of the cube. And it was
proved in the 17. of the thirtenth, that the same side of the cube subte^deth
the angle of the pentagon of the Dodecahedron circumscribed: and therefore it
makes the greater segment the side of the Dodecahedron or of the pentagon, by
the first corollary of the same. Wherefore it is equal to both those segments.

The 14. Problem. The 14. Proposition. In a cube given, to inscribe an
Icosahedron.
SVppose that the cube given be ABC, Construction.
the Centres of whose bases let be the points D, E, G, H, I, K: by which
points draw in the bases unto the other sids parallels not touching the one
the other. And divide the lines drawn from the centres, as the line DT. etc. by
an extreme and mean proportion in the points A, F: L, M: N, B: P, Q: R, S: C,
O: by the 30. of the sixth: and let the greater segmentes be about the ce^tres.
And draw these right lines, AL, AG, AM, and TG. And forasmuch as the lines cut
are parallels to the sides of the cube: Demonstration.
they shall make right angles the one with the other by the 29. of the first:
and forasmuch as they are equal: their sections shall be equal, for that the
sections are like by the 2. of the fourtenth. Wherefore the line TG is equal to
the line DT, for they are each, half sides of the cube. Wherefore the square of
the whole line TG, and of the less segment TA, is triple to the square of the
line AD the greater segment (by the 4. of the thirte^th). But the line AG
contains in power the lines AT and TG, for the angle ATG is a right angle.
Wherefore the square of the line AG is triple to the square of the line AD. And
forasmuch as the line MGL is erected perpendicularly to the plain passing by
the lines AT, and which is parallel to the bases of the cube (by the corollary
of the 14. of the eleue^th) therefore the angle AGL is a right angle. But the
line LG is equal to the line AD, for they are the greater segments of equal
lines: Wherefore the line AG (which is in power triple to the line AD) is in
power triple to the line LG. Wherefore adding unto the same square of the line
AG, the square of the line LG, the square of the line AL, which (by the 47. of
the first) contains in power the two lines AG and GL, shall be quadruple to the
line AD or LG. Wherefore the line AL is double to the line AD (by the 20. of
the sixth:) and therefore is equal to the line AF, or to the line LM. And by the
same reason may we prove that every one of the other lines which couple the
next sections of the lines cut, as the lines AM, PF, PM, MQ, and the rest are
equal. Wherefore the triangles ALM, APF, AMP, PMQ and the rest such like, are
equal, equiangle, and equilater, by the 4. and eigth of the first. And
forasmuch as upon every one of the lines cut of the cube are set two triangles,
as the triangles ALM, and BLM^ there shall be made 12. tria^gles. And forasmuch
as under every one of the ^. angles of the cube, are subtended the other 8.
triangles, as the triangle AMP. etc. of 1^. and 8. triangles, shall be produced
20. triangles equal and equilater co^taining the solid^ of an Icosahedron, by
the 25. diffinition of the eleventh, which shall be inscribed in the cube given
ABC by the first diffinition of this book. The invention of the demonstration
of this depends of the ground of the former. Wherefore in a cube given, we
have described an Icosahedron: which was required to be done.

First Corollary.
The diameter of a sphere which contains an Icosahedron, contains two
sides, namely the side of the Icosahedron, and the side of the cube which
contains the Icosahedron. For if we draw the line AB, it shall make the
angles at the point A right angles: for that it is a parallel to the sides of
the cube: wherefore the lin^ which coupleth the opposite angle^ of the
Icosahedron, at the points F and B, contains in power the line AB (the sid^
of the cube) and the line AF (the side of the Icosahedron) by the 47. of the
first. Which line FB is equ^l to the ^iameter of the sphere, which cont^ineth
the Icosahedron, by the demonstration of the ^^. of the thirte^th.

Second Corollary.
The six opposite sides of the Icosahedron divided into two equal parts: their
sections are coupled by three equal right lines, cutting the one the other into
two equal parts, and perpendicularly in the center of the sphere which
contains the Icosahedron. For those three lines are the three lines which
couple the centres of the bases of the cube, which do in such sort in the
center of the cube, cut the one the other, by the corollary of the third of
this book, and therefore are equal to the sides of the cube. But right lines
drawn from the ce^tre of the cube to the angles of the Icosahedron, every one
of them shall subtend the half side of the cube, and the half side of the
Icosahedron (which half sides contain a right angle) wherefore those lines
are equal. Whereby it is manifest that the foresaid center is the center of the
sphere which contains the Icosahedron.

Third Corollary.
The side of a cube divided by an extreme and mean proportion, makes the
greater segment the side of an Icosahedron described in it. For the half side
of the cube makes the half of the side of the Icosah^dron the greater
segment: wherefore also the whole side of the cube, makes the whole side of
the Icosahedron the greater segment by the 15. of the fifthe, for the sections
are like by the ^. of the fourtenth.

Fourth Corollary.
The sides and bases of the Icosahedron, which are opposite the one to the
other, are parallels. Forasmuch as every one of the opposite sides of the
Icosahedron, may be in the parallel lines of the cube, namely, in those
parallels which are opposite in the cube: and the triangles which are made of
parallel lines, are parallels, by the 15. of the eleventh: therefore the
opposite tri^ngle^ of the Icosahedron, as also the sides, are p^rallels the one
to the other.

The 15. Problem. The 15. Proposition. In an Icosahedron given, to inscribe an
Octohedron.
SVppose that the Icosahedron given be ACDF: and by the former second
Corollary, Construction.
let there be taken the three right lines which cut the one the other into two
equal parts perpendicularly, and which couple the sections into two equal
parts of the sides of the Icosahedron: which let be BE, GH, and KL, cutting
the one the other in the point I. And draw^ these ri^ht lines ^G, GE, EH, and
HB. And forasmuch as the angles at the point I are (by construction) right
angles, Demonstration.
and are con^^ined under equ^ll lines^ the (...) G^ and ^^ shall (...) squ^re,
by the ^. of the first. Likewise unto those (...) shall be ^quall the lines
dr^w^n from (...) points K and ^ to every one of the poin^^s ^, G. ^, H: And
therefore the triangles which (...) the ^^ramis DGENK, shall be equal (...).
And by (...).

The 16. Problem. The 16. Proposition. In an Octohedron given, to inscribe an
Icosahedron.
LEt there be taken an Octohedron, whose 6. angles, let be A, B, C, F, P, L.
And draw the lines AC, BF, PL, Construction.
cutting the one the other perpendicularly in the point R (by the 2. Corollary
of the 14. of the thirtenth). And let every one of the 12. sides of the
Octohedron be divided by an extreme and mean proportion, in the points H, X,
M, K, D, S, N, G, V, E, Q, T. And let the greater segmentes be the lines BH,
BX, FM, FK, AD, AQ, CS, CT, PN, PG, LV, LE: And draw these lines HK, XM, GE,
NV, DS, QT. Now forasmuch as in the triangle ABF, the sides are cut
proportionally, namely, as the line BH is to the line HA, so is the line FK to
the line KA (by the 2. of the fouretenth): Demonstration.
therefore the line HK shall be a parallel to the line BF (by the 2. of the
sixth). And forasmuch as the line AC cutteth the line HK in the point Z, and
the line ZK is a parallel unto the line RF, the line RA shall be cut by an
extreme and mean proportion in the point Z: by the 2. of the sixth: namely,
shall be cut like unto the line FA: and the greater segme^t thereof shall be the
line ZR. Unto the line ZK put the line TO equal, by the 3. of the first: and
draw the line KO: now then, the line KO shall be equal to the line ZR, by the
33. of the first. Draw the lines KG, KE, and KI. And forasmuch as the triangles
ARF, and AZK, are equiangle (by the 6. of the sixth) the sides AZ and ZK, shall
be equal the one to the other, by the 4. of the sixth, for the sides AR and
RF, are equal. Wherefore the line ZK shall be the less segment of the line RA.
But if the greater segment RZ be divided by an extreme and mean proportion,
the greater segment thereof shall be the line ZK, which was the less segment of
the whole line RA, by the 5. of the thir^enth. And forasmuch as the two lines
FE and FG, are equal to the two lines AH and AK, namely, each are less
segmentes of equal sides of the Octohedron, and the angles HAK and EFG are
equal, namely, are right angles, by the 14. of the thirtenth: the bases HK and
GF shall be equal, by the 4. of the first: And by the same reason unto them
may be proved equal the lines XM, NV, DS, and QT. And forasmuch as the lines
AC, BF, and PL, do cut the one the other into two equal parts, and
perpendicularly, by construction: the lines HK and GE (which subtend angles of
triangles like unto the triangles whose angles the lines AC, BF, and PL
subtend) are cut into two equal parts in the points Z and I, by the 4. of
the sixth, so also are the other lines NV, XM, DS, QT (which are equal unto
the lines HK and GE) cut in like sort, and they shall cut the lines AC, BF, and
PL like. Wherefore the line KO (which is equal to RZ) shall make the greater
segment the line TO, which is equal to the line ZK (for the greater segment of
the RZ was the line ZK): and therefore the line OI shall be the less segment,
when as the whole line RI is equal to the whole line RZ. Wherefore the squares
of the whole line KO, and of the less segment OI, are triple to the square of
the greater segment TO, by the 4. of the thirtenth. Wherefore the line KI, which
contains in power the two lines KO and OI, is in power triple to the line TO
(by the 47. of the first): for the angle KOI is a right angle. And forasmuch as
the lines FE and FG (which are the less segmentes of the sides of the
Octohedron) are equal: and the line FK is common to them both: and the angles
KFG and KFE (of the triangles of the Octohedron) are equal: the bases KG and
KE shall (by the 4 of the first) be equal: and therefore the angles KIE and
KIG which they subtend, are equal (by the 8. of the first): Wherefore they are
right angles, by the 13. of the first. Wherefore the right line KE (which
contains in power the two lines, KI and ^E by the 47. of the first) is in
power quadruple to the line TO (or IE): for the line RI is proved to be in
power triple to the same line TO: But the line GE is double to the line IE:
Wherefore the line GE is also in power (...) PF. And by the same reason may be
proved, that the ^est of the eleven solid angles of the (...), are (...) the
sections of every one of the sides of the Octohedron, namely, in the points E,
N, V, H, ^, M, ^, D, S, Q, T. Wherefore there are 12. angles of the
Icosahedron. Moreover, forasmuch as every one of the bases of the Octohedron,
do each contain triangles of the Icosahedron, (...) pyrami^^ ABC^FP (which is
the half of the Octohedron) the triangle FCP receaueth in the section of his
sides the ^ triangle GMS: and the triangle CPB contains the triangle NXS: and
the triangle ^AP contains the triangle HND: and moreover the triangle APF
contains the triangle ^DG, and the same may be proved in the opposite pyramid
ABCFL: Wherefore there shall be eight triangle^. And forasmuch as besides these
triangles, to every one of the solid angles of the Octohedron (...) subtended
two triangles, as the triangles KEG amd MEG, to the angle F: and the triangles
HNV and XNV, to the angle B: also the triangles NDS and ^DS, to the angle P:
likewise the triangle^ DHK and QHK, to the angle A: Moreover the triangles EQT
and VQT, to the angle L: and finally the triangles SXM and TXM, to the angle C:
these 12. triangles being added to th^^ for (...) triangles, shall produce ^0.
triangles equal and equil^ter coupled together: which shall male an
Icosahedron, by the 25. definition of the eleventh: and it shall be inscribed
in the Octohedron given ABC^^L, by the first definition of this book: for the
1^. angles thereof are set in 1^. like sections of the sides of the Octohedron.
Wherefore in an Octohedron given, is inscribed an Icosahedron.

First Corollary.
The side of an equilater triangle being divided by an extreme and mean
proportion: a right line subtending within the triangle, the angle which is
contained under the greater segment and the less: is in power duple to the
less segment of the same side. For the line KE, which subtendeth the angle KFE
of the triangle AFL, which angle KFE is contained under the two segmentes KF
and FE, was proved equal (...) the line HK, which contains in power the two
less segmentes HA and AK, by the 47. of the ^^rst for (...) angle HAK is (...).

Second Corollary.
The bases of the Icosahedron are concentricall (that is, have one and the
self same center) with the bases of the Octohedron which contains it.

For suppose that (...) Octohedron (...) ECD the base of an Icosahedron: and
let the center of the base ABG be the point F. And draw these right lines FA,
FB, FC, and FE. Now then the (...) to the two lines FB and BC: for they are
lines drawn from the center, and are also less segmentes: and they contain
the (...).

The 17. Problem. The 17. Proposition. In an Octohedron given, to inscribe a
Dodecahedron.
Construction.
SVppose that the Octohedron given be ABGDEC: whose 12. ^ides let be cut by an
extreme and mean proportion, as in the former Proposition. It was manifest
that of the right lines which couple th^se sections, are made 20. triangles, of
which 8. are concentricall with the bases of the Octohedron, by the second
Corollary of the former Proposition. If therefore in every one of the centres
of the 20. triangles be inscribed (by the 1. of this book) every one of the
^^. ^^gles of the Dodecahedron, Demonstration.
we shall find, that ^. angles of the Dodecahedron are set in the 8. centres
of the bases of the Octohedron: namely, these angles I, u, ct, O, M, a, P, and
X: and of the other 12. solid angles there are two in the centres of the two
triangles which have one side common under every one of the solid angles of
the Octohedron: namely, under the solid angle A, the two solid angles, K, Z:
under the solid angle B, the two solid angles H, T: under the solid angle G,
the two solid angles Y, V: under the solid angle D, the two solid angles F,
L: under the solid angle E, the two solid angles S, N: under the solid angle
C, the two solid angles Q, R: and forasmuch as in the Octohedron are six
solid angles, under them shall be subtended 12. solid angles of the
Dod^cahedron: and so are m^de 20. solid angles composed of 12. equal and
^quil^ter superficial pentagons (as it was (...), by the 5. of this book)
which therefore contain a Dodecahedron (by the 24. definition of the
eleventh). And it is inscribed in the Octohedron (by the 1. definition of this
book): for that every one of the bases of the Octohedron do receive angles
thereof. Wherefore in an Octohedron given, is inscribed a Dodecahedron.

The 18. Problem. The 18. Proposition. In a trilater and equilater Pyramid, to
inscribe a Cube.
Construction.
SVppose that there be a trilater equilater Pyramid, whose base let be ABC, and
^oppe the point D. And let it be comprehended in a Sphere^ by the 13. of the
(...), And l^^ the center of that Sphere be the point E. And from the solid
angles A, B, C, D, draw right lines passing by the center E, unto the opposite
bases of the pyramis^ and they shall ^all perpendicularly upon the bases, and
shall also fall upon the centres of the circles which contain the bases, by
the Corollary of the 13. of the thirtenth. Let the cen^re of the triangle ABC,
be the point G, and let the center of the triangle ADC be the point H^ and of
the triangle ADB let the point N be the center, and finally, let the point F be
the center of the other triangle DBC. And let the right lines falling upon
those ce^tres be DEGREES, BEH, CEN, and AEF. And by those centers G, H, N, F, let
there be drawn from the angles to the opposite sides these right lines, AGL,
DHK, BNM, and DFL, which shall fall perpendicularly upon the sides BC, CA, AD,
and CB, by the Corollary of the 1^. of the thirtenth, and therefore they shall
cu^ them into two equal parts in the points K, L, M, by the 3. of the third.
Again let the lines which were drawn from the solid angles to the opposite
bases be divided into two equal parts, namely, the line DG in the point T, the
line CN in the point O, the line AF in the point P, and the line BH in ^he
point R: and draw the lines HT, FT, HO, and FO. Now forasmuch as the lines GK,
Demonstration.
and GL, which are drawn from the center of one and the self same triangle ABC
to the sides, are equal, and the lines DK and DL are equal, for they are the
perpendiculars of equal and like triangles: Produce in the figure the line TF
to the point B.
and the line DG is common to the^. Wherefore, by the 8. of the first, the
angles KDG and LDG, are equal. And forasmuch as the lines HD and DF are drawn
from the center of equal circles which co^taine the equal triangles ADC and
DBC, therefore they are equal, and the line DT is common to the^ both, and they
contain equal angles, as before has been proved. Wherefore the bases HT and FT
are equal by the 4. of the first. And by the same reason if we draw the lines
CF and CH, may we prove that the other lines HO and FO, are equal to the same
lines HT and FT, and also the one to the other. Wherefore also after the same
manner may be proved that the rest of the lines, which couple the centres of the
triangles and the sections of the perpendiculars into two equal parts, as the
lines NP, GR, GP, RN: NT, PH, GO, and RF, are equal. And forasmuch as from
every one of the centres of the bases are drawn three right lines to the
sections into two equal parts of the perpendiculers, and there are four
centres, it follows, that these equal right lines so drawn, are twelve in
number, of which every three and three make a solid angle in the four centres
of the bases, and in the four sections into two equal parts of the
perpendiculars: wherefore that solid has 8. angles, contained under 12. equal
sides, which make six quadrangled figures, namely, HOFT, PGRN, PHOG, GOFR,
FRNT, and TNPH. Now let us prove that those quadrangled figures are rectangle.

Forasmuch as upon DC the common base of the triangles ADC and BDC falls the
perpendiculars AS and BS, which are drawn by the centres H and F: either of
these lines HS and SF shall be the third part of either of these lines AS and SB:
for the line AH is duple to the line HS, and deuideth the base DC into two
equal parts by the corollary of the 12. of the thirtenth. Wherefore in the
triangle ABS, the sides AS and BS are cut proportionally in the points H and F:
and therefore the line HF is a parallel to the side AB, by the 2. of the sixth.
Wherefore the triangles ASB and HSF are equiangle, by the 6. of the sixth.
Wherefore the base HF shall be the third part of the base AB, by the 4. of the
sixth. We may also prove that the line TO is the third part of the line DC, for
the lines EC and ED, which are drawn from the center of the sphere which
contains the pyramid are equal: and the line EN, (which is drawn from the
center to the base) is the third part of the line EC, so also is the line GE
the third part of the line ED (by the corollary of the 13. of the thirtenth)
for it is the sixth part of the diameter of the sphere which contains the
pyramid: And the line ON, is the half of the whole line NC wherefore the residue
EO is the third part of the line EC^ and so also is the line ET the third part
of the line ED. Wherefore the line TO in the triangle DEC is a parallel to the
line DC, and is a third part of the same, by the former 2. and 4. of the
sixth, as the line HF was proved the third part of the line AB. But AB and DC
being sides of the pyramid are equal. Wherefore the lines HF and TO, being the
third parts of equal lines, are equal, by the 15. of the fiueth. Wherefore by
the 8. of the first the angles HTF, and TFO are equal: and by the same reason,
the angles opposite unto them, namely, the angles FOH and OHT are equal the one
to the other, and also are equal to the said angles HT^ and TFO: but these
four angles are equal to 4. right angles by the corollary of the 32. of the
first: wherefore the angles of the quadrangle HOFT are right angles. And by the
same reason may the angles of the other five quadrangled figures be proved
right angles^ Now rests to prove that the foresaid quadrangles are each in
one and the self same plain.

Take the quadra^gle HOFT: and forasmuch as in the triangle ASB, the line HF is
proved a parallel to the line AB, therefore it cutteth the lines SV, and SB
proportionally in the points I. and F. by the 2. of the sixth: Now then
forasmuch as SF was proved the third part of the line SB, the line SI, shall
also be the third part of the line SV. Moreover forasmuch as the line US,
which coupleth the sections into equal parts of the opposite ^ides of the
pyramid, namely, of the sides AB and DC, is by the center E divided into two
equal parts, by the corollary of the second of this book (for it is the
diameter of the octohedron inscribed in the pyramid): therefore the line SI is
two third parts of the half line SE. And by the same reason, forasmuch as in
the tria^gle DEC the line TO is proved to be a parallel to the side DC, it
shall in the self same triangle cut the lines CE and SE, proportionally in the
points O and I by the same 2. of the sixth: but the line EO is proved to be a
third part of the line EC. Wherefore the line EI is also a third part of the
line ES. Wherefore the residue IS shall be two third parts of the whole line ES.
Wherefore the point I cutteth of the lines TO and HF. Wherefore the two lines
HIF and TIO cutting the one the other, are in one and the self same' plain,
by the 2. of the eleventh. And therefore the points H, T, F, O are in one and
the self same plain. Wherfore^ the rectangle figure HOFT being quadrilater
and equilater, and in one and the self same plain, is a square, by the
di^^inition of a square. And by the same reason may the rest of the bases of
the solid be proved to be squares equal and plain or superficial: Now then
the solid is comprehended of 6. equal squares (which are contained of 12.
equal sides) which squares make 8. solid angles, of which four are in the
ce^tres of the bases o^ the pyramid, and the other 4. are in the middle sections
of the four perdendiculars. Wherefore the solid HOFTPGRN, is a cube by the 21.
diffinition of the eleventh, and is inscribed in the pyramid, by the first
definition of this book. Wherefore in a trilater equilater pyramid given, is
inscribed a cube.

A Corrollary.
The line which cutteth into two equal parts the opposite sides of the
Pyramid, is triple to the side of the cube inscribed in the pyramid, and
passes by the center of the cube. For the line SEV, whose third part the line
SI is, cutteth the opposite sides CD and AB into two equll parts: but the line
EI (which is drawn from the center of the cube to the base is proved to be a
third part of the line ES: wherefore the side of the cube which is double to
the line EI shall be a third part of the whole line US, which is (as has been
proved) double to the line ES.

The 19. Problem The 19. Proposition. In a trilater equilater Pyramid given,
to inscribe an Icosahedron.
SVppose that the pyramid is given, (...) AB^D^ every one of whose s^des (...)
be diuid^d into two equal parts in the poy^^^^ ^, M, K, L, P, N. Construction.
And i^ every one of the b^ses of that pyramid, descride the triangl^^ L^^,
PMN, NKL, and (...) which triangles shall be equilater by the 4. of the first,
^or the sides sub^end equal angles of the pyramid, contained under the halues
of the sides of the same pyramis^ wherefore the sides of the said triangles are
equal. Let those sides be ^iuided by an extreme and mean propor^^on (by the
30. of the sixth) in the points C, E, Q, R, S, T, H, I, O, V, Y, X. Now then
those sides are cut into the self same proportions, by the 2. of the
fourte^th: and therefore they make the li^e sectio^s equal, by the ^. part of
the ninth of the fiueth. Now I say, that the foresaid poyn^es do^ rec^aue the
angles of the Icosahedron inscribed in the pyramid AB^D. In the foresaid
triangles let there again be made other triangles by coupling the sections,
and let those triangles be TRS, IOH, CEQ, and VXY, which shall be equilater:
for every one of their sides do sub^^^d equal angles of equilater triangles,
and those said equal angles are contained under equal side^ (namely, under
the greater segmen^ and the less)^ and therefore the sides which subtend those
angles are equal by the 4. of the first. Now let us prove that at each of the
foresaid points, as for example at T, is set the solid angle of an
Icosah^dron^ Demonstration.
Forasmuch as the triangles TRS and TQO are equilater and equal, the 4. right
lines TR, TS, TQ and TO shall be equal. And forasmuch as ^PNK is a square
cutting the pyramid AB^D into two equal pa^^^^, by the corollay of the second
of this booke^ the line TH shall be in power duple to the line TN or NH by the
47. of the first. For the lines TN or NH are equal, for that by construction
they are each less segmentes: and the line RT or TS is in power duple to the
same line TN or NH (by the corollary of the 16. of this book) for it
subtendeth the angle of the triangle contained under the two segmentes.
Wherefore the lines TH, TS, TR, TQ, and TO are equal: and so also are the lines
HS, SR, RQ, QO, and OH, which subtend the angles at the point T, equal. For
the line QR contains in power the two lines PQ and PR the less segmentes,
which two lines the line TH also contained in power. And the rest of the lines
do subtend angles (of equilater triangles) contained under the greater segment
and the less. Wherefore the five triangles TRS, TSH, THO, TOQ, TQR are
equilater and equal making the solid angle of an Icosahedron at the point T,
by the 16. of the thirtenth, in the side PN of the triangle P NM. And by the
same reason in the other sides of the 4. triangles PNM, NKL, FMK, and LFP
(which are inscribed in the bases of the pyramid) which sides are 12^ in number
shall be set 12. angles of the Icosahedro^ contained under 20. equal and
equilater triangles of which fowere are set in the 4. bases of the pyramid,
namely, these four triangles, TRS, HOI, CEQ, VXY: 4. triangles are under 4.
angles of the pyramid: that is, the four triangles CIX, YSH, ERV, TQO: and
under every one of the six sides of the pyramid are set two triangles, namely,
under the side, of the triangles THS and THO^ under the side DB the triangles
RQE and RQT: under the side DA the triangles COQ, and COI: under the side AB,
the triangles EXC and EXV^ under the side BG the triangles SVR and SVY: and
under the side AG the triangles IYH and IYX. Wherefore the solid being
contained under 20. equilater and equal triangles shall be an Icosahedron by
the 23. diffinition of the eleventh: and shall be inscribed in the pyramid AB^D
by the first di^^^nition of this book, for all his angles do at one time
touch the bases of the pyramid. Wherefore in a trilater equilater pyramid
given, we have inscribed an Icosahedron.

The 20. Proposition. The 20. Problem. In a trilater equilater Pyramid given,
to inscribe a dodecahedron.
SVppose that the pyramid given be ABGD, ^che of whose sides let be cut into
two equal parts: and draw the lines which couple the sections, which being
divided by an extreme and mean proportion, and right lines being drawn by
the sections, shall receive 20. triangles making an Icosahedron, as in the
former proposition it was manifest. Now then if we take the centres of those
triangles, we shall there find the 20. angles of the dodecahedron inscribed in
it by the 5. of this book. And forasmuch as 4. bases of the foresaid
Icosahedro^ are co^centricall with the bases of the pyramid, as it was proved
in the 2. corollary of the 6. of this book: there shall be placed 4^ angles of
the dodecahedro^, namely, the 4. angles E, F, H, D, in the 4. centres of the
bases: and of the other 16. angles, under every one of the 6. sides of the
pyramid are subtended two; namely, under the side AD, the angles CK: under the
side BD the angles LI: under the side GD the angles M, N: under the side AB the
angles T, S: under the side BG the angles P, O: and under the side AG the
angles R, Q: so there rest 4. angles, whose true place we will now appoint.
Forasmuch as a cube contained in one and the self same sphere with a
dodecahedron, is inscribed in the same dodecahedron, as it was manifest by the
17. of the thirtenth, and 8. of this book: it follows that a cube and a
dodecahedron circumscribed about it, are contained in one and the self same
bodies, for that their angles concur in one and the self same points. And
it was proved in the 18. of this book, that 4. angles of the cube inscribed in
the pyramid are set in the middle sections of the perpendicular^ which are
drawn from the solid angles of the pyramid to the opposite bases: wherefore
the other 4. angles of the dodecahedron are also, as the angles of the cube,
set in those middle sections of the perpendiculars. Namely, the angle V is set
in the midst of the perpendicular AH^ the angle Y in the midst of the
perpendicular BF: the angle X in the midst of the perpendicular GE: and
lastly the angle D in the midst of the perpendicular D which is drawn from
the top of the pyramid to the opposite base. Wherefore those 4. angles of the
dodecahedron may be said to be directly under the solid angles of the pyramid,
or they may be said to be set at the perpendiculars. Wherefore the dodecahedron
after this manner set, is inscribed in the pyramid given (by the first
diffinition of this book) for that upon every one of the bases of the pyramid
are set an angle of the dodecahedro^ inscribed. Wherefore in a trilater
equilater pyramid is inscribed a dodecahedron.

The 21. Problem. The 21. Proposition. In every one of the regular solides to
inscribe a Sphere.
IN the 13. of the thirtenth and the other 4. propositio^^ following, This
proposition Campane has, and is the last also in order of the 15. book with
him.
i^ was declared that ^he ^^ regular solides^ ^re so conta^^ed in a sphere,
that ^ight lin^^ drawn from the cen^^^ o^ the (...) of (...) solid inscribed,
are equal. Which right lines therefore make pyramids, whose ^oppes are the
center of the sphere, or of the solid, and the bas^^ ^^e cu^^^ one of the
bases of those solides. And (...) solid ^quall and like the one to the other,
and described in equal circles: those cir^les shall cut the sphere: for the
angles which touch the circumference of the circle, touch also the superficies
of the sphere. Wherefore perpe^diculars drawn from the center of the sphere to
the bases, or to the plain superficieces of the equal circles, are equal, by
the corollary of the assumpt of the 1^. of the twelfth. Wherefore making the
center the (...) of the sphere which (...) the solid, and the space some one
of the equal perpendicular^, d^scrib^ a sphere, and it shall touch every one
of the bases of (...) solid: (...)perficies of the sphere pass beyond those
bases: when as those p^^pe^diculars (...) are drawn from the center to the
bases, by the 3. corollary of the sa^^ ^^^umpt. Wher^fore ^e have i^ every one
of the regular bodies inscribed a sphere: which regular bo^^^ are in number one
i^ (...) by the corollary of the 1^. of the (...).

A Corollary.
The regular figures inscribed in spheres, and also the spheres circumscribed
about them, or containing them, have one and the self same center. Namely,
their pyramids, the ^ngles of whose b^ses touch the super^^^^^^ of the ^^here,
do from those angles cause equal right lines to be draw^^ to one and ^he
self (...) poyn^ making the top^^^ of the pyramid^ in the same point: and
therefore they (...) the c^^tres of the spheres in the self same tops when
(...) the right lines drawn from those angles to the cro^^ed superficies,
wh^rein are (...) the angles of the bases of the pyramid^, are equall^

An adue^^^sment of Flussas^
Of these solides, only the Octohedron receaueth the other solides inscribed
one with (...) other. For the Octohedron contains the Icosahedron inscribed
in it: and the same Icosahedron contains the Dodecahedron inscribed in the
same Icosahedron: and the same dodecahedron contains the cube inscribed in
the same Octohedron, and (...) ^^r^^mscribeth the Pyramid inscribed in the said
Octohedron. But this happ^neth not in the other solides.

The end of the fiuetenth Book of Euclides Elemen^^^ after Ca^pa^^ and (...).
The sixtenth book of the Elements of Geometry added by Flussas.
IN the former fiuetenth book has been taught how to inscribe the five
regular solides one with in an other. Now seems to rest, to compare those
solid^ so inscribed, one to an other, and to set forth their passion^ and
proprieties: which thing, Flussas considering, in this sixte^th book added by
him, The argument of the 16. book.
has excellently well and most conningly performed. For which undoubtedly he
has of all them which have a love to the Mathematicals, deserved much praise
and commendacion: both for the great tra^ailes and payn^s (which it is most
likely) he has ta^^n in i^uenting such strange and wonderful propositions
with their demonstrations, in this book contained, as also for participating
and communicating abroad the same to others. Which book also, that the reader
should want nothing conducing to the perfection of Euclides Elements: I have
with some travail translated, and for the worthiness ^hereof have added it, a^
a sixtenth book to the 15. books of Euclide. Vouchsafe therefore gentle
reader diligently to read and peyse it, for in it shall you find no^ only
matter strange and delectable, but also occasion of invention of greater things
pertaining to the natures of the five regular solid^s^

The 1. Proposition. A Dodecahedron, and a cube inscribed in it, and a Pyramid
inscribed in the same cube, are contained in one and the self same sphere.
FOr the angles of the pyrami^ are se^ in the ang^es of the cube wherein it is
inscribed (by the first of the fiuetenth^ and all the angles of the cube are
set in the angles of the dodecahed^^^ circumscribed (...) ((...) the 8. of the
fiuetenth): And all the angles of the Dodecahedron, are set in the superficies
of the sphere, by the 17. of the thirtenth. Wherefore those three solides
inscribed one within an other, are contained in one and the self same sphere,
by the first diffinition of the fiuetenth. A dodecahedron therefore and a cube
inscribed in it, and a pyramid inscribed in the same cube, are contained (...)
^^lfe same sphere.

(...)
These three solides li(...)elfe same Icosahedron, or Octohedron, or Pyramid.
(...)me Icosahedron, by the, 5.11. and 12. of the fiuetenth: and they are(...)ctohedron, by the 4. 6. and 16. of the same: lastly they are inscribed
in (...) the first, 18. and 19. of the same. For the angles of all these
solid(...) the circumscribed Icosahedron, or octohedron, or pyramid.

The (...) The proportion of a Dodecahedron circumscribed about a cube, to a
Dodecahedro^ inscribed in the same cube, is triple to an extreme and mean
propartio^.
FOrasmuch as in the ^^ corollary of the 13. of the fiu^^enth, it was proved,
that the side of a Dodecahedron inscribed in a cube, is the less segment of
the side of that cube divided by an extreme and mean proportion: and the side
of the dodecahedron ^ircumscribed about the same cube, is the greater segment
of the side of the same cube (which thing also was taught in the 13. of the
fiuetenth) the side of the Dodecahedron circumscribed, shall be to the side of
the Dodecahedron inscribed, as the greater segment of a right line divided by
an extreme and mean proportion, is to the less segment of the same, which
proportion is called an extreme and mean proport^^^ by the diffinition, and by
the 30. of sixth. But the proportion of like solid prolihedrons, is t^iple to
the proportion of the side^ of like proportion, by the corollary of the 17. of
the twelueth. Wherefore the proportion of the Dodecahedron circumscribed about
the cube, is to the dodecahedron inscribed in the same cube, in triple
proportion of the sides joined together by an extreme and mean proportion: The
proportion therefore of ^ Dodecahedron circumscribed about a cube to a
dodecahedron inscribed in the same cube, is triple to an extreme and mean
proportion.

The 3. Proposition. In every equiangle, and equilater Pentagon, a
perpendicular drawn from one of the angles to the base, is divided by an
extreme and mean proportion by a right line subtending the same angle.
SVppose that ABCDF be a^ equiangle and ^quilater pentagon: Construction.
and from one of the angles namely, from A, let there be drawn to the base CD
a perpendicular AG: and let the line BF subtend the angle BAP, Demonstration.
which line BF let the line AD cut in the point I. Then I say that the line BF,
cutteth the line AG by an extreme and mean proportion. For forasmuch as the
angles GAF and GAB are equal by the 27. of the third, and the angles A^F and
AFB, are equal by the 5. of the first^ therefore the ^^gles remaining at the
point E, of the triangles AEB and AEF are equal: for that they are the residues
of two right angles by the corollary of the 32. of the first. But the angle
EGC, is by construction a right angle^ wherefore the lines BF and CD are
parallels by the 28. of the first. Wherefore as the line DI is to the line IA,
so i^ the line GE to the line EA, by the 2. of the sixth. But the line DA, is
in the poin^ I divided by an extreme and mean proportion, by the 8. of the
thirtenth. Wherefore the line GA is in the point E, divided by an extreme and
mean proportion (by the ^. of the fourtenth). Wherefore in every equiangle and
equilater pentagon, a perpendicular drawn from one of the angles to the base,
is divided by an ex^reme and mean proportion by a right line subte^ding the
same angle^

A Corollary.
The line which subtendeth the angle of a pentagon, is a parallel to the side
opposite unto the angle. As it was manifest in the lines ^F and CD.

The 4. Proposition. If from the angles of the base of a By a Pyramid
understand a Tetrahedron throughout all this book.
Pyramid, be drawn to the opposite sides, right lines cutting the said sides
by an extreme and mean proportion: they shall contain the bise of the
Icosahedron inscribed in the Pyramid, which base shall be inscribed in an
equilater triangle, whose angles cut the sides of the base of the Pyramid by an
extreme and mean proportion.
Construction.
SVppose that ABG be the base of a pyramid, in which let be inscribed an
equilater triangle FKH, which is done by dividing the sides into two equal
parts. And in ^his triangle let there be inscribed the base of the Icosahedro^
inscribed in the pyramid: which is described by dividing the sides FK, KH, HF,
by an extreme and mean proportion in the points C, D, E, by the 19. of the
fiuete^th. Again let the sides of the pyramid, namely, AB, BG, and GA be
divided by an extreme and me^ne proportion in the points I, M, L, by the 30. of
the sixth. And draw these right lines AM, BL, GI. Demonstration.
Then I say that those lines describe the triangle CDE of the Icosahedron. For
forasmuch as the lines BG and FH are parallels, by the 2. of the sixth: by the
point D let the line ODN be drawn parallel to either of the lines BG and FH.
Wherefore the triangle HDN shall be like to the triangle HKG, by the corollary of
the 2. of the sixth. Wherefore either of these lines DN and NH shall be equal to
the line DH, the greater segment of the line KH or FH. And forasmuch as the
line FO is a parallel to the line HK, and the line OD to the line FH^ the line
OD shall be equal to the whole line FH in the parallelogramme FODH, by the 34.
of the first. Wherefore as the whole line FH is to the grea^er segment FE, so
shall the lines equal to them be, namely, the line OD to the line DN, by the 7.
of the fifth. Wherefore the line ON is divided by an extreme and mean
proportion in the point D, by the 2. of the fourtenth. But the triangles AOD,
AFE, and ABM, are like the one to the other, and so also are the triangles ADN,
AEH, and AMG, by the corollary of the second of the sixth^ Wherefore as FE is
to EH, so is OD to DN, and BM to MG. Whe^fore the line AM cutting the lines FH
and ON, like unto the line BG in the points E, D, M, describes ED the side of
the triangle of the Icosahedron ECD, which is described in the sections E, C,
D, by suppositio^. And by the same r^ason the lines BL and GI shall describe
the other sides EC and CD of the same triangle. By the point E, let there be
drawn to GI a parallel line PEQ. Now forasmuch as the lines BM and FE are
parallels, the line AM is in the point E, cut like to the line AB in the point
F, by the 2. of the sixth. Wherefore the line AE is equal to the line EM: and
unto the line EM also are equal either of the lines GD and DI: which ^re cut
l^ke unto the forsaid lines. Again forasmuch as in the triangle ADI the lines
DI and EP are parallels, as the line DI is to the line EP, so is the line AD to
the line AE: but as the line AD is to the line AE, so is the line DG to the
line EQ by the 2. of the sixth: wherefore as the line DI is to the line EP, so
is the line DG to the line EQ: and alternately as the line DI is to the line
DG, so is the line EP to the line EQ: but the lines DI and IG are equal:
wherefore also the lines EP and EQ are equal. And forasmuch as the line AH is
equal to the line FH, whose greater segme^t is the line HN^ therefore the whole
line AN, is divided by an extreme and mean proportion in the point H, by the
^. of the thirtenth. But as the line AN is to the line AH, so is the line AD to
the line AE, by the 2. of sixth (for the line^ FH and ON are parallel^:) and
again as the line AD is to the line AE, so (by the same) is the line AG to the
line AQ, and the line AI to the line AP: for the lines PQ, and GI are
parallels: Wherefore the lines AG and AI are divided by an extreme and mean
proportion in the points Q and P: and the line AQ shall be the greater segme^t of
the line AG or AB. And forasmuch as the whol^ line AG is to the greater segment
AQ, as the greater segment AI is to the residue AP: the line A^ shall be the
less segment of the whole line A^ or AG. Wherefore the li^^ PEQ (which by the
point E passes parallelwise to the line GI) cutteth the lines AG and BA by an
extreme and mean proportion in the points Q and P. And by the same reason the
line ^R (which by the point C, passes parallelwise to the line AM) shall fall
upon the sections P and R: so also shall the line RQ (which by the point D
passes parallelwise to the line BL) fall upon the sections RQ. Wherefore
either of the lines PE and EQ shall be equal to the line CD, in the
parallelogrammes PD, and QC, by the 34. of the first. And forasmuch as the
lines PE and EQ are equal, the lines PC, CR, RD and DQ shall be likewise equal.
Wh^rfore the triangle PRQ i^ ^quilater, and cutteth the sides of the base of
the pyrami^ in the points P, Q, R, by an extreme and mean proportion. And in
it is inscribed the base ECD of the Icosahedron contained in the for^sayd
pyramid. If therefore from the angles of the base of a pyramid, be drawn to
the opposite sid^s, right lines cutting the said sides by an extreme and mean
proportion: they shall contain the base of the Icosahedron inscribed in the
pyramid, which base shall be inscribed in an equilater triangle, whose angles
cut the sides of the base of the pyramid by an extreme and mean propo^tion.

A Corollary.
The side of an Icosahedron inscribed in an Octohedron, is the greater segment
of the line, which being drawn from the angle of the base of the Octohedron
cutteth the opposite side by an extreme and mean proportion. For, by the 16.
of the fiuetenth, FKH is the base of the Octohedron, which contains the base
of the Icosahedron CDE: unto which triangle FKH, the triangle HKG is equal, as
has been proved. By the point H draw unto the line ME a parallel line HT,
cutting the line DN in the point S. Wherefore ES, DT, and ET, are
parallelogrammes: and therefore the lines EH and MT are equal: and the lines
EM and HT are like cut in the points D and S, by the 34. of the first.
Wherefore the greater segment of the line HT is the line HS, which is equal to
ED the side of the Icosahedron. But (by the 2. of the sixth) the line TK is cut
like to the line HK by the parallel DM. And therefore (by the 2. of the
fourtenth) it is divided by an extreme and mean proportion. But the line TM is
equal to the line EH. Wherefore also the line TK is equal to the line OF or
DH. Wherefore the residues EH and TG are equal. For the whole lines FH and KG
are equal. Wherefore KG the side of the triangle HKG is in the point T divided
by an extreme and mean proportion in the point T, by the right line HT, and
the greater segment thereof is the line ED the side of the Icosahedron
inscribed in the Octohedron, whose base is the triangle HKG (or the triangle
FKH which is equal to the triangle HKG) by the 16. of the fiuetenth.

The 5. Proposition. The side of a Pyramid divided by an extreme and mean
proportion, makes the less segment in power double to the side of the
Icosahedron inscribed in it.
SVppose that ABG be the base of a pyramid: Construction.
and let the base of the Icosahedron inscribed in it, be CDE, described of
three right lines, which being drawn from the angles of the base ABG cut the
opposite sides by an extreme and mean proportion, by the former Proposition:
namely, of these three lines AM, BY, and GI. Then I say, that AI the less
segment of the side A^, is in power duple to CE the side of the Icosahedron.
For, forasmuch as by the former Proposition, it was proved that the triangle
CDE is inscribed in an equilater triangle, Demonstration.
whose angles cut the sides of ABG the base of the pyramid by an extreme and
mean proportion, let that triangle be FHK, cutting the line AB in the point F.
Wherefore the less segment FA is equal to the segment AI, by the 2. of the
fouretenth: (for the lines AB and AG are cut like). Moreover the side FH of the
triangle FHK is in the point D cut into two equal parts, as in the former
Proposition it was proved, and FCED also by the same is a parallelogramme:
Wherefore the lines CE and FD are equal, by the 33, of the first. And
forasmuch as the line FH subtendeth the angle BAG of an equilater triangle,
which angle is contained under the greater segment AH and the less segment AF^
therefore the line FH is in power double to the line AF or to the line AI the
less segment, by the Corollary of the 16. of the fiuetenth. But the same line
FH is in power quadruple to the line CE, by the 4. of the second: (for the line
FH is double to the line CE). Wherefore the line AI being the half of the
square of the line FH is in power duple to the line CE, to which the line FH
was in power quadruple. Wherefore the side AG of the pyramid being divided by
an extreme and mean proportion, makes the less segment AI in power duple to
the side CE of the Icosahedron inscribed in it.

A Corollary.
The side of an Icosahedron inscribed in a pyramid, is a residuall line. For
the diameter of the Sphere which contains the five regular bodies, being
rational, is in power sesquialtera to the side of the pyramid, by the 13. of
the thirtenth: and therefore the side of the pyramid is rational, by the
definition: which side being divided by an extreme and mean proportion, makes
the less segment a residuall line, by the 6. of the thirtenth. Wherefore the
side of the Icosahedron being commensurable to the same less segment (for the
square of the side of the Icosahedron is the half of the square of the said
less segment) is a residuall line, by that which was added after the 103. of
the tenth book.

The 6. Proposition. The side of a Cube contains in power half the side of
an equilater triangular Pyramid inscribed in the said Cube.
FOr forasmuch as the side of the pyramid inscribed in the cube subte^deth two
sides of the cube which contain a right angle, by the 1. of the fiuetenth: it
is manifest, by the 47. of the first, that the side of the pyramid subte^ding
the said sides, is in power duple to the side of the cube: Wherefore also the
square of the side of the cube is the half of the square of the side of the
pyramid. The side therefore of a cube contains in power half the side of an
equilater triangular pyramid inscribed in the said cube.

The 7. Proposition. The side of a Pyramid is duple to the side of an
Octohedron inscribed in it.
FOrasmuch as by the 2. of the fiuetenth it was proved, that the side of the
Octohedron inscribed in a pyramid coupleth the middle sections of the sides of
the pyramid. Wherefore the sides of the pyramid and of the Octohedron are
parallels, by the Corollary of the 39. of the first: and therefore, by the
Corollary of the 2. of the sixth, they subtend like triangles. Wherefore (by the
4. of the sixth) the side of the pyramid is double to the side of the
Octohedron, namely, in the proportion of the sides. The side therefore of a
pyramid is duple to the side of an Octohedron inscribed in it.

The 8. Proposition. The side of a Cube is in power duple to the side of an
Octohedron inscribed in it.
IT was proved in the 3. of the fiuetenth, that the diameter of the Octohedron
inscribed in the cube, coupleth the centres of the opposite bases of the cube.
Wherefore the said diameter is equal to the side of the cube. But the same is
also the diameter of the square made of the sides of the Octohedron, namely, is
the diameter of the Sphere which contains it, by the 14. of the thirtenth.
Wherefore that diameter being equal to the side of the cube, is in power
double to the side of that square, or to the side of the Octohedron inscribed
in it, by the 47. of the first. The side therefore of a Cube, is in power duple
to the side of an Octohedron inscribed in it: which was required to be proved.

The 9. Proposition. The side of a Dodecahedron, is the greater segment of the
line which contains in power half the side of the Pyramid inscribed in the
said Dodecahedron.
SVppose that of the Dodecahedron ABGD the side be AB: and let the base of the
cube inscribed in the Dodecahedron be ECFH, by the ^^ of the fiuetenth. And let
the side of the pyramid inscribed in the cube be CH, by the 1. of the
fiuetenth. Construction.
Wherefore the same pyramid is inscribed in the Dodecahedron, by the 10. of the
fiuetenth. Then I say, that AB the side of the Dodecahedron is the greater
segment of the line which contains in power half the line CH, which is the
side of the pyramid inscribed in the Dodecahedron. Demonstration.
For forasmuch as EC the side of the cube being divided by an extreme and mean
proportion makes the greater segment the line AB, the side of the
Dodecahedron, by the ^^rst Corollary of the 17. of the thirtenth: (For they are
cont^ined in one and the self same Sphere (by the first of this book): and
the line EC the side of the cube contains in power the half of the side CH,
by the 6. of this book. Wherefore AB the side of the Dodecahedron, is the
greater segment of the line EC, which contains in power the half of the line
CH, which is the side of the Dodecahedron inscribed in the pyramid. The side
therefore of a Dodecahedron, is the greater segment of the line which
contains in power half the side of the Pyramid inscribed in the said
Dodecahedron.

The 10. Proposition. The side of an Icosahedron, is the mean proportional
between the side of the Cube circumscribed about the Icosahedron, and the side
of the Dodecahedron inscribed in the same Cube.
SVppose that there be a cube ABFD, in which let there be inscribed an
icosahedron CLIGOR, by the 14. of the fiuetenth. Construction.
Let also the Dodecahedron inscribed in the same be EDMNPS, by the 13. of the
same. Now forasmuch as CL the side of the Icosahedron is the greater segme^t of
AB the side of the cube circumscribed about it, by the 3. Corollary of the 14.
of the fiuetenth: Demonstration.
and the side ED of the Dodecahedro^ inscribed in the same cube is the less
segme^t of the same side AB of the cube, by the 2. Corollary of the 13. of the
fiuetenth: it follows that AB the side of the cube being divided by an
extreme and mean proportion, makes the greater segment CL the side of the
Icosahedron inscribed in it, and the less segment ED the side of the
Dodecahedron likewise inscrib^d in it. Wherefore as the whole line AB the side
of the cube, is to the greater segment CL the side of the Icosahedron, so is
the greater segment CL the side of the Icosahedron, to the less segment ED^
the side of the Dodecahedron, by the third definition of the sixth. Wherefore
the side of an Icosahedron, is the mean proportional between the side of the
cube circumscribed about the Icosahedron, and the side of the Dodecahedron
inscribed in the same cube.

The 11. Proposition. The side of a Pyramid, is in power That is, a^ 18. to 1.
Octodecuple to the side of the cube inscribed in it.
FOr, by that which was demonstrated in the 18. of the fiuetenth, the side of
the pyramid is triple to the diameter of the base of the cube inscribed in it:
Demonstration.
and therefore it is in power nonecuple to the same diameter (by the 20. of the
sixth). But the diamer is in power double to the side of the cube, by the 47.
of the first. And the double of nonecuple makes Octodecuple. Wherefore the
side of the pyramid is in power Octodecuple to the side of the cube inscribed
in it.

The 12. Proposition. The side of a Pyramid, is in power Octodecuple to that
right line, whose greater segment is the side of the Dodecahedron inscribed in
the Pyramid.
FOrasmuch as the Dodecahedron and the cube inscribed in it, are set in one and
the s^lf^ same pyramid, by the Corollary of the first of this book: and the
side of the pyramid circumscribed about the cube is in power octodecuple to the
side of the cube inscribed, by the former Proposition: but the greater segment
of the self same side of the cube, is the side of the Dodecahedron which
contains the cube, by the Corollary of the 17. of the thirtenth. Wherefore the
side of the pyramid is in power octodecuple to that right line, namely, to the
side of the cube, whose greater segment is the side of the Dodecahedron
inscribed in the pyramid.

The 13. Proposition. The side of an Icosahedron inscribed in an Octohedron, is
in power duple to the less segment of the side of the same Octohedron.
FOrasmuch as in the 17. of the fiuetenth, it was proved, that the side of an
Icosahedron inscribed in a pyramid, coupleth together the two sections (which
are produced by an extreme and mean proportion) of the side of the Octohedron
which make a right angle: and that right angle is contained under the less
segmentes of the sides of the Octohedron, and is subtended of the side of the
Icosahedron inscribed: it follows therefore, that the side of the Icosahedron
which subtendeth the right angle, being in power equal to the two lines which
contain the said angle, by the 47. of the first, is in power duple to every
one of the less segme^tes of the side of the Octohedron which contain a right
angle. Wherefore the side of an Icosahedron inscribed in an Octohedron, is in
power duple to the less segment of the ^ide of the same Octohedron.

The 14. Proposition. The sides of the Octohedron, and of the Cube inscribed in
it, are in power the one to the other That i^, as 9. to 2.
in quadrupla sesquialter proportion.
SVppose that ABGDE be an Octohedron, and let the cube inscribed in it be FCHI.
Then I say, that AB the side of the Octohedron, is in power quadruple
sesquialter to FI the ^ide of the cube. Let there be drawn to BE the base of
the triangle ABE a perpendicular AN: and again let there be drawn to the same
base in the triangle G^E the perpendicular GN: which AN and GN shall pass by
the centres F and I: and the line AF is duple to the line FN, by the Corollary
of the 12. of the thirtenth. Wherefore the line AO is duple to the line OE, by
the 2. of the sixth. For the lines FO and NE are parallels. And therefore the
diameter AG is triple to the line FI. Wherefore the power of AG is That is, as
18. to 2. or 9. to 1.
noncuple to the power of FI. But the line AG is in power duple to the side AB,
by the 14. of the thirtenth. Wherefore the square of the line AB, being ing the
half of the square of the line AG, which is noncuple to the square of the line
FI, i^ quadruple sesquialter to the square of the line FI. The sides therefore
of the Octohed^^^ and of the cube inscribed in it^ are in power the one to the
other, in quadruple sesquialter proportion.

The 1^. Proposition. The side of the Octohedron, is in power quadruple
sesquialter to that right line, whose greater segment is the side of the
Dodecahedron inscribed in the same Octohedron.
FOrasmuch as in the 14. of this book, it was proved, that the side of the
Octohedron is in power quadruple sesquialter to the side of the cube inscribed
in it: but the side of the cube being cut by an extreme and mean proportion,
makes the greater segment the side of the Dodecahedron circumscribed about it,
by the 3. Corollary of the 13. of the fiuetenth: therefore the side of the
Octohedron is in power quadruple sesquialter to that right line (namely, to the
side of the cube) whose greater segment is the side of the Dodecahedron
inscribed in the cube. But the Dodecahedron and the cube inscribed one within
an other, ar^ inscribed in one and the self same Octohedron, by the Corollary
of the first of this book. The side therefore of the Octohedron, is in power
quadruple sesquialter to that right line, whose greater segment is the side of
the Dodecahedron inscribed in the same Octohedron.

The 16. Proposition. The side of an Icosahedron, is the greater segment of
that right line, which is in power duple to the side of the Octohedron
inscribed in the same Icosahedron.
SVppose that there be an Icosahedron ABGDFHEC: whose side let be BG or ^C^ and
let the Octohedron ins^^ib^d in it be AKD^: and let the side thereof be AL. Then
I say, that the side ^C is the greater segment of that right line which is in
power duple to the side AL. For forasmuch as figures inscribed and
circumscribed have o^e and the selfsame center, by the Corollary of the ^1. of
the fiuetenth, let the same be the point I. Now right line^ drawn by th^^
(...) to the middle sections of the opposite sides, namely, the lines AID and
KILL, do in the point I ^ut (...) the other in^^ two ^quall (...), and
perpendicularly, by the Corollary of the 14. of the fiuetenth: and forasmuch as
they couple the middle sections of the opposite lines BG and HF, therefore they
cut them perpendiularly: Draw in the figure a line from B to H.
wherefore also the lines BG (...), are parallels, by the 4. Corollary of the
14. of the (...). Now then draw a line from B to H: and the said ^^ne BH shall
be equal and parallel to the line KL, by the 33. of the first. But the line BH
subtendeth ^w^ sides of the pentagon which is composed of the sides of the
Icosahedron, namely, the sides BA and AH: Wherefore the line BH being cut by an
extreme and mean proportion makes the greater segment the side of the
pentagon, by the 8. of the thirtenth: which side is also the side of the
Icosahedron, namely, EC. And unto the line BH the line KL^ is equal: and the
line KL is in power duple to ALL the side of the Octohedron, by the 47. of the
first: for in the square AKDL the angle KAL is a right angle. Wherefore EC the
side of the Icosahedron, is the greater segment of the line BH or KL, which is
in power duple to AL ^he side of the Octohedron inscribed in the Icosahedron.
Wherefore the side of an Icosahedron, is the greater segment of that right
line, which is in power duple to the side of the Octohedron inscribed in the
same Icosahedron.

The 17. Proposition. The side of a Cube is to the side of a Dodecahedron
inscribed in it, in duple proportion of an extreme and mean proportion.
FOr it was manifes^ by the ^. corollary of the 13. of the fiuetenth, that the
side of a cube divided by an extreme and mean pr^portion, makes the less
segment, the side of the dodecahedron inscribed in it: but the whole is to the
less segment in duple proportion of that in which it is to the greater, by the
10. diffinitio^ of the fifth. For the whole, the greater segme^t, and the
less, are lines in continual proportion, by the 3. diffinition of the sixth.
Wherefore the whole namely the side of the cube, is to the side of the
dodecahedron inscribed in it, namely, to his less segment, in duple propo^tion
of an extreme and mean proportion', namely, What the duple of an extreme and
mean proportion is.
of that which the whole has ^o the greater segmen^, by the 2. of the
fourtenth.

The 18. Proposition. The side of a Dodecahedron is, to the side of a Cube
inscribed in it, in converse proportion of an extreme and mean proportion.
IT was proved in the 3. corollary of the 13. of the fiuetenth, that the side
of a Dodecahed^on circumscribed about a Cube, is the greater segment of the
side of the same Cube. Wherefore the whole side of the Cube inscribed is to the
greater segment, namely, to the side of the dodecahedron circumscribed, in an
extreme and mean proportion: wherefore by conversion, the greater segment,
that is, the side of the dodecahedron, is to the whole, namely, to the side of
the Cube inscribed, in the converse proportion of an extreme and mean
proportion, by the 13. diffinition of the fiueth.

The 19. Proposition. The side of an Octohedron, is sesquialter to the side of
a Pyramid inscribed in it.
FOr (by the corollary of the 14. of the thirtenth) the Octohedron is cu^te
into two quadrilater py^amids, one of which let be ABGDF: Construction.
and let the centres of the circles which contain the 4. bases of the
Octohedron be K, E, I, C. And dr^w these right lines KE, ^I, IC, CK, and EC.
Wherefor^ K^IC is a square, and one of the bases of the cube inscribed in the
Octohedron, by the 4. of the fiuetenth. And forasmuch as the angles of a cube
and of the pyramid in^cribed in it, are for in the centres of the bases of the
Octohedron circumscribed about the cube, by the 6^ of the fiuetenth: and the
side of the pyramid coupleth the opposite angle^ of the base of the cube, by
the 1. of the fiuetenth, it is manifest that the line EC is the side of the
pyramid inscribed in the Octohedron ABGDF. Then I say that GD the side of the
Octohedron, is sesquialter to EC the side of the pyramid inscribed in it. From
the point A draw to the bases BG and FD perpendiculars AN and AM^ which (by the
corollary of the 12. of the thirtenth) shall pass by the centres E and C.
Demonstration.
And draw the line NM. Now forasmuch, as BGDF is a square, by the 14. of the
thirtenth, the lines NG and MD shall be parallels and equal. For the lines BG
and FD are by the perpendiculars cut into two equal parts in the points N
and M (by the 3. of the third). Wherefore the lines NM and GD shall be
parallels and equal, by the 33. of the first. And forasmuch as the lines AN
and AM which are the perpendiculars of equal and like^ triangles are c^t a
like in the points ^ and C, the lines EC and NM^ shall be parallels, by the 2.
of the sixth: and therefore by the corollary of the same, the triangles AEC,
and ANM shall be like. Wherefore as the line AN is to the line AE, so is the
line NM to the line EC by the 4. of the sixth. But the line AN is sesquialter
to the line AE, for the line AE is duple to the line EN, by the corollary of
the 12^ of the thirtenth^ wherefore the line NM, or the line GD which is equal
unto it, is sesquialter to the line EC. Wherefore GD the side of the
Octohedron, is sesquialter to EC the sid^ of the pyramid inscribed in it.

The ^0. Proposition. If from the power of the diameter of an Icosahedron, be
taken away the power tripled of the side of the cube inscribed in the
Icosahedron: the power remaining shall be sesquitertia to the power of the side
of the Icosahedron.
LEt there be taken an Icosahedron ABGD: and l^^ two bases of the cube
inscribed in it, joined together be EHKL and LKFC: and let the diameter of the
cube be FH and the side be EH, and let the diameter of the Icos^h^dron be ^G,
and the side be AB. Then I say, that if from the power of the diamet^^ GB, be
taken away the power tripled of EH the side of the cube: Demonstration.
the power remaining, shall be sesquetertia to the power of AB the side of the
Icosahedron. For forasmuch as the centres of inscribed and circumscribed
figures, are in one and the self same point, by the ^^rollary of the 21. of
the (...) the diameters BG and FH shall in one and the self same point cut
the one the other into two equal parts: for we have before by the same
corollary taught, that the tops of equal and like pyramids do in that point
concur, let that point be the center I. Now the angles of the cube, which are
at the points F and H are set at the centres of the bases of the Icosahedron
by the 11. of the fiuetenth^ Wherefore the line FH shall be perpendicular to
both the bases of the Icosahedro^, by the corollary of the assu^pt of the 16.
of the twelfth. Wherefore the line IB contains in power the two lines IH and
HB, by the 47. of the first. But the line HB, is drawn from the center of the
circle which contains the base of the Icosahedron namely, the angle B is
placed in the circumference, and the point H is the center. Wh^refore the whole
line BG contains in power the whole lines FH and the diameter of the circle
(namely, the double of the line BH) by the 15^ of the fiueth. But the diameter
which is double to the line HB is in power sesquiterti^ to the side of the
equilater triangle inscribed in the same circle^ by the corollary of the ^^. of
the thirtenth. For it is in proportion to the side^ as the side is to the
perpendicular, by the corollary of the 8. of the ^ixth. And FH the diameter of
the cube, is in power triple to EH the side of the same cube, by the 15^ of the
thirtenth. If therefore from the power of the diameter BG, be taken away the
power tripled of EH the side of the cube inscribed^ that is^ the power of the
line FH: the residue (namely, the power of the diameter of the circle which is
duple to the line HB shall be sesquiterti^ to the side of the triangl^
inscribed in that circle: which self side is AB the side of the Icosahedron.
If therefore from the power of the diameter of an Icosahedro^, be taken away the
power tripled of the side of the cube inscribed in the Icosahedron, the power
remaining shall be s^squitertia ^o the power of the side of the Icosahedron.

A Corollary.
The diameter of the Icosahedron, contains in power two lines, namely, the
diameter of the cube inscribed, which coupleth the centres of the opposite
bases, and the diameter of the circle which contains the base of the
Icosahedron. For it was manifest, that BG the diameter contains to power the
line FH which doupleth the centres, and the double of the line BH, that is, the
diameter of the circle containing the bas^ wherein i^ the center H^

The 21. Proposition. The side of a Dodeca^edron is the less segment of that
right line, which is in power duple to the side of the Octohedron inscribed in
the same Dodecahedron.
LEt there be taken a Dodecahedron AB^DCT, one of whose sides let be AB. And let
the Octohedron inscribed in the Dodecahedron be EFLKI: one of whose sides let
be OF. Then I say that AB the side of the Dodecahedron, is the less segment of
a certain right ^ine ^ cut by an extreme and mean proportion) which is in
power duple to OF the side of the Octohedro^ inscribed in the Dodecahedron.
Draw the diameters EL and FK of the Octohedron. Now they couple the middle
sections of the opposite sides of the dodecahedron AB and GD, (by the 9. of the
fiuetenth, and 3. corollary of the 17. of the thirte^th) and every one of those
diameters being divided by an extreme and mean proportion, do make the less
segment, the side of the dodecahedron, by the 4. corollary of the same.
Wherefore the side AB is the less segment of the line FK. But the line FK
contains in power the two equal lines OF and EK, by the 47. of the first:
for the angle FEK is a right angle of the square FEKL of the Octohedron.
Wherefore the line FK is in power duple to the line OF. Wherefore the line AB
(the side of the dodecahedron) is the less segment of the line FK, which is in
power duple to OF the sid^ of the Octohedron. The side therefore of a
Dodecahedron i^ the less segment of that right line, which is in power duple
to the side of the Octohedron inscribed in the same Dod^cahedron.

The 22. Proposition. The diameter of an Icosahedron is in power sesquitertia
to the side of the same Icosahedron, and also is in power sesquialter to the
side of the Pyramid inscribed in the Icosahedron.
FOr forasmuch as it has been proved (by the 10. of this book) that if from
the power of the diameter of the Icosahedro^ be taken away the triple of the
power of the side of the cube inscribed in it, there shall be left a square
sesquitertia to the square of the side of the Icosahedron: But the power of the
side of the cube tripled, is the diameter of the same cube, by the 15. of the
thirte^th: And the cube, and the pyramid inscribed in it are contained in one
and the self same sphere, by the first of this book, and in one and the self
same Icosahedron by the corollary of the same. Wherefore one and the self same
diameter of the cube, or of the sphere which contains the cube and the
pyramid, is in power sesquialter to the side of the pyramid by the 13. of the
thirtenth. Wherefore it follows, that if from the diameter of the Icosahedron,
be taken away the triple power of the side of the cube, or the sesquialter
power of the side of the pyramid, which are the powers of one and the self
same diameter, there shall be left the sesquitertia power of the side of the
Icosahedron. The diameter therefore of an Icosahedron is in power sesquitertia
to the side of the same Icosahedron, and also is in power sesquialter to the
side of the Pyramid inscribed in the Icosahedron.

The 23. Proposition. The side of a Dodecahedron is to the side of an
Icosahedron inscribed in it, as the less segment of the perpendicular of the
Pentago^, is to that line which is drawn from the center to the side of the
same pentagon.
Constrution.
LEt there be taken a Dodecahedron ABGDFSO. Whose side let be AS or SO: and let
the Icosahedron inscribed in it be KLNMNE, whose side let be KL. From the two
angles of the pentagon^ BAS and FAS of the Dodecahedron, namely, from the
angle^ ^ and F, let there be drawn to the common base AS perpendicular lines
BC and FC: which shall pass by the centres K and L of the said pentagons, by
the corollary of the 10. of the thirte^th. Draw the lines BF and TO. Now
forasmuch as the line TO subtendeth the angle OFR of the pentagon of the
dodecahedron, it shall cut the line FC by an extreme and mean proportion, by
the 3. of this book, let it cut it in the point I. And forasmuch as the line
KL is the side of the Icosahedron inscribed in the Dodecahedron, it coupleth
the ce^tres of the bases of the dodecahedron: for the angles of the Icosahedron
are set in the centres of the bases of the dodecahedron, by the 7. of the
fiuetenth. Now I say that SO, the side of the dodecahedron is to KL the side of
the Icosahedron, as the less segment IF of the perpendicular line CF, is to
the line LC which is drawn from the center L to AS the side of the pentagon.
For forasmuch as in the triangle BCF the two sides CB and CF are in the centres
L and K cut like proportionally, Demonstration.
the lines BF and KL shall be parellels, by the 2. of the sixth. Wherefore the
triangles BCF, and KCL shall be equiangle, by the corollary of the same.
Wherefore as the line CL is to the line KL^ so is the line CF to the line BF, by
the 4. of the sixth. But CF makes the less segment the line IF, by the 3. of
this book, and the lin^ BF makes the less segment the line SO, namely, the
side of the Dodecahedron, by the 2. corollary of the 13. of the fiuetenth. For
the line BF which coupleth the angles B and F of the bases of the dodecahedron,
is equal to the side of the cube, which contains the dodecahedron, (by
the.13. of the fiuetenth). Wherefore as the whole line C^, is to the whole line
BF, so is the less segment IF to the less segment SO (by the 2. of the 14).
But as the line CF is to the line BF, so is the line CL proved to be to the
line KL. Wherefore as the line IF is to the line SO, so is the line CL to the
line KL. Wherefore alternately by the 16. of the fiueth, as the line IF the
less segment of the perpendicular of the pentagon FAS, is to the line LC which
is drawn from the center of the pentagon, to the base, so is the line SO the
side of the Dodecahedron to the line KL the side of the Icosahedron inscribed
in it. The side therefore of a Dodecahedron is to the side of an Icosahedron
inscribed in it, as the less segment of the perpendicular of the pentagon, is
to that line which is drawn from the cen^re to the side of the same pentagon.

The 24. Proposition. If half of the side of an Icosahedron be divided by an
extreme and mean proportion: and if the less segment thereof be taken away
from the whole side, and again from the residue be taken away the third part:
that which remains shall be equal to the side of the Dodecahedron inscribed
in the same Icosahedron.
SVppose that ABGDF be a pentagon, Construction.
containing five sides of the Icosahedron by the 16. of the thirtenth, and let
it be inscribed in a circle, whose center let be the point E. And upon the
sides of the pentagon, let there be reared up triangles, making a solid angle
of the Icosahedron at the point I, by the 16. of the thirtenth. And in the
circle ABD, inscribe an equilater triangle AHK. From the center E draw to HK
the side of the triangle, and GD the side of the pentagon, a perpendicular
line, which let be ECNM. And draw these right lines EG, ED, IG and ID. And
divide the line BG into two equal parts in the point T. And draw these lines
IN, IT, TN, ET. And forasmuch as in the perpendiculars IT and IN are the
centres of the circles which contain the equilater triangles IBG, and IGD, by
the corollarye of the first of the third. Let those centres be the points S
and O. And draw the line SO. Divide the line TB the half of BG the side of the
Icosahedron by an extreme and mean proportion in the point R, by the 30. of
the sixth, and let the less segment thereof be RB. And forasmuch as the line SO
coupleth the centres of the triangles IBG, and IGD, it is by the 5. of the
fiuetenth, the side of the Dodecahedro^ inscribed in the Icosahedron, whose
side is the line BG. From the side BG take away ^R the less segment of the
half side. And from the residue GR take away the third part GV (by the 9. of
the sixth.) Then I say that the residue RV is equal to SO the side of the
Dodecahedron inscribed. Demonstration.
For forasmuch as the perpendicular EN is in the point C divided by an extreme
and mean proportion, by the corollary of the first of the fourtenth, and the
greater segment thereof is the line EC, and unto the line EC the line CM is
equal, by the corollary of the 12. of the thirtenth: wherefore the line EC is
to the line CN, as the line CM is to the same line CN, by the 7. of the fiueth.
But as the line EC is to the line CN, so is the whole line ^N, to the greater
segment EC, by the 3. diffinition of the sixth. Wherefore (by the 11. of the
fiueth), as the whole line EN is to the greater segment EC, so is the line CM
to the line CN. Wherefore the line CM, is divided by an extreme and mean
proportion in the point N, namely, is divided like unto the line EN, by the 2.
of the fourtenth. Wherefore the line EM excedeth the line EN by the less
segment of his half, namely, by MN. And forasmuch as EGD is the triangle of
an equilater and equiangle pentagon ABGDF, and ETN is likewise the triangle of
the like pentagon inscribed in the pentagon ABGDF: Therefore by the 20. of the
sixth, the triangle ETN is like to the triangle EGD^ Wherefore as the line EG
is to the line EN, so by the 4. of the sixth, is the line GD to the line NT.
Wherefore the line GD (or BG which is equal unto it) excedeth the line NT by
the less segment of the half of BG. For the line EG did in like sort excede
the line EN. But that less segment is the line BR. Wherefore the residue RG is
equal to the line TN. And forasmuch as IBG is an equilater triangle: the
perpendicular ST shall be the half of the line SI which is drawn from the
center, by the corollary of the 12. of the thirtenth: wherefore the line IT
excedeth the line IS by his third part. And forasmuch as the line SO which
coupleth the sections, is a parallel to the line TN, by the 2. of the sixth.
For the equal perpendiculars IT, and IN are cut like in the points S and O:
therefore the triangles ITN and I^O, are like by the corollary of the second of
the sixth. Wherefore as the line IT is to the line IS, so by the 4. of the sixth
is the line TN to the line SO. But the line IT excedeth the line IS by a third
part: wherefore the line TN, excedeth the line SO by a third part: but the line
TN is proved equal to the line RG. Wherefore the line RG excedeth the line SO by
a third part of himself, which is GV. Wherefore the residue RV, is equal to the
line SO, which is the side of the dodecahedron inscribed in the Icosahedron,
whose side is the line BG. If therefore half of the side of an Icosahedro^, be
divided by an extreme and mean proportion: and if the less segment thereof be
taken away from the whole side, and again from the residue be taken away the
third part: that which remains shall be equal to the side of the dodecahedron
inscribed in the same Icosahedron.

The 25. Proposition. To prove that a cube given, is to a trilater equilater
pyramid inscribed in it, triple.
SVppose that the cube given, be ABCH: and let the pyramid inscribed in it be
AGDF. Then I say that the cube ABCH is triple to the pyramid AGDF. For
forasmuch as the base AFD is common to the pyramid AFDB and AFDG, the pyramid
AFDB shall be set without the pyramid AFDG. Likewise the rest of the bases of the
inscribed pyramid are common to the rest of the pyramids sort without: which
are these: the pyramid AGDC upon the base AGD: the pyramid AGF^ upon the base
AGF^ and the pyramid GDFH upon the base GDF. Which pyramids taken without, are
four in number, equal and like the one to the other, by the ^. diffinition of
the eleu^th. For every one of them is contained under thr^ half squares of the
cube, and one of the bases of the pyramid inscribed. Wherefore every one of the^
is contained under the half base of the cube, and the altitude of the cube. As
the pyramid ALGF, has to his base half of the square EH, namely, the triangle
EGF, and has to his altitude, the altitude of the cube, namely, the line AE.
Wherefore the said pyramid is the sixth part of the cube. For if the cube be
divided into two prismes, by the plain CBFG, the prisme ACBGEF, shall be triple
to the pyramid AEGF, having one and the self same base with it EGF, and one
and the self same altitude EA, by the first corollary of the 7. of the
twelueth. Wherefore the said outward pyramid AEGF is the sixth part of the
whole cube. Wherefore also the same pyramid together with the other three
outward pyramids AFDB, AGDC, and GDFH, ^hal contain two third parts of the
cube. Wherefore the residue, namely, the pyramid inscribed AGDF, shall contain
one third part of the cube. And therefore conuersedly the cube shall be triple
to it: wherefore we have proved that a cube given triple to a trilater and
equilater pyramid inscribed in it.

The 26. Proposition. To prove that a trilater equilater Pyramid is duple to an
Octohedron inscribed in it.
LEt there be taken a trilater Pyramid ABCD: whose six sides let be cut into
two equal parts, in the points E, K, F, L, G, and H^ inscribing thereby an
Octohedron in the pyramid, by the 2. of the fiuetenth. Wherefore the pyramids
AEGH, BEFK, CFGL, and DKHL, fall without the Octohedron inscribed, by the same
second of the fiuetenth. But the outward Pyramids (namely, AEGH, and the three
other) are like unto the whole pyramid, by the 7. definition of the eleventh.
For the bases of the whole pyramid are by parallel lines drawn in them cut
into like triangles, by the Corollary of the 2. of the sixth, of which the
foresaid pyramids are made. Wherefore the whole pyramid is to every one of them
in treble proportion of that in which the sides of like proportion are, by the
8. of the twelfth. But by construction, the proportion of the side A^ to the
side A^ is duple. Wherefore the whole pyramid ABCD is octuple to the pyramid
AEGH, and so is it to every one of the pyramids which are equal to AEGH. For
duple proportion multiplied into it self twice makes octuple. Wherefore it
follows that the 4. pyramids AEGH, ^EFK, CFGL, and DKHL, taken together, make
the half of the whole pyramid ABCD. Wherefore the residue, namely, the
Octohedron EGLKHF, is the other half of the pyramid. Wherefore the pyramid is
duple to the Octohedron. Wherefore we have proved that a trilater equilater
pyramid is duple to an Octohedron inscribed in it.

The 27. Proposition. To prove that a Cube is sextuple to an Octohedron
inscribed in it.
LEt there be taken a cube ABCD, EFGH: whose 4. standing lines AE, BF, CH, and
DG, let be cut into two equal parts in the points I, K, M, L: and^ by those
points let there be extended a plain KLMI: which shall be a square, and
parallel to the squares BC and FH, by the 15. of the eleventh. Wherefore in it
shall be the base which is common to the two pyramids of the Octohedron
inscribed in the cube, by that which was demonstrated in the third of the
fiuetenth. Let that base be NPRQ, coupling the centres of the bases of the
cube: and upon that base let be set the two pyramids of the Octohedron, which
let be NPQRS, and NPQRT. And forasmuch as those two pyramids taken together,
have their altitude equal with the altitude of the whole cube, Demonstration.
each of them a part has to his alt^^ude half the altitude of the cube,
namely, half of the side of the cube, as the line KB. And forasmuch as the
square KLMI is double to the square NRQP, by the 47. of the first: the other
squares of the cube shall also be double to the square NRQP. And forasmuch as
the cube, as it was manifest by the last of the fiuetenth, is resolved into
six pyramids, whose bases are the bases of the cube, and the altitudes the
lines drawn from the center to the bases, which are equal to half the side
of the cube^ it follows that every one of the six pyramids of the cube,
having his base double to the base of each of the pyramids of the Octohedron,
and the self same altitude that the said pyramids of the Octohedro^ have, is
double to either of the pyramids of the octohedro^, by the 6. of the twelfth.
And forasmuch as every one of the pyramids of the cube is equal to the two
pyramids of the Octohedron, the six pyramids of the cube shall be sextuple to
the whole Octohedron. Wherefore it is manifest, that a cube is sextuple to an
Octohedron inscribed in it.

The 28. Proposition. To prove that an Octohedron is quadruple sesquialter to a
Cube inscribed in it.
SVppose that the Octohedron given be ABCDEF: and let the cube inscribed in it
be GHIK, VQRS. Then I say, that the Octohedron is quadruple sesquialter to the
cube inscribed in it. Forasmuch as the lines drawn from the center of the
Octohedron, or of the Sphere which contains it, unto the centres of the bases
of the Octohedron, are proved equal, by the 21. of the fiuetenth: and the
angles of the cube are set in the centres of those bases, by the 4. of the
fiuetenth: it follows, that the self same right lines are drawn from one
and the self same center of the cube and of the Octohedron: for they have each
one and the self same center, by the Corollary of the 21. of the fiuetenth.
Let that center be the point T. Wherefore the base BDFC, which cutteth the
Octohedron into two equal and quadrilater pyramids, by the Corollary of the
14. of the thirtenth, shall also cut the cube into two equal parts, by the
Corollary of the 39. of the eleventh. For it passes by the center T, by that
which was demonstrated in the 14. of the thirtenth. And forasmuch as the base
of the cube is in the 4. centres G, H, I, K, of the bases of the pyramid ABDFC,
a plain LNOM, extended by those points, shall be parallel to the plain BDFC,
by that which was demonstrated in the 4. of the fiuetenth, and shall cut the
pyramid in the points L, N, O, M: and the lines LN, BD, and NO, DF, shall be
parallels, so also shall the lines OM, FC, and LM, BC: and the square GHIK of
the cube shall be inscribed in the square LNOM, by the same. Wherefore the
square LNOM is duple to the square GHIK, by the 47. of the first. From the
solid angle A, let there be drawn to the plain superficies BDFC, a
perpendicular, which let fall upon it in the point T, and let the same
perpendicular be AT, cutting the plain LNOM in the point P. And it shall also
be a perpendicular to the plain LNOM, by the Corollary of the 14. of the
eleventh. Again from the angle BAD of the triangle ADB, let there be drawn by
the center H of the triangle, to the base a line AHX. Wherefore the line AX is
sesquialter to the line AH, by the Corollary of the 12. of the thirtenth.
Wherefore the line AH is duple to the line HX. But the other lines AB, AD, AF,
AC, and the perpendicular APT, are cut like unto the line AHX, by the 17. of
the eleventh: Wherefore the line AP is double to the line PT. Wherefore the
line AP is the altitude of the cube, for the line PT is the half thereof. And
forasmuch as upon the base GHIK of the cube, and under the altitude AP of the
same cube, is set the pyramid AGHIK: the said pyramid is the third part of the
cube, by the Corollary of the 7. of the twelfth. But unto the pyramid AGHIK the
pyramid ALNOM is duple, by the 6. of the twelfth, for the base of the one is
double to the base of the other. Wherefore the pyramid ALNOM is two third
parts of the cube. And forasmuch as the pyramids ALNOM, and ABDFC, are like,
by the 7. definition of the eleventh: therefore they are in triple proportion
of that in which the sides of like proportion AH to AX, or AL to AB, are, by
the Corollary of the 8. of the twelfth. But the side AB is proved to be
sesquialter to the side AL. Wherefore the pyramid ABCDF is to pyramid ALNOM, as
27. is to 8. (that is, in sesquialter proportion tripled: for the quantity or
denomination of sesquialter proportion, namely, 1 multiplied into it self once
makes 2, which again multiplied by 1 makes 3 1/^, that is, 27. to 8.). But
of what parts the pyramid ALNOM contains 8, of the same the cube contains
12: namely, is sesquialter to the pyramid. Wherefore of what parts the cube
contains 12, of the same the whole Octohedron (which is double to the pyramid
ABDFC) contains 54. Which 54. has to 12. quadruple sesquialter proportion.
Wherefore the whole Octohedron is to the cube inscribed in it, in quadruple
sesquialter proportion. Wherefore we have proved that an Octohedron given is
quadruple sesquialter to a cube inscribed in it.

A Corollary.
An Octohedron is to a cube inscribed in it, in that proportion that the
squares of their sides are. For by the 14. of this book, the side of the
Octohedron is in power quadruple sesquialter to the side of the cube inscribed
in it.

The 29. Proposition. To prove that an octohedro^ given, is That is at 13. 1/^
is to ^.
tredecuple sesquialter to a trilater equilater pyramid inscribed in it.
LEt the octohedron ge^en, be AB: in which let there be inscribed a cube FCED,
by the 4. of the fiuetenth, and in the cube let there be inscribed a pyramid
FEGD, by the ^. of the fiuetenth. And forasmuch as the angles of the pyramid
are (by the same first of the fiuetenth) set in the angles of the cube: and the
angles of the cube are set in the centres of the bases of the Octohedron,
namely, in the points F, E, C, D, G by the 4. of the fiuetenth. Wherefore the
angles of the pyramid, are set in the centres F, C, E, D of the octohedron.
Wherefore the pyramid FEDG is inscribed in the octohedron (by the 6. of the
fiuetenth.) And forasmuch as the octohedron AB is to the cube FCED, inscribed
in it quadruple sesquialter (by the former proposition): and the cube CDEF is
to the pyramid FEDG inscribed in it triple, by the 25. of book: wherefore
three magnitudes being given, namely, the octohedron, the cube and the pyramid,
the proportion of the extremes (namely, of the octohedron to the piramis) is
made of the proportions of the means, (namely, of the octohedron to the cube,
and of the cube to the pyramid,) as it is easy to see by the declaration upon
the 10. diffinition of the fiueth. Now then multiplying the quantities or
denominations of the proportions (namely, of the octohedron to the cube which
is 4 1/^, and of the cube to the pyramid, which is 3) as was taught in the
diffinition of the sixth, there shall be produced 13 1/^, namely, the proportion
of the octohedron to the pyramid inscribed in it. For 4, multiplied by 3.
produce 13. Wherefore the Octohedron is to the pyramid inscribed in it in
tredecuple sesquialter proportion. Wherefore we have proved that an Octohedron
is to a trilater equilater pyramid inscribed in it, in tredecuple sesquialter
proportion.

The 30. Proposition. To prove that a trilater equilater Pyramid, is noncuple
to a cube inscribed in it.
SVppose that the pyramid given, be ABCD, whose two bases let be ABC, and DBC,
and let their centres be the points G and I. And from the angle A, draw unto
the base BC a perpendicular AE: likewise from the angle D draw unto the same
base BC, a perpendicular DE: and they shall concur in the section E by the 3.
of the third and in them shall be the ce^tres G and I, by the corollary of the
first of the third. And forasmuch as the line AD is the side of the pyramid,
the same AD shall be the diameter of the base of the cube which contains the
pyramid, by the 1 of the fiuete^th. Demonstration.
Draw the line GI. And forasmuch as the line GI coupleth the centre^ of the
bases of the pyramid: the said line GI shall be the diameter of the base of the
cube inscribed in the pyramid by the 18. of the fiuetenth. And forasmuch as
the line AG is double to the line GE, by the corollarye of the twelueth of the
thirtenth: the whole line AE shall be triple to the line GE: and so is also the
line DE to the line IE. Wherefore the lines AD and GI are parallels, by the 2.
of the sixth. And therefore the triangles AED, and GEI are like^ by the
corollary of the same. And forasmuch as the triangles AED, and GEI are like,
the line AD^ shall be triple to the line GI, by the 4. of the sixth. But the line
AD is the diameter of the base of the cube circumscribed about the pyramid
ABCD, and the line GI is the diameter of the base of the cube inscribed in the
pyramid ABCD: but the diameters of the bases are equemultiplices to the sides
(namely, are in power duple). Wherefore the side of the cube circumscribed about
the pyramid ABCD, is triple to the side of the cube, inscribed in the same
piramis, by the 15. of the fiueth: but like cubes are in triple proportion the
one to the other of that in which their sides are, by the 33. of the eleventh:
and the sides are in triple proportion the one to the other: Wherefore triple
taken three times brings forth twenty seuencuple, which is 27. to 1: for the
4. terms 27.9.3.1, being set in triple proportion: the proportion of the first
to the fourth, namely, of 27. to 1. shall be triple to the proportion of the
first to the second, namely, of 27. to 9, by the 10. diffinition of the fiueth:
which proportion of 27. to 1. is the proportion of the sides tripled, which
proportion also is found in like solides. Wherefore of what parts the cube
circumscribed contains 27. of the same, the cube inscribed contains one:
but of what parts the cube circumscribed, contains 27. of the same, the
pyramid inscribed in it, contains 9. by the 25. of this book: wherefore of
what parts the pyramid AB CD contains 9. of the same, the cube inscribed in
the pyramid, contains one. Wherefore we have proved that a trilater and
equilater pyramid, is non^cuple to a cube inscribed in it.

The 31. Proposition. An Octohedron has to an Icosohedron inscribed in it,
that proportion, which two bases of the Octohedron have to five bases of the
Icosahedron.
SVppose that the octohedron given be ABCD, and let the Icosahedron inscribed
in it, be FGHMKLIO. Then I say that the octohedron is to the Icosahedron, as
two bases of the octohedron, are to five bases of the Icosahedron. For
forasmuch as the solid of the octohedron consists of eight pyramids, set
upon the bases of the octohedron, Demonstration.
and having to their altitude a perpendicular line drawn from the center to
the base: let that perpendicular be ER, or ES, being drawn from the center E
(which center is common to either of the solides, by the corollary of the 21.
of the fiuetenth) to the centres of the bases, namely, to the points R and S.
Wherefore for that three pyramids are equal and like, they shall be equal to a
prisme set upon the self same base, and under the self same altitude, by the
corollary of the seventh of the twelueth. But unto this prisme is double that
prisme which is set upon the self same base, and has his altitude duple,
namely, the whole line RS by the corollary of the 25. of the eleventh: for it
is equal to the two equal and like prismes whereof it is composed. Wherefore the
prisme set upon the base of the octohedron, and having to his altitude the line
RS is equal to six pyramids, set upon six bases of the Octohedron, and having
to their altitude the line ER. So there remain two pyramids (for in the
octohedron are 8. bases) which shall be equal to the prisme which is set upon
the third part of the base of the octohedron, and under the altitude RS. For
prismes under one and the self same altitude, are in proportion the one to the
other, as are their bases, by the corollary of the 7 of the twelueth. Wherefore
the two prismes which are set upon the base of the octohedron, and upon a
third part thereof, and under the altitude RS, are equal to the 8. pyramids of
the Octohedron, or to the whole solid of the octohedron. And forasmuch as the
Icosahedron inscribed in the octohedron, has his bases set in the bases of
the Octohedron, by the 17. of the fiuetenth: it follows that the pyramids set
upon the bases of the Icosahedron, and having to their tops one and the
self same center E, are contained under the self same altitude, that the
pyramids of the octohedron are contained under. namely, under the line ER, or
ES. And therefore a prisme, set upon the base of the Icosahedron, and having
his altitude double to the altitude of the pyramid, namely, the whole line RS,
is equal to six pyramids set upon the base of the Icosahedron, and under the
altitude ER or ES, as we have proved in the octohedron. Wherefore the 20.
pyramids, set upon the 20. bases of the Icosahedron, are equal to three prismes
set upon the base of the Icosahedron, and under the altitude RS, and moreover
to an other prisme set upon a third part of the base of the Icosahedron and
under the same altitude RS, which prisme is a third part of the former prisme,
by the corollarye of the 7. of the twelueth: for their proportion is as the
proportion of the bases. Wherefore two prismes set upon the base of the
octohedron, and a third part thereof, and under the altitude RS, is to 4.
prismes set upon three bases of the Icosahedron, and a third part thereof, and
under the same altitude RS, in the same proportion that the bases are, that is,
as 4. third parts of the base of the Octodron (which are equal to one base,
and 1/^;) to ten third parts of the base of the Icosahedron (which are equal
to three bases and 1/^;) or as two third parts of the base of the Octohedron,
are to five third parts of the base of the Icosahedron. But two third parts
of the base of the Octohedron, are to five third parts of the base of the
Icosahedron, as two bases are to five bases (by the 15. of the fifth, for they
are parts of equemultiplices:) And two prismes of the Octohedron are to 4.
prismes of the Icosahedron, as the solid of the Octohedron is to the solid of
the Icosahedron, when as each are equal to each of the solides: Wherefore (by
the ^^. of the fiueth) the solid of the Octohedron, is to the solid of the
Icos^hedron inscribed in it, as two bases of the Octohedron, are to five bases
of the Icosahedron. An Octohedron therefore is to an Ico^ahedron inscribed in
it, in that proportion, that two bases of the Octohedron, are to five bases of
the Icosahedron.

The 32. Proposition. The proportion of the solid of an Icosahedron to the
solid of a Dodecahedron inscribed in it, consists of the proportion of the
side of the Icosahedron to the side of the Cube contained in the same sphere,
and of the proportion tripled of the diameter to the line which conpleth the
centers of the opposite bases of the Icosahedron.
Construction.
SVppose that there be ^ Dodecahedron, whose diameter let be HI, and let the
Icosahedron contained in the same sphere be ABGC, whose dimetient let be AC.
And let the right line which coupleth the centres of the opposite base^ be BG.
And let the dodecahedron inscribed in the Icos^hedron be that which is set upon
the diameter BG, by the 5. of the fiuetenth. And let the side of the cube be
DE, and let the side of the Icosahedron be D^, both the said solides being
described in one and the self same sphere. The^ I say that the proportion of
the solid of the Icosahedron ABCG to the solid of the dodecahedron set upon
the diameter BG, inscribed in it, consists of the proportion of the line DF
to the line DE, and of the proportion tripled of the line AC to the line BG.
Demonstration.
For forasmuch as the solid of the Icosahedron ABGC is to the solid of the
dodecahedron HI, being contained in one and the self same sphere, as DF is to
D^, by the 8. of the fourtenth But the dodecahedron whose diameter is HI, is to
the dodecahedron whose diamer is BG, in treble propo^tio^ of that in which the
diameter HI is to the diameter BG, by the corollary of the 17. of the twelfth:
and the lines HI and AC are equal by supposition (namely, the diameters of one
and the self same sphere). Wherefore as HI is to BG, so is AC to BG. Wherefore
the proportion of the extremes, namely, of the Icosahedron ABGC to the
Dodecahedron set upon the diameter BG which coupleth the c^ntres, consists
(by the 5. diffinition of the sixth) of the proportions of the me^nes, namely,
of the proportion of the Icos^hedron ABCG to the dodecahedron HI (which is one
and the same with the proportion of DF to DE) and of the proportion of the same
HI to the other dodecahedron set upon the diamete^ BG, inscribed in the same
Icosahedron ABGC, by the same 5. of the fiuetenth: which proportion is triple
to the propo^tio^ of the line HI (or the line AC) to GB which coupleth the
centres of the opposite bases of the Icosahedron. The proportion therefore of
the solid of the Icosahedron to the solid of a D^^ecahedron inscribed in it,
consists of the proportion of the side of the Icosahedron to the side of the
Cube contained in the same sphere, and of the proportion tripled of the
diameter to the lin^ which coupleth the centres of the opposite bases of the
Icosahedron.

The 33. Proposition. The solid of a Dodecahedron excedeth the solid of a
Cube inscribed in it, by a parallelipipedon, whose base wants of the base of
the Cube by a third part of the less segment, and whose altitude wants of
the altitude of the Cube, by the less segment of the less segment, of half
the side of the Cube.
FOrasmuch as by the 17. of the thirtenth, and 8. of the fiuetenth, it was
manifest, that the base of a cube inscribed in a dodecahedron, does with his
sides subtend t^^ angles of 4. pentagons co^curring at one and the self same
side of the dodecahedron: Construction.
let that base of the cube be ABCD: and let the side whereat 4. bases of the
dodecahedron circumscribed concur, be EG: which shall contain a solid
AEBDGC set upon the base ABCD. Divide the sides AB and DC into two equal
parts in the points L and N. And draw the line LN, which is a parallel to the
side EG, as it was manifest by the 17. of the thirtenth. The perpendiculars
also ER and GO which couple those parallels, are each equal, to half of the
side EG, and each is the greater segment of half the side of the cube, and
therefore the whole line EG is the greater segment of the whole line LN the
side of the cube (by the foresaid 17. of the thirtenth). By the points R and
O, draw unto the sides AB and CD parallel lines FH and IK. And draw these right
lines OF, EH, GI and GK. Now forasmuch as the two lines FH and ER touching the
one the other are parallels to the two lines IK and GO touching also the one
the other, Demonstration.
and not being in the self same plain with the two first lines: therefore the
plain super^icieces EFH and GIK passing by those lines are parallels, by the
15. of the eleventh: which playnes do cut the solid AEBDGC. Whererefore
there are made four quadrangled pyramids set upon the rectangle
parallelogrames LH, LF, NK, and NI, and having their tops the points E and
G. And forasmuch as the triangles GOK and ERH are equal and like, by the 4. of
the first, namely, Extend in the figure a line from the point E to the point B.
they contain equal angles comprehended under equal sides, and they are
parallels by construction, being set in the playnes GIK and EFH: the figures
GKHE, OKHR, and GORE shall be parallelogrammes, by the di^^^nition of a
parallelogramme, and therefore the solid GOKERH is a prisme, by the 11.
diffinition of the eleventh. And by the same reason may the solid GOIERF be
proved to be a prisme. And forasmuch as upon equal bases NOKC, and RLBH, and
under equal altitudes OG and RE are set pyramids: those pyramids shall be
equal to that pyramid which is set upon the ^ase CKID (which is double to
either of the bases NOKC, and RLBH) and under the same altitude OG, by the 6.
of the twelfth. And forasmuch as the side GE is the greater segment of the line
CB, the line KH, which by the 33. of the first, is equal to the line GE, shall
be the greater segment of the same line CB, by the 2. of the fourtenth.
Wherefore the residues CK and HB shall make the less segment of the whole line
CB. But as the greater segment KH is to the two lines CK and HB the less
segment, so is the rectangle parallelogramme OH to the two rectangle
parallelogrammes OC and HL, by the 1. of the sixth. Wherefore the less segment
of the parallelogramme NB, shall be the two parallelogrammes OC and HL. Put the
line KM double to the line KC and draw the line MS parallel to the line CN.
Wherefore the parallelogramme OKMS is equal to the parallelogrammes OC and HL,
by the 1. of the sixth. Wherefore the pyramid set upon the base OKMS contains
two third parts of the prisme set upon the self same base, by the 4.
corollary of the 7. of the twelfth. Wherefore the prisme which is set upon two
third parts of the base OKMS is equal to the two pyramids NOKCG and RLBHE.
For the sections of a prisme are one to the other, as the sections of the base
are, by the first corollary of the 25. of the eleventh. But the sections of the
base are as the sections of the line CB or KM, by the 1. of the sixth. Wherefore
the two pyramids NOKCG and RLBHE, add unto the prisme GOKERH two third parts
of the prisme set upon the base OKMS. And forasmuch as the line KM is the less
segme^t of the whole line BC (for it is equal to to the two lines CK and H^),
and the prisme set upon the base OKHR is cut like unto the line KM, namely,
in each are taken two thirdes, as has before been proved: the prisme equal to
the two pyramids, shall add unto the prisme GOKERH, which is set upon the
greater segment KH, two th^^ds of the less segment. Wherefore in the line BC
there shall remain one third part of the less segment: and therefore in the
rectangle parallelogramme NB which is half the base of the cube, there shall
remain the same third part of the less segment. And by the same reason may we
prove that in the other pyramids ONDIG, and RLAFE, and in the prisme GOIERF is
left the self same excess of the base LAND, namely, the third part of the
less segment. Wherefore the whole prisme contained between the triangles IGK
and FEH, and under the length of the greater Extend in the figure a line from
the point E to the point B.
segment and two third parts of the less segment of BC the side of the cube,
is equal to the solid composed of 4. bases of the dodecahedron and set upon
the base of the cube. Wherefore the base of that prisme wants of the whole
base of the cube only a third part of the less segment: and the altitude of
that prisme was the line GO, which is the greater segment of half the side of
the cube. And forasmuch as unto the triangle IGK, is double the rctangle
parallelogramme set upon the same base IK, (the side of the cube) and under the
altitude GO, by the 41. of the first: it follows that three rectangle
parallelogrammes set upon the same base IK, the side of the cube, and under the
altitude OG the greater segment of half the side of the cube, are sextuple to
the triangle IGK. Wherefore those three rectangle parallelogrammes do make one
rectangle parallelogramme set upon the base IK and under the altitude of the
line GO tripled. But by the 7. diffinition of the eleventh, there are six
prismes equal and like unto the foresaid prisme, being set upon every one of
the six bases of the cube: which prismes are in proportion the one to the
other as their bases are by the 3. corollary of the 7. of twelfth. Wherefore
the solid composed of these six prismes, shall want of the base ABCD the
third part of the less segment, and taking his altitude of the foresaid
rectangle parallelogramme, the said altitude shall be equal to three greater
segmentes (one of which is GO) of half the side of the cube.

Now rests to prove that these three segmentes want of the side of the cube
by the less segment of the less segment of half the sid^ of the cube.
Suppose that AB the side of the cube be divided into the greater segment AC,
and into the less segment CB (by the 30. of the sixth). And divide into two
equal parts the line AC in the point G, and the line CB in the point E. And
unto the line CG put the line CL equal. Now forasmuch as the lines AG and GC
are the greater seg^^^tes of half the line AB, for ^che of them is the half
of the greater segment of the whole line AB: the lines EB and EC shall be the
less segmentes of half the line AB. Wherefore the whole line C^ is the
greater segment, and the line CE is the less segment. But as the line CL is to
the line CE, so is the line CE to the residue EL. Wherefore the line EL is the
greater segment of the line CE, or of the line EB which is equal unto it.
Wherefore the residue LB is the less segment of the same EB (which is the les^e
segment of half^ the side of the cube). But the lines AG, GC, and CL are three
greater segmentes of the half of the whole line AB: which three greater
segmentes make the altitude of the foresaid solid: wherefore the altitude of
the said solid wants of AB the side of the cube by the line LB, which is the
less s^gment of the line BE. Which line BE again is the less segment of
half the side AB of the cube. Wherefore the foresaid solid consisting of the
six solides, whereby the dodecahedron exceeds the cube inscribed in it, is
set upon a base which wants of the base of the cube by a third part of the
less segment, and is under an altitude wanting of the side of the cube by the
less segment of the less segment of half the side of the cube. The solid
therefore of a dodecahedron exceeds the solid of a cube inscribed in it, by
a parallelipipedon, whose base wants of the base of the cube by a third part
of the less segment, and whose altitude wants of the altitude of the cube,
by the less segment of the less segment of half the side of the cube.

A Corollary.
A Dodecahedron is double to a Cube inscribed in it, taking away the third part
of the less segment of the cube, and moreover the less segment of the less
segment of half of that excess. For if there be given a cube, from which is
cut of a solid set upon a third part of the less segment of the base and
under one and the same altitude with the cube: that solid taken away has to
the whole solid the proportion of the section of the base to the base, by the
32. of the eleventh. Wherefo^e from the cube is taken away a third ^art of the
less segment. Farther, forasmuch as the residue wants of the altitude of the
cube, by the less segment of the less segment of half the altitude or side,
and that residue is a parallelipipedon, if it be cut by a plain superficies
parallel to the opposite plain superficieces, cutting the altitude of the cube
by a point, it shall take away from that parallelipipedon a solid, having to
the whole the proportion of the section to the altitude, by the 3. Corollary of
the 25. of the eleventh. Wherefore the excess wants of the same cube by the
thi^d part of the less segment, and moreover by the less segment of the less
segment of half of that excess.

The 34. Proposition. The proportion of the solid of a Dodecahedron to the
solid of an Icosahedron inscribed in it, consists of the proportion tripled
of the diameter to that line which coupleth the opposite bases of the
Dodecahedron, and of the proportion of the side of the Cube to the side of the
Icosahedron inscribed in one and the self same Sphere.
SVppose that AHBCK be a Dodecahedron^ whose diamet^r let be AB: and let the
line which coupleth the ce^tres of the opposite bases be KH^ and let the
Icosahedron inscribed in the Dodecahedron ABC, be DEE: whose diameter let be
DE. Now forasmuch a^ o^e and the self same circle contains the pentagon of a
Dodecahedron, and the triangle of an Icosahedro^ described in one and the self
same Sphere, by the 14. of the fourtenth: Let that circle be IGO. Wherefore IO
is the side of the cube, and IG the side of the Icosahedron, by the same. The^
I say, that the proportion of the Dodecahedron AHBCK to the Icosahedron DEF
inscribed in it, consists of the proportion tripled of the line AB to the
line KH, and of the proportion of the line IO to the line IG. For ^o^asmuch as
the Icosahedron DEF is inscribed in the Dodecahedro^ ABC, Demonstration.
by suppositio^, the diameter DE shall be equal to the line KH, by the 7. of the
fiuetenth. Wherefore the Dodecahedron set upon the diameter KH shall be
inscribed in the same Sphere, wherein the Icosahedron DEF is inscribed: but the
Dodecahedron AHBCK is to the Dodecahedron upon the diameter KH in triple
proportion of that in which the diameter AB is to the diameter KH, by the
Corollary of the 17. of the twelfth: and the same Dodecahedron which is set
upon the diameter KH, has to the Icosahedron DEF (which is set upon the same
diameter, or upon a diameter equal unto it, namely, DE) that proportion which
IO the side of the cube has to^ IG the side of the Icosahedron, inscribed in
one and the self same Sphere, by the 8 of the fouretenth. Wherefore the
proportion of the Dodecahedron AHBCK to the Icosahedron DEF inscribed in it,
consists of the proportion tripled of the diameter AB to the line KH, which
coupleth the centres of the opposite bases of the Dodecahedron (which
proportion is that which the Dodecahedron AHBCK has to the Dodecahedron set
upon the diameter KH) and of the proportion of IO the side of the cube to IG
the side of the Icosahedron (which is the proportion of the Dodecahedron set
upon the diameter KH to the Icosahedron DEF described in one and the self same
Sphere) by the 5. definition of the sixth. The proportion therefore of the
solid of a Dodecahedron to the solid of an Icosahedron inscribed in it,
con^isteth of the proportion tripled of the diameter to that line which
coupleth the opposite bases of the Dodecahedron, and of the prop^^tion of the
side of the cube to the side of the Icosahedron inscribed in one and the self
same Sphere.

The 35. Proposition. The solid of a Dodecahedron contains of a Pyramid
circumscribed about it two ninth parts, taking away a third part of one ninth
part of the less segment (of a line divided by an extreme and mean
proportion) and moreover the less segment of the less segment of half the
residue.
IT has been proved that the Dodecahedron, together with the cube inscribed in
it is contained in one and the self same pyramid, by the Corollary of the
first of this book. And by the Corollary of the 33. of this book, it is
manifest, that the Dodecahedron is double to the same cube, taking away the
third part of the less segment, and moreover the less segment of the less
segment of half the residue, or of this excess. But a pyramid is to the same
cube inscribed in it nonecuple, by the 30. of this book. Wherefore the
Dodecahedron inscribed in the pyramid, and containing the same cube twice,
taking away the self same third of the less segment, and moreover the less
segment of the less segment of half the residue, shall contain two ninth
parts of the solid of the pyramid (of which ninth parts each is equal unto
the cube) taking away this self same excess. The solid therefore of a
Dodecahedron contains of a Pyramid circumscribed about it two ninth parts,
taking away a third part of one ninth part of the less segment (of a line
divided by an extmere and mean proportion) and moreover the less segment of
the less segment of half the residue.

The 36. Proposition. An Octohedron exceeds an Icosahedron inscribed in it,
by a parallelipipedon set upon the square of the side of the Icosahedron, and
having to his altitude the line which is the greater segment of half the
semidiameter of the Octohedron.
SVppose that there be an Octohedron ABCFPL: Construction.
in which let there be inscribed an Icosahedron HKEGMXNVDSQT^ by the ^6. of the
fiuetenth. And draw the diameters AZRCBROIF, and the perpendicular KO ^arallel
to the line AZR. Then I say, that the Octohedron ABCFPL is greater th^n the
Icosahedron inscribed in it, by a parallelipipedon set upon the square of the
side HK or GE, and having to his altitude the line KO or RZ: which is the
greater segment of the semidiameter AR. Forasmuch as in the same 16. it has
been proved, that the triangles KDG and KEQ are described in the bases APF and
ALF of the Octohedron: Demonstration.
therefore about the solid angle there remain upon the base FEG three
triangles KEG, KFE, and KFG, which contain a pyramid KEFG. Unto which pyramid
shall be equal and like the opposite pyramid MEFG set upon the same base FEG,
by the 8. definition of the eleventh. And by the ^ame reason shall there at
every solid angle of the Octohedron remain two pyramids equal and like:
namely, two upon the base AHK, two upon the base BNV, two upon the base DPS,
and moreover two upon the base QLT. Now the^ there shall be made twelve
pyramids, set upon a base contained of the side of the Icosahedron, and under
two le^^e segmentes of the side of the Octohedron containing a right angle, as
for example the base GEF, And forasmuch as the side GE subte^ding a right
angle, is, by the 47. of the first, in power duple to either of the lines OF
and FG, and so the ^^de^ KH is in power duple to either of the sides AH and AK:
and either of the lines AH, AK, or OF, FG, is in power duple to either of the
lines AZ or ZK which co^tayne a right angle, made in the triangle or base AHK
by the perpendicular AZ. Wherefore it follows that the side GE or HK, is in
power quadruple to the triangle EFG or AHK. But the pyramid KEFG, having his
base EFG in the plain FLBP of the Octohedron, shall have to his altitude the
perpendicular KO (by the 4. definition of the sixth) which is the greater
segment of the semidiameter of the Octohedron, by the 16. of the fiuetenth.
Wherefore three pyramids set under the same altitude and upon equal bases,
shall be equal to one prisme set upon the same base, and under the same
altitude, by the 1. Corollary of the 7. of the twelfth. Wherefore 4. prismes
set upon the base GEF quadrupled (which is equal to the square of the side GE)
and under the altitude KO (or RZ the greater segment which is equal to KO)
shall contain a solid equal to the twelve pyramids, which twelve pyramids
make the excess of the Octohedron above the Icosahedron inscribed in it. An
Octohedron therefore excedeth an Icosahedron inscribed in it, by a
parallelipipedon set upon the square of the side of the Icosahedron, and having
to his altitude the line which is the greater segment of half the semidiameter
of the Octohedron.

A Corollary.
A Pyramid exceeds the double of an Icosahedron inscribed in it, by a solid,
set upon the square of the side of the Icosahedron inscribed in it, and having
to his altitude that whole line of which the side of the Icosahedron is the
greater segme^t. For it is manifest by the 19. of the fiuete^th, that an
octohedro^ and an Icosahedro^ inscribed in it are inscribed in one and the self
same pyramid. It has moreover been proved in the 26. of this book, that a
pyramid is double to an octohedro^ inscribed in it. Wherefore the two excesses
of the two octohedrons (unto which the pyramid is equal) above the two
Icosahedrons (inscribed in the said two octohedrons) being brought into an
solid, the said solid shall be set upon the self same square of the side of
the Icosahedron, and shall have to his altitude the perpendicular KO doubled:
whose double coupling the opposite sides HK and XM makes the greater segment
the same side of the Icosahedron, by the first and second corollary of the 14.
of the fiu^^en^h.

The 37. Proposition. If in a triangle having to his base a rational line set,
the sides be commensurable in power to the base, and from the top be drawn to
the base a perpendicular line cutting the base: The sections of the base shall
be commensurable in length to the whole base, and the perpendicular shall be
commensurable in power to the said whole base.
SVppose that there be a triangle ABG, whose base BG let be a rational line set
of purpose. And let the sides AB and AG be unto the same BG commensurable at
the least in power. Construction.
And from the top A, draw unto the base BG, a perpendicular, cutting the base
in the point P. Then I say that the sections of the base, are commensurable in
length to the whole line BG, and that the perpendicular AP, is unto the same
base BG co^mensurable at the least in power. Produce on either side the line BG
to the points C and E. And unto the line AG put the line GE equal, and unto
the line AB put the line BC equal. And upon the lines CB, BG and GE describe
squares BK, BD, and GL. And from the greater of the squares of the lines AB or
AG, which let be GL cut of a parallelogramme EM equal to the less square BK
(by the 45. of the first:) And (by the same) unto the residue GM, let there be
applied upon the line GD an equal rectangle parallelogramme OD. First part of
the demonstration.
Now forasmuch as the angles APB and APG are right angles, therefore (by the 47.
of the first) the line AG contains in power the two lines AP and PG, and the
line AB the two lines AP and PB. Wherefore how much the line AG contains in
power more then the line AB, so much also does the line PG contain in power
more then the line BP: namely, taking away the common square of AP, there is
left the excess of the square of PG above the square of BP. But the square of
AG (which is GL) exceeds the square of AB (namely, the square BK) by the
rectangle parallelogramme GM or OD, by construction. Wherefore the square of PG
exceeds the square of BP, by the rectangle parallelogramme OD. And forasmuch
as unto the squares of AB and AG, are equal the squares of AP and PB, and of AP
and PG: and their excess is taken away, namely, the rectangle parallelogramme
OD: there shallbe left the squares of AP and PO equal to the squares of AP and
PB. And taking away the square of AP which is common, the residues namely, the
squares of BP and PO shall be equal: and therefore their sides (namely, the lines
BP and PO) are equal. And forasmuch as the squares GL and PK are (by
suppositio^) rational, and therefore co^me^surable their excess OD, shall be
comme^surable unto the^ by the 15. of the tenth. And therefore it is rational
by the 9. diffinition of the tenth. Wherefore the rational parallelogram OD,
being applied upon the rational line GD (or BG) makes the breadth OG rational
and co^mensurable in length to the whole line BG^ by the 20. of the tenth. But
if the whole line BG be commensurable to one of the parts OG, the lines BO,
OG, and BG sh^^^ be commensurable, by the same 15. of the tenth. Wherefore also
the line OG shall be commensurable to the half of the line BO, namely, to the
line PO, or PB, by the 12. of the tenth. And forasmuch as the two lines PO and
OG are commensurable, the whole line PG shall be commensurable to the line PO, or
to the line PB, by the same 15. of the tenth. Wherefore either of the lines PG
and PB shall be co^mensurable unto the whole line PB, by the same. Wherefore
the lines BG, PB and PG have the one to the other that proportion which numbers
have, by the 5. of thirtenth. Wherefore the sections PB and PG of the base BG
are commensurable in length ^o the same base, by the 6: of the tenth.

And now that the perpendicular AP is commensurable in power to the base BG,
Second part of the Demonstration.
i^ thus proved. Forasmuch as the square of AB is by supposition, commensurable
to the square of BG: and unto the rational square of AB is commensurable the
rational square of BP (by the 12. of the eleventh) Wherefore the residue,
namely, the square of PA is commensurable to the same square of BP, by the 2.
part of the 15. of the eleventh. Wherefore by the 12. of the tenth, the square
of PA is commensurable to the whole square of BG. Wherefore the perpendicular
AP is commensurable in power to the base BG, by the 3. diffinition of the
tenth: which was required to be proved.

In demonstrating of this, we made no mention at all of the length of the sides
AB and AG, but only of the length of the base BG: for that the line BG is the
rational line first set: and the other lines AB and AG are supposed to be
commensurable in power only to the line BG. Wherefore if that be plainly
demonstrated, when the sides are commensurable in power only to the base, much
more easily will it follow, if the same sides be supposed to be commensurable
both in length and in power to the base: that is, if their lengthes be
expressed by the roots of square nombers.

A Corollary. 1.
By the former things demonstrated, it is manifest that if from the powers of
the base, and of one of the sides, be taken away the power of the other side,
and if the half of the power remaining, be applied upon the whole base, it
shall make the breadth that section of the base which is coupled to the first
side. For from the powers of the base BG, and of one of the sides AG, that is,
from the squares BD and GL, the power of the other side AB, namely the square
BK (or the parallelogramme EM) is taken away. And of the residue, (namely, of
the square BD, and of the parallelogramme OD, or DR, which by supposition is
equal unto OD) the half (namely^ of the whole FR, which is PD, for the lines
GR and PB are equal to the lines GO and PO) is applied to the whole line BG or
GD: and makes the bredthe the line PG the section of the base BG, which
section is coupled to the first side AG. And by the same reason in the other
side, if from the squares BD and BK be taken away the square GL, there shall
remain the rectangle parallelogramme FO: For the parallalelogramme EM is equal
to the square BK, and the parallelogramme GM to the parallelogramme OD.
Wherefore FP the half of the residue FO, makes the breadth BP, which is
coupled to the first side taken AB.

A Corollary. 2.
If a perpendicular drawn from an angle of a triangle do cut the base: the
sections are to the other sides in power proportional by an Arithmetical
proportion. For it was proved that the excess of the powers of the lines AG
and AB is one and the same with the excess of the powers of the lines PG and
PB. If therefore the powers do equally excede the one the other, they shall by
an Arithmet^cal proportion, be proportional.

The end of the sixtenth Book of the Elements of Geometry added (...).
A brief treatise, added by Flussas, of mixed and composed regular solides.
REgular solides are said to be composed and mixed, when each of them is
transformed into other solides, keeping still the form, number, and
inclination of the bases, which they before had one to the other: some of which
yet are transformed into mixed solides, and other some into simple. Into mixed,
as a Dodecahedron and an Icosahedron: which are transformed or altered, if ye
divide their sides into two equal parts, and take away the solid angles
subtended of plain superficial figures made by the lines coupling those
middle sections: for the solid remaining after the taking away of those solid
angles, is called an Icosidodecahedron. Icosidodecahedron.
If ye divide the sides of a cube and of an Octohedron into two equal parts,
and couple the sections, the solid angles subtended of the plain
superficieces made by the coupling lines, being taken away, there shall be left
a solid, which is called an Exoctohedron. Exoctohedro^.
So that both of a Dodecahedron and also of an Icosahedron, the solid which is
made, shall be called an Icosidodecahedron: and likewise the solid made of a
Cube and also of an Octohedron, shall be called an Exoctohedron. But the other
solid, namely, a Pyramid (or Tetrahedron) is transformed into a simple solid:
for if ye divide into two equal parts every one of the sides of the pyramid,
triangles described of the lines which couple the sections, and subtending, and
taking away solid angles of the pyramid, are equal and like unto the
equilater triangles left in every one of the bases: of all which triangles is
produced an Octohedron, namely, a simple and not a composed solid. For the
Octohedron has four bases, like in number, fonne, and mutual inclination
with the bases of the pyramid: and has the other four bases with like
situation opposite and parallel to the former. Wherefore the application of the
pyramid taken twice, makes a simple Octohedron, as the other solides make a
mixed compound solid.

First Definition.
An Exoctohedron is a solid figure contained of six equal squares, and eight
equilater and equal triangles.

Second Definition.
An Icosidodecahedron is a solid figure, contained under twelve equilater
equal and equiangle Pentagons, and twenty equal and equilater triangles.

For the better understanding of the two former definitions, and also of the
two Propositions following, I have here set two figures, whose forms, if ye
first describe upon pasted paper or such like matter, and then cut them and
fold them accordingly, they will represent unto you the perfect forms of an
Exoctohedron and of an Icosidodecahedron.



The first Problem. To describe an equilater and equiangle exoctohedron, and
to contain it in a sphere given: and to prove that the diameter of the sphere
is double to the side of the said exoctohedron.
SVppose that there be a sphere given, whose diameter let be AB. And about the
diameter AB let there be described a square by the sixth of the fourth:
Construction of the exoctobedron.
and upon the square let there be described a cube by the 15. of the thirtenth:
which let be CDEFQTVR: and let the diameter thereof be QR, and the center S.
And divide the sides of the cube into two equal parts, in the points G, H,
I, K, L, M, N, O, P. etc. And couple the middle sections by the right lines IN,
NO, OP, PI and such like, which subtend the angles of the squares or bases of
the cube: and they are equal by the 4. first, and contalne right angles, as
the angle NIP. For the angle NID which is at the base of the Isosceles triangle
NDI, is the half of a right angle, and so likewise is the opposite angle RIP.
Wherefore the residue NIP is a right angle, and so the rest. Wherefore NIPO is
a square. And by the same reason shall the rest NMLK, KGHI etc. inscribed in
the bases of the cube, be squares: and they shall be six in number, according
^o the number of the bases of the cube. Again forasmuch as the triangle KIN
subtendeth the solid angle D of the cube, and likewise the triangle KGL the
solid angle C, and so the rest, which subtend the eight solid angles of the
cube: and these triangles are equal and equilater, namely, being made of
equal sides and they are the limmits or borders of the squares, and the
squares the limmits or borders of the^, as has before been proved: wherefore
LMNOPHGK is an exoctohedro^, by the diffinition, and is equilater, for it is
contained of equal subtendent lines: it is also equiangle, for every solid
angle thereof, is contained under two superficial angles of two squares, and
two superficial angles of two equilater triangles.

And now forasmuch as the opposite sides and diameters of the bases of the cube
are parallels, That the ^xoctohedron is contained in a sphere.
the plain extended by the right lines QT, VR, shall be a parallelogramme. And
for that also in that plain lies QR the diameter of the cube, and in the same
plain also is the line MH, which divides the said plain into two equal
parts, and also coupleth the opposite angles of the exoctohedron this line MH
therefore divides the diameter into two equal parts, by the corollary of the
34. of the first, and also divides it self in the same point, which let be S,
into two equal parts, by the 4 of the first. And by the same reason may we
prove that the rest of the lines, which couple the opposite angles of the
exoctohedron, do in S the center of the cube divide the one the other into two
equal parts. For every one of the angles of the exoct^^edron are set in every
one of the bases of the cube. Whe^^^ore making the center the point S, and the
space SH or SM, describe a sphere, and it shall touch every one of the angles
eq^edistant from the point S.

And forasmuch as AB the diameter of the sphere given, is put equal to the
diameter of the base of the cube, That the exoctohed^on is contained in the
sphere given.
namely, to the line RT, and the same line RT is equal to the line MH, by the
33. of the first: which line MH coupling the opposite angles of the
exoctohedron, is drawn by the center: wherefore it is the diameter of the
sphere given which contains the exoctohedron.

Finally forasmuch as in the triangle RFT, the line PO does cut the sides
into two equal parts, That the dia^^^ter of the s^here is do^ble to the side
^f the exoctohedron.
it shall cut them proportionally with the bases namely, as FR is to FP, so
shall RT be to PO, by the 2. of the sixth. But FR is double to FP, by
supposition: wherefore RT, or the diameter HM, is also double to the line PO
the side of the exoctohedron. Wherefore we have described an equilater and
equiangle exoctohedron, and comprehended it in a sphere given, and have proved
that the diameter of the sphere is double to the side of the exoctohedron.

The 2. Problem. To describe an equilater and equiangle Icosidodecahedron, and
to comprehend it in a sphere given: and to prove that the diameter being
divided by an extreme and mean proportion, makes the greater segment double
to the side of the Icosidodecahedron.
SVppose that the diameter of the sphere given be NL, and (by the 30. of the
sixth) divide the line NL by an extreme and mean proportion in the point I:
and the greater segment thereof let be NI. Construction of the
Icosidodecah^dron.
And upon the line NI describe a cube by the 15. of the thirtenth: and about
this cube let there be circumscribed a dode^ahedron, by the 17. of the
thirtenth: and let the same be ABCDEFHKMO. And divide every one of the sides
into two equal parts in the points Q, R, S, T, V, X, Y, Z, P, ^, ^, G. etc?
and couple the sections with right lines, which shall subtend the angles of the
pentagons, as the lines PG, GV, VQ, QY, YR, RQ, VT, TX, XV, and so the rest.
Now forasmuch as these lines subtend equal angles of the pentagons, and those
equal angles are contained of equal sides (namely of the halues of the sides
of the pentagons: therefore those subtending lines are equal, by the 4. of the
first. Wherefore the triangles GQV, YQR, VXT, and the rest which take away
solid angles of the dodecahedron, are equilater. Again forasmuch as in every
pentagon are described five equal right lines, coupling the middle sections of
the sides, as are the lines QV, VT, TS, SR, RQ: they describe a pentagon in the
plain of the pentagon of the dodecahedron: and the said pentagon is contained
in a circle, namely, whose cen^re is the center of a pentagon of the
dodecahedron. For the lines drawn from that center to the angles of this
pentagon are equal, for that they are perpendiculars upon the bases cut, by
the 12. of the fourth. Wherefore the pentagon QRSTV is equiangle, by the 11. of
the same. And by the same reason may the rest of the pentagons described in the
bases of the dodecahedron be proved equal and like. Wherefore those pentagons
are 12. in number: And forasmuch as the equal and like t^iangles, do subtend
and take away 20. solid angles of the dodecahedron, therefore the said
triangles shall be 20. in number. Wherefore we have described an
Icosidodecahedro^ by the diffinitio^, which Icosidodecahedro^ is equilater, for
that all the sides of the triangles are equal and common with the pe^tagons:
and it is also equiangle. For every one of the solid angles is made of two
superficial angles of an equilater pentagon, and of two superficial angles of
an equilater triangle.

Now let us prove that it is contained in the Sphere given, whose diameter is
NL. That the Icosidodecahedron is contained in the sphere given.
Forasmuch as perpendiculars drawn from the centres of the Dodecahedron, to
the middle sections of his sides, are the halfes of the lines, which couple the
opposite middle sections of the sides of the Dodecahedron, by the 3. Corollary
of the 17. of the thirtenth: which lines also, by the same Corollary, do in the
center divide the one the other into two equal parts: therefore right lines
drawn from that point to the angles of the Icosidodecahedron (which are set in
those middle sections) are equal: which lines are 30. in number according to
the number of the sides of the Dodecahedron: for every one of the angles of the
Icosidodecahedron are set in the middle sections of every one of the sides of
the Dodecahedron. Wherefore making the center the center of the Dodecahedron,
and the space any one of the lines drawn from the center to the middle
sections, describe a Sphere, and it shall pass by all the angles of the
Icosidodecahedron, and shall contain it.

And forasmuch as the diameter of this solid, is that right line, whose
greater segment is the side of the cube inscribed in the Dodecahedron, by the
4. Corollary of the 17. of the thirtenth, which side is NI, by supposition.
Wherefore that solid is contained in the Sphere given whose diameter is put to
be the line NL.

That the diameter being divided by an extreme and mean proportion. etc.
Now let us prove that the greater segment of the diameter is duple to QV the
side of this solid. Forasmuch as the sides of the triangle AEB are in the
points Q and V divided into two equal parts, the lines QV and BE are
parallels, by the Corollary of the 39. of the first. Wherefore as AE is to AV,
so is EB to VQ, by the 2. of the sixth. But the line AE is double to the line
AV. Wherefore the line BE is double to the line QV: by the 4. of the sixth. Now
the line BE is equal to NI, or to the side of the cube, by the 2. Corollary of
the 17. of the thirtenth, which line NI is the greater segment of the diameter
NL. Wherefore the greater segment of the diameter given, is double to the side
of the Icosidodecahedron inscribed in the Sphere given. Wherefore we have
described an equilater and equiangle Icosidodecahedron, and contained it in a
Sphere given, and have proved that the diameter thereof being divided by an
extreme and mean proportion, makes his greater segment double to the side of
the Icosidodecahedron.

An aduertisment of Flussas.
To the understanding of the nature of this Icosidodecahedron, ye must well
conceive the passions and proprieties of both those solides, of whose bases i^
consists, namely, of the Icosahedron and of the Dodecahedron. And although in
it the bases are placed oppositely, yet h^u^ they one to the other one and the
some inclination. By reason whereof there he hidden in it the actions and
p^^^^ons of the other regular solides. And I would have thought i^ not
impertinent to the purpose to have set forth the inscriptions and
circumscriptions of this solid, if w^nt of t^h^ had not hindered. But to the
end the reader may the better a^^aine to the understanding thereof, I have here
following briefly set forth, how it may in o^ about every one of the five
regular solides be inscribed or circumscribed: by the help whereof ^e may,
with small travail or rather none at all, so that he have well p^ysed and
considered the d^monstrations pertaining to the foresaid fi^e regular solides,
demonstrate both the inscription of the said solides in it, and the inscription
of it in the said solides.

Of the inscriptions and circumscriptions of an Icosidodec^hedron.
An Icosidodecahedron may contain the other five regular bodies. For it will
receive the angles of a Dodecahedron, in the centres of the triangles which
subtend the solid angles of the Dodecahedron: which solid angles are 20. in
number, and are placed in the same order in which the solid angles of the
Dodecahedron taken away or subtended by them, are. And by that reason it shall
receive a Cube and a Pyramid contained in the Dodecahedron: when as the angles
of the one are set in the angles of the other.

An Icosidodecahedron receaueth an Octohedron, in the angles cutting the six
opposite sections of the Dodecahedron, even as if it were a simple Dodecahedron.

And it contains an Icosahedron, placing the 12. angles of the Icosahedron in
the self same centres of the 12. Pentagons.

It may also by the same reason be inscribed in every one of the five regular
bodies: namely, in a Pyramid, if ye place 4. triangular bases concentricall
with 4. bases of the Pyramid, after the same manner, that ye inscribed an
Icosahedro^ in a Pyrami^. So likewise may it be inscribed in an Octohedron, if
ye make 8. bases thereof concentricall with the 8. bases of the Octohedron. It
shall also be inscribed in a Cube, if ye place the angles which receive the
Octohedron inscribed in it, in the centres of the bases of the Cube. Moreover,
ye shall inscribe it in an Icosahedron, when the triangles compased in of the
Pentagon bases, are concentricall with the triangles, which make a solid angle
of the Icosahedron. Finally, it shall be inscribed in a Dodecahedron, if ye
place every one of the angles thereof in the middle sections of the sides of the
Dodecahedron, according to the order of the construction thereof.

The opposite plain superficieces also of this solid are parallels. For the
opposite solid angles are subtended of parallel plain superficieces, as well
in the angles of the Dodecahedron subtended by ^ri^ngle^, a^ in the angles of
the Icosahedron subtended of Pentagons, which thing may easily be d^monstra^ed.
Moreover in thi^ solid are infinit^ properti^^ and p^ssion^, springing of the
solide^ whereof ^t is composed.

Wherefor^ it is manifest that a Dodecahedron and an Icosahedron, mixed, are
transformed into one and the self same solid of an Icosidodecahedron. A cube
also and an octohedro^ are mixed and altered into an other solid, namely, into
one and the same Exoctohedron. But a pyramid is transformed into a simple and
perfect solid, namely into an Octohedron.

If we will frame these two solides joined together into one solid, this only
must we observe.

In the pentagon of a dodecahedron inscribe a like pentagon, so that let the
angles of the pentagon inscribed be set in the middle sections of the sides of
the pentagon circumscribed, and then upon the said pentagon inscribed, let
there be set a solid angle of an Icosahedron, and so observe the self same
order in every one of the bases of the Dodecahedron: and the solid angles of
the Icosahedron set upon these pentagons shall produce a solid consisting of
the whole Dodecahedron, and of the whole Icosahedron. In like sort, if in every
base of the Icosahedro^, the sides being divided into two equal parts be
inscribed an equilat^^ triangle, and upon every one of those equilater
triangles be set a solid angle of a Dodecahedron: there shall be produced the
self same solid consisting of the whole Icosahedron, and of the whole
Dodecahedron.

And after the same order, if in the bases of a cube, be inscribed squares
subtending the solid angles of an Octohedron, or in the bases of an
Octohedron, be inscribed equilater triangles subte^ding the solid angles of a
cube, there shall be produced a solid consisting of either of the whole
solides, namely, of the whole cube and of the whole Octohedron.

But equilater triangles inscribed in the bases of a pyramid, having their
angles set in the middle sections of the sides of the pyramid, and the solid
angles of a pyramid set upon the said equilater triangles, there shall be
produced a solid, consisting of two equal and like pyramids.

And now if in these solides thus composed, ye take away the solid angles,
there shall be restored again the first composed solides: namely, the solid
angles taken away from a Dodecahedron and an Icosahedron composed into one,
there shall be left an Icosidodecahed^on: the solid angles taken away from a
cube, and an octohedro^ composed into one solid, there shall be left an
exocthedro^. Moreover the solid angles taken away from two pyramids composed
into one solid, there shall be left an Octohedron.

Flussas after this sets forth certain passions and properties of the five
simple regular bodies: which although he demonstrateth not, yet are they not
hard to be demonstrated, if we well pease and conceive that, which in the former
books has been taught touching those solides.

Of the nature of a trilater and equilater Pyramid.
is an octohedro^ inscribed in the pyramys in which all the solides inscribed
in the pyramid are contained. A perpendicular drawn from the angle of the
pyramid

Of the nature of an Octohedron.
Four perpendiculars of an Octohedron, drawn in 4. bases thereof from two That
is as 8. 103^
duple superbipartiens tercias to the perpe^dicular or side of the foresaid
Rhombus: and moreover is in length triple to the line which coupleth the
centres of the next bases. The angle of the inclination

Of the nature of a Cube.
The diameter of a cube, is in power sesquialter to the diameter of his base:

Of the nature of an Icosahedron.
Five triangles of an Icosahedron, do make a solid angle, the bases of which
be taken the other pentagon by them described, these pentagons shall in such
sort cut the diameter of the Icosahedron which coupleth the forsaid opposite
angles, that that part which is contained between the plains of those two
pentagons, shall be the greater segment: and the residue which is drawn from the
plain to

Of the nature of a Dodecahedron.
segment of the line which subtendeth the angle of the pentagon. A
perpendicular

The end of the Elements of Geometry, of the most ancient Philosopher (...)
of Megara.
Faults escaped.
^

^cl. ^ag. Line. Faultes^ Co^. Errata Lib. 1. 1 2 41 point B. at Campane point
C, a^ Campane 3 1 22 a^l lines drawn all righ^ (...) 3 1 28 lines drawn to
the superficies right lines drawn to the circumference 9 1 42 li^es AB and AC,
lines AB and BC 15 1 35 are equal are proved equal 20 2 28 (by the first (by
the fourth 21 1 39 the center C. the center E 2^ 2 ^ I^ ^ower right If two
right 25 2 3 f^^^ petition fiueth petition 49 2 7 14.^^.32.64 etc.
4.8.16.32.64. and 53 1 39 the triangle NG the triangle K^ 54 2 25 (by the 44
(by the 42 57 2 23 and C^G in the and CGB is the Instead of ^lussates through
out (...) whole book read ^lus^as. Errata Lib. 2. 60 2 29 Gnomon FGEH Gnomon
AHKD 30 Gnomon EHFG Gnomon ^CKD 69 1 18 the whole line the whole ^igure 76 2 9
the diameter CD the diameter AHF Errata Lib. 3. 82 2 36 angle equal to the
angle 92 1 last the line AC is the line AF (...) Errata Lib. 4. 110 2 10 CD
touches the ED touches the 12 side of the other angle of the other 115 1 21
and HB and HE 117 2 44 the angle ACD the angle ACB 118 1 2 into ten equal into
two equal 121 1 3^ CD, and EA, CD, DE, and EA, ^^^ 1 29 the first the third
Errata Lib. 5. 126 1 43 it makes 12. more then 17. by 5. it makes 24. more
then 17. by 7. 129 1 Instead of the figure of the 6. definition draw in the
mag^^ a figure like unto th^s. 134 2 4 As AB is to A, so is CD to C As AB is to
B, so is CD to D 141 2 last But if K excede M, But if H excede M, (...)

LIEFE IS DEATH AND DEATH IS LIEFE: AETATIS SVAE: XXXX


AT LONDON Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate beneath Saint Martins.

These Books are to be sold at his shop under the gate. 1570.


