THE Hateful Hypocrisy, and rebellion of the Romish prelacie.

By Lewys Euans

Hieron. Through the vnskilfullnesse therefore of teachers, in the darkness
of ignorance through blindness, euo^ a troop of people have erred in the
streates. for, While they give the^ selfs unto the snares of plesures they
have not kept the right pathe of the divine precepts.

Anno. M. D. LXX.

D. Boners words.
If thou at any time heretofore have doubted, of the B. of Romes false
pretenced supremacy, as In praef.
if thou had a good smelling nose, and a sound judgment, I think thou
dydest not: yet having read over this, which (if thou favor the truethe, and
hate the tyranny of the Busshop of Rome and his Deuelishe fraudulent falshod,)
shall doubtless wonderfullye content the, throw down thine error, and
acknowledge the truethe, now frelye offered the at length: consideringe with
thy self, that it is better late to do so, then never to repent.

D. Gardiners words.
All sorts of People are agreed upon this In orat. De obe.
point, with most steadfast consent, learned and unlearned, both men and
women, that no manner person borne, and brought up in England, has ought to
do with Rome. All manner of People receaninge and embracinge the truth, do with
one whole consent, acknowledge, honor and reverence the King, for the supreme
head of the Church upon earth,

To the Reader.
WHAT Kind of Phisician is he (gentle Reader) that in time of a dangerouse
sickness, will then cease to Minister his remedies, and Physic? what
capitayn is he, that when his enemies do muster, will the^ either stand all
amazed, or else through cowardlyefeare, will give over the field? what good
Christian is he, that when Antichrist by ragewold reign, will then either
openly renounce Christianity, or else in any wise cease from the constante
acknowlaiginge of the same? if lewd light headdes shall rebel against their
sovereign lady, who (o Lord) can but deteste them? who can but abhor them?
yea, if they rebel against god, and authority, who (trow ye) can hold his
peace? where shall I begin? of what shall I first speak? is not their intent
more then haynouse, is it not most hateful, who to the intent they might
bring to pass their traiterous purposses, will not stick to paynte their
baner with Ydolatry, to trouble the common peace of this Realm, to annoye
(as much as in them lyethe) all good, louinge, and faythefull subjects? o the
end of necessite! o the fruit of hateful Ydolatrie? we may now well say,
as the Doctor and friar Uincentius once said. Dant sermo: de Trin.
vnam medicina^ cuilibet morbo, scz missas. etc. They give one Medycine unto
every sickness, that is masses. etc. And why? because bankrouteship must
have a cover, riotousnesse must have sum defense, treason must have a
cloak, traitors will ever have sum color. But God that sees the inward
parts, and meaninges of men, will detecte their Hypocrysye, he will put
into the hearts of Good people, to defend the anointed, he will endue his
chosen, with the knowlaig of his word, he will suppress all tumultes, he will
work (according unto his secret and goodwill) all for the best* well to
speak no more of such, it is so (Christian reader) that being of late in the
university of Oxforde, I herd there, not by any mean man but by the learnest,
how mine adversaries, na, how the truethes adversaries had bruited, that I had
revolted from, the Gospel, and that I was again gonne beyond the seas, I
heard also ^ovve at my cominge to the City of Londen, hovveyt was in the
mouths of many, that I was dead. two tales, and yet never a one true. alas,
beyond the seas, what to do? Stultus ^eda.
populus quaerit Romam: Folishe folks fly to Rome. I think it not wisdom,
in these days to flee from Eglande to a foreign realm, I think it no
godliness to leave God, and to lean to Antichrist. shall we flee from light
to darkness, from the Gospel to vain gloses, fro^trueth to falshoode, from
faith to infidelity, from religion to superstition? God forbid. For mine
own part, I se every day more, and more, the filthy fruits of the Romish
sinagogue, and therefore in despite of satan, say mine enemies what they will,
think men as they list, it is the law of God that I profess, and it is
traiterouse Papacy that I detest. and this is it which mo ued me at this time
(Gentle reader) to set furthe these few leafes, wherein we may se, the
hypocrisy, from time to time, of the romayn prelacie, and where by we may
learn to be wise, to know our selfs, to see their doings, and to defy
them. but as for late time, euon at the dissolucion of Abbevs, if thou will
know what was the lives of the irreligeouse roagues if thou will vewe, what
holiness they were then of, let us consider certain of the monasteries put down,
let us weyghe the honesty of sum, for, of all, it were to much, At
Windesore kept not eight ^x br^u: (...).
of the Priests, twenty and niene harlates? A Hollye whoredom. At the
Monastery of Battle, were not xv. found to be sodomits? as for such as kept
there harlattes their names be set furthe, and therefore I will omit them. What
were the Divines at Cantur bury? what? eighte of Ca^turburye.
them were sodomites, and to let pass many thirtene kept fourtene harlates. At
Bathe twoe Priests keepte eyghtene harlates, besides that they were proved to
be sodomits. come we to moo^kenfarleghe, and we shall find that the Prior kept
niene harlats, the prior of Mayde^bradley had five, the Abbate of Bristow had
four, the Abbate of Abindon had three, besides that he had twoe Children by his
own natural sister. At Shulbred four moonkes Shulbrede.
kept twenty one harlattes. as for the Prior of Bermoundesey, ^ermou^ desaye.
he kept no less by record then twenty. Yt is tediouse to write of all, yet
it is proffitable to speak of these, that euon Children, may see the
iniquity of the Romish Ydolatrie. and therefore to make an end, take a view of
the Cathedral church Cichester.
of Cichester, whereof Sir Ihon Champion had twoe Harlattes, sir William
Cross one, sir Thomas Parker twoe, sir Richard busfielde one, Sir
Bartholomewe Cokisleye one, Sir Roberte Hunte many, Sir Thomas Coffe twoe, Sir
Ihon Hill thirtene, Sir Roberte Moore many, as for Sir George Barrham, and sir
Ihon Cha^pio^, besyds that they were proved adulterers, they were also found to
be sodomites. see, Christian Reader, by a few, under the profession of all,
behold what is the fruit of a heathenishe ydolatrie. thus they lived in King
Henri the eyghte his time, at what time (not without just cause thou see) he
overthrew their brothell houses, their unclean de^ nes, and their filthy
caves. but that thou may further mark their hypocrisy, read over this little
book, dedicated not unto any onne singular, to aduoyde the note of vayn
glory, but un to thee, for thy proffite, and utility. And if thou will
proffite, and do good unto thine own soul, yea, if thou will prosper in this
world fear God, embrace the Gospel, obey the Queen's Majesty, and be not a
foe, but (as thou art most bounden) a friend unto this Realm, not forgettinge,
that maugre all the malice of rebels, not only, the truth is great, and
prevail, but also as God has done, so will he ever defend thy sovereign,
his anointed. And that he so do, as I with an unfeigned heart, so you with all
fayithe fullnes, say

Amen.
OF HIPOCRITES, and the Hypocrisy of the Romayne Prelacie. CAP. I.
WEyghing with indifferency the whole estate of this our time, and
consideringe without partiallitie the disposition of such as now do live: we
shall find (a thing to be lamented) the very face of Christendom to be
spreadde over with ^^yfe, the Gospel of our Savior Christ to be in
contempt, and hatred, and the professors of the same almost every where to
be persecuted, and that, with intolerable sclaunders, with extreme disdain,
and with passinge tyranny. the cause whereof is the blind supersticion of
certain, whereof some are Hypocrites, and some are bewitched, trees they are not
only unprofitable, but also most hurtful: whose root is crueltye, but
clothed over with a counterfaicte face of charity: whose branches are
infidelity, heathines, ydolatrie, though covered with the name of Faith,
religion and piety: whose fruit is fornication, yet fenced with the title of
Chastity: and whose end, without repentance, is da^nacio^, only outwardly
decked with a disse^bled hew of salvation. What shall we then say? to omit
all circumstances: let us wish that S. Paul were now living: or else, that
his words would pearce into the hearts of such as be thus hardened. What?
and wrote he only unto the Galathians? or wrote he not by their names unto
us all that are Christians? and what says he? O ye senseles Galathians
(says Gal. 3.
he) Who has so bewitched you, that you will not obey the truethe? Lo, his
zeal, and behold the blindness that they were in. but how shall we know
that these who now live are bewitched? Cum non videant Lacta^. lib. 2. de
orig. err.
ea quae sunt: and videre se arbitrantur e^ quae non sunt: When they can not
se the things that in deed are: and when they seem to se the things which are
not. When they can not se, that the scriptures, being the word of God, ought to
be had, read, and embrased, and when it semethe unto them, that follishe
legendes, that feigned miracles, and that passinge fond opinions ought rather
to be regarded, professed, and believed. ah las (for of such I speak) what is
papacy? a mere lump of pride, a den of hypocrisy, a cave of uncleanness,
and a very fence for fornication, for example: behold out of their ^oke ye
lothesomenesse of their law, and the lawless perverse demeanor of their
priests. Qui inuenerit pupillaoculi quiut. par. cap. 18.
clericu^ cu^ vxore, matre, sorore, vel filia turpiter agente^, vel parante^ se
ad opus carnale, in loco priuato, and suspecto per oscula, and amplexus, vel si
per alia signa aperta opus turpitudinis constat esse expletu^: Dicit quod non
licet talem percutere. In Will. super Ray. h^s.
english it is thus: He that finds a Priest with his wife, mother, sister,
or daughter, behaui^g him self vnhonestli, or preparing, him self unto carnal
work, in a place private, and suspected, by kyssing, and embracing or else, if
it shall appear by manifest signs, that the filthy act has been committed:
yet he says, that it is not lawful to stryke such a one. And further. Si ipsa
percutiat eum, incidit Ibidem. secundu^. Will.
in Canone^. That is: If the woman should strike him, she is to be punished by
the Canon law. Who now, except he be more then betwitched, can excuse these
men? who may commend their laws? who can like their lives? what shall we say
of Laurentius Valla, a Lano^ not long a gone of Rome? writes he not in this
wise? Omnino nihil interest, vtrum De v^* lup. lib. (...)
cum marito co^at mulier, an cum amatore. There is no matter at all (says
he. Whether a wooman keep company with her husband or whith her lover. Here
we have to consider, that if he wrote this in ^est, yet it becamme not a Chanon
to use such jestinge, to write it, and to put yt furthe to Printinge: but if
he wrote it in ernest, then it was to yrkesome, it was ungodly, it was
noisome. these, these certenlye are they, of whom Christ long sythence has
said: Beware ye of false Prophets, which come unto you in shiepes
cloathinge, but inwardelye they be raueninge Mat: 7.
wolfes. That they came in shepes clothing how may it appear? how? by their
sundry false, and faygned professions, by their inward syghinge, by their
vain blessings, by their childishe ceremonies, by their dreaminge
desceaptefull miracles, by their hew of hollinesse, and to be brief, by the
beguylinge, and seducinge of so many, and of so long a time. But that they
be in wardelye raueninge wolfes it is euydente, by their curssinge, by their
hate, by their fagottes, by their fire, by their tormentinge of true
Christians, and by their tyranny: it is euidente by their false teachinge, by
their errors, and by their heresye: it is euidente by their fornication: it is
evident by their Sodomiticall life, and adultery: it is evident by their
fruits, by their factes. by their Hypocrisy, and superstition: and this
shallbe now euidente by aunciente Autors, by their own writers, by holy
Scriptures, and by reason. wherefore I crave, or rather the troth it self
craves at thy hands (gentle reader) three things: First, that to further
thine own everlasting joye, thou will in readinge lay a side all
partiallitie: Secondly, that thou will then judge, and that with
indifferency: Thirdelye, that in the end, settinge apart worldly
frendeshipe, and all vain respects, thou will be an earnest defendour of
Christ his faith, and that thou will embrace his Gospel with constanncie.
Knowing that unto all such as believe, it is Romans 1.
the power of God unto salvation. For thus doing: His faithfullnes and truth
shall be Psalm 81.
thy shield, and buckler, neither shall any yuell happen unto thee. But if God
offer thee knoweledge. if he proffer thee syghte, by what means soever, and
thou refuse it, beware then, lest thou be in the number of those, of whom
Saint Paul thus says: They are without excuse, by cause that Romans 1.
when they know God, they glorified him not as God, neither were they
thankful, but waxed all together vain in their own imaginations, and their
foolish heart was blinded. Consyderinge this then, if thou se ye truth take heed, and I say again, take heed that thou disse^ble not, take heed of
hypocrisye. If God be God, follow him, but if Baal (...). ^eg 18
be he, go after him: And to this end, remember well always, and carye in
mind, what Jesus the son of Syrach doethe say: A heart (says he) That
goes two ways, shall Eccl. 3.
not prosper. Meaning therefore to speak of Hypocrites, before we so do, let us
learn by the heathens, by natural reason, by examples and by holy scripture,
first how to deteste Hypocrisy. And before we begin, let us not study how
to please the vain, and waueringe minds of men, we must look certain, we
shute at a mark, the hyttinge whereof if we sail, it is death. know we
not, what saint Paul says? An quaero hominibus placere? si hominibus
placere^, seruus Christi non G^^. 1.
essem: That is: Go I about to please men? if I would please men, I should
not be the servant of Christ. I am plain, it is not possible, to serve two
masters, and that truly, it is not possible to serve both God, and the Pope,
it is not possible to obey the Pope and thy Prince: For, what felloweship
has Christ, with Belial? or what agremente 2. Cor. 6
is betwixt light, and darkness? or what part has a Faythefull with an
infidel? well, the Noble Romayne, Marcus Tullius Cicero (whom for learning I
ca^ not to much come^de, nor for wit enough praise, neither yet for Eloquence
sufficie^tlye extolle) he in his first book of duties of an Hypocrite,
says thus: of all injustice, theyres is most worthy of death, who when they
deceive most, then specially would they seem to be good men. Here let us
remember the shiepes cloathinge, that is, the seming to be good, and then we
shall beware the ravening wolfs, we shall epsy their dissembling, and we shall
aduoyd al their subtle juggling. but to speak of no heathen, what has (...).
Hierome Offic. 1. In exe^p. ad Rust. monachu^
of such? euon these words. An Hipocrite is inwardely Nero, but outwardly he
is Cato, he is altogether so variable, that you might well say, how that one
monster, and a new beast is co^pacted of contrary, and diuersse natures. S.
Hierome will anon, and in plain words, declare, that the prelacie of Rome,
ye Moonkes, Priests, and Friars are they. Come we to natural reason does not
dame nature her self prefer the inward parts, before the outward? is not
this manifest by the fourming of man's body, where nature first works about ye
heart, the lyue^ and the lunges, before she deal with the outewarde form, or
other parts? I will omit to speak of trees, where nature first has regard
unto the roots, then after unto the parts apparaunte, as the body, the
bows, the leafes, and fruit: and what does an hipocrite? ^a: what does a
Papiste? he against all nature, only outwardly to seem good, shows all his
endeavor, omitting the inward parts, and neglectinge the chief duty of man.
This is he, which can behave him Eccl 19.
self humblye, and can dowke with his head, and yet is he but a deceauer
within. Now, that we may touch examples: an hypocrite is compared unto a
Peacoke, which has wings, as if it were of an Angel, but the feet of a
thief, and the head of a Serpent. and even so it is of a Papiste: his words
be pleasant, his works are detestable and his head is full of Poison, and
sutteltie. to let pass that he is compared unto an Ostriche, unto an ape,
and such like: let us hear what Saint Bernarde says of them Hypocrites
(says he) are biters as doagges: deceaptefull as foxes: proud as Bernard
Lyones: inwardely they are raueninge wolffes: howling as bears: they will be
judges without authority, witnesses without sight: false accusers, and wantinge
all troth: And what gather we of this? euon (as Hierome says) That they do
all things to be praised of men. We gather that they be like sup. mat. ad Eus.
unto the elder tree, which having a fair and pleasant flower, yet bearth a
contageous, and a most noisome fruit. open your ears therefore (o ye
Hypocrites) and hear, open your eyes (o you papists) and se, be not you Ierem
5. Lib. 6. Cap. 24.
them, of whom it is written: Ye have eyes but you se not: ears have ye but
you here not. It proffiteth nothing (says Lacta^tius) To have your conscience
secret, and hid within, it is open unto God, let no place be leaft unto
lyenge, and disse^bling, for though that with wales, things may be moved from
man's sight: yet from the deity of God you can hide nothing, no not with
your intraylles, but that he sees, and knows man throughely. What does an
Hypocrite I pray you, seek? what doethe a Papiste hannt for in all his
doings? Reuerentiam Greg. lib 8. moral
honoris, gloriam laudis, a melioribus metui, sanctus ab omnibus voeari: That
is: The reverence of honor, the glory of praise, to be feared of their
betters, and to be called holy of all men. Shall I rehearse any scripture
against an Hypocrite? or is it not enough only to cousyder the twenty and
third chapter, of the Gospel after Saint Matthewe? wherein o how often does
our savior Christ reprehe^de the hypocrites? pro nu^ceth he not woe there in
one place, eyghte times against them? O ye serpents (says he) Ye
generation of vipers, how will ye mat. 23.
escape the dampnacion of hell? To speak at once of hypocrites, of papists, or
of both: Such as men think to be perfect among Esaias. 9.
these, are but cast awayes. Yt remaynethe therefore, that we show playnelye,
and that we declare briefly who they are: and in shewinge this, their own
autoures, their own friends, and the writings of men ancient, and learned
shall describe them. to begin, a Doctor of their own divinity says thus:
First, the pastoures of the Church, the viualdus in opere. regali.
Cardinals, Archebusshoppes, Busshoppes, Abbates, Deanes, Archedeacons, and
such which are promoted to high dignity, they have black spots of
Hypocrisy, as the spots of a Lybarde. These are they which come not
lawefullye, but by yuell means unto the prelacie, they are for the most part
puffed up with the wind of the vain praise of men, and therefore by their
outewarde signs, and deed, they seem to have more in them, then in deed their
is, for above their ability, they maintain great estates, and pompeous
furnitures, horses, and servants in abundance. They have also their
custrells, or pages, decked all in silk, with crisped, or curled hears,
having Eunuchs faces, against the intention of the Church, and contrary
unto the manners, and examples of the Hollye Fathers, and so they spend the
goods of our Lord Jesus Christ (where with the poor should have been
refresshed) vaynelye, and vnproffitablye, in vain ornaments, in much
superfluity, and curiosity, but Christ his poor me^bres craved for bread,
and there was none that would give it them. So well did Viualdus know them,
he was of their profession, of their council, of their Company, he saw
their works, he was acquaynted with their words, he wrote thus of them,
more then three score years agonne, and yt is Andreas de Soncino, at that time
a Fryare that commended his Book, it was the Pope, and all his Prelacie that
accepted it, there was then nonne that could deny it. But deal we with
others and let us hear what Saint Hierome says, let us hear how he
reprehendeth them. ad pauli
What proffite is it (says he) to have the waules to shine with Jeweles,
and Christ in the poor to starve for hungre? the things that thou possessest
are not thine, but the dispensacio^ thereof is committed Ad gaudentium
unto thee, and further he says: nay, he exclayneth: O wickedness: the whole
world decayth through us: but sinners decay not the hollie Churches sometime
fell into ashes, and sparkles, and we give our whole study unto Covetousness,
we build, as though we should live always in this world, the walls do
shine with gold, the vawltes do glister with gold, the tops of the pillars
are trymmed with gold, and Christ being hungrye, and naked dies before our
gates. Mark then the estate of the Prelacie euon in Hieromes time, note how
he complains of them, and consider how he rebukes their pomp, and
follye, their pomp in adourninge without due regard the material temple:
and their folly, in neglectinge, and despisinge the poor members of Christ.
Yea, and further, to make the same most manifest, he says: Many Ad
Nepotianu^.
do build, they set up the walls, and pillars of the Church, the marble
stones do shine, the roofes, and beams are glisteringe with gold, the altar
is all garnished with precious stones, but of the servant of Christ, there
is no election, nor regard, neither let any obiecte here unto me, the rich
temple in Judaea, the tables, the lyghtes, the Frankensence, the basens, cups
and morters, and all other things wrought of gold, for the Lord did then
allow these, when the Priests did offer sacrifice, and when the blood of
beasts was the redemption of sin, although yet all these things went
before in a figure, but now when our Lord being poor, did consecrate the
poverty of his house: let us think upon his passion, and account riches to
be but claye. What marvel we that Christ called it, the wicked Mammo^? why do
we esteem, or love that, which Pieter with joy testified that he wanted. Such
was the estate of the Romayne cleargye for a thousaund and two hundredth years
past, such are the words of Sayncte Hierome, who was as it were Notarye unto
Damasus the Pope, against the Prelacie. What maruayle is it therefore, if they
fell afterward from yuell to worsse? what wonder we, it they waxed, as they
did, most wicked? why muse we, if they became supersticious, arrogaunte,
ignoraunte and malicious? in what case (o Lord, these things considered) was
the time of late, when, and wherein eyghtein Busshopes of Rome were coniureres,
and that one Imediatly succeadinge the other? of whom wrytethe not Wierus in
this wise? For, from Syluester De prae* them, li. 4
the second (says he) unto Gregory the seuenthe that great sorcerer. it is
written in their lives, that they were all coniurers. Where we may read most
execrable examples of the like sort, who gave them selves unto the sacrifices
of the Diuelles, and that in wooddes, and hills, to the intent that they
might allure women to love them. And shall this be winked at? shall we think
they did well? or shall we not detest them? well let Ludouicus Viualdus
speak of them again, for in these words he wrytethe: Secoundelye, the
clearkes priests, and Chanons, Ludoui. viualdus
are Hipocrites, and like unto a Lybarde, who feign meekenes, bountiefullnes,
modesty, humility, and in all things do counterfaicte Religiousenes: which
care not if they may attain unto a benefice, or ecclesiastical dignity, by
craft, by theafte, or by simonie. These coueyte not to foster virtue, but to
cherishe vices, and being corrupted through arrogancy, their care is not to
proffite, but to rule. Whereof this is an euidente sign, for, being promoted
unto honors, furthe with they are lifted up in pride, and swollen in
loftines, they disdain their former friends, and those whom before they knew,
they now have forgotten, they hoyse up their necks, they speak great
things, they are glorious, arrogante, and outerageouse. O how aptelye do the
words of Esaye agree with these? Esaias. 5^.
The pastors (says he) were void of understanding, every one followed
his own way, every one haunted after covetousness, euon from the highest to
the lowest. Now let us hear Saint Hierome again: Dico quosdam scelere,
periurio, Ad mercellam.
falsitate, ad dignitatem nescio quam, peruenisse: Some I say have creapte
into a dignity, I know not what, by wickedness, perjury, and falshoode. These
were means then used, this used they whom the world took for Godly, and
whom the simple people esteamed for hollye. And further Saint Hierome
says: Some Idem.
seek not to appointe those to be ayders in the Church, whom they know may
proffite best, but whom they love best, or for whom some great man has
entreated, yea, (and that I may keep secreate, things that are worsse) or
those, which optayned to be made priests through rewards. Here you se when
favor took place, when rewards prevailed, that simonie was offered, that
ecclesiastical orders were sold, and to let pass the worsse, that gifts were
rec^^ued, that kinsfolks were preferred, and that good, and goodlye men were
neglected. O, then might Simon magus make up his marchaundize, then might
learning lamente, then might truethe mourn; then might all godlynes bewail,
then might Gregory say, as of his time he justlye said: Sacerdotes
nominamur, non sumus. We are called Priests, Gregr. Maur.
but we are nonne. What then were they? Superbiae duces. The ringe leaders of
pride. They were euon such, as of whom God, by his Prophet Hieremye, says:
My people has been a lost flock, my Hier 50.
shepeheardes have deceived them, and have made them gone a straye upon the
hills. And again: The Priests them selves said not: Where is the Lord?
the Idem. 2.
shepeherdes offended against me. These are the words of God, uttered
against the ungodly Pryestes, to be uttered against those, who served Baal,
who obeyed Antichryste, and who went after strange gods, after wodden
stoackes, after golden Images, after engraven ydoles, and after not only
folishe, but also most filthy and more then heathenisshe supersticio^. shall
we further see, what Hugo de sancto victore De claus animam Lib. 2.
says of them? and shall we learn by him, what, and how great their
charity then was? They reach bread (says he) with a better will unto a
dog then unto the poor, and more do wait upon them at their tables, then
in time of prayers, they will have with them men servants and maid
servants, but clerks they cannot have with them, for they will nonne. and
Ibidem.
moreover he says: They neither know the law of GOD, neither will they
learn it, they are given unto ydlenes, banquetinge, and drunkenness, they
smelle and gape for earthelie thiuges, they are always in the streets, but
seledome in in the church, slow are they to redress the faults of a sinner,
but swift to seek after the footing of a hare, swifter to gather doagges
together, then to call, or to relieve the poor. whether this was to walk in
the spirit, or not, judge thou Christian Gal. 5.
reader. S. Paul says, that the works of ye flesh, are manifest, and if
these be not they, what are they? while (a thing to be lamented) they thus
hunted the hare, while in this sort they fead their dogs, while after such
manner they banqueted together: God right worthily might say: Et dispersae su^t
oues meae eo ezec. 34.
quod no^ esset pastor, My sheep are scattered abrod, because they had no
shephard. Because they preached not because they lived thus lewdelye, therefore
Gregory uses toward them these words: What do we, Hom. super. dignus
operari us
(o shepeherdes,) when we receive the hyre, and yet be no laborers? for we
receive the proffit of the Church, in a daily stipende, but yet we labor not
for the aeternall Church in preachinge. Let us consider what damnacion it is
without labouringe, to receive the hyre of labor. Lo, we live of the oblacion
of faythefull folks, but what do we labor for the souls of the
faythefull? These were they, who through covetousness got riches, and
through negligence corrupted not only them selves, but also others, and yet
being such, they thought nonne wise, nonne learned, nonne hollye but they.
certenlye it is in such men a thing most shameless, to come by their wealth
so unlawfully, to keep it un orderlye, and to spend it ungodly. A las, what
hope might our forefathers conceive of pure religion, or of true Christianity,
if unto such, every thing being lusted for was lawefull: and being
lawefull if they could do it: and being able to do it, if they durst do it:
and darieng to do it, if they did An obiectio.
it: and doing it, if every one allowed it? but o (will some say) they
builded fair houses, passinge palaces, great halles, excellent parlours,
fine chambres, and such like, and therefore no remedy we must praise, and
commend them. well, of all such buyldinges, and of their like braweries, (not
to rehearsse again what saint Hierome in An aun swear.
that behalf has said) let us here what the said Hugo Victorinus says. The
Busshops do build them howses, for greatness, De cla. animae. lib. 1.
nothing inferior unto Churches, they will have painted chambres, and there
they have images decked with sundry colors, and preciouse ornaments: But the
poor do walk without clothes, and they cry with an empty beallye at
their doors. Yea, and that I may confess the truethe, the pore are
oftentimes spoiled, to the intent that stoans, and wood may be clothed. And
is this then praise worthy, because of buyldinge, to leave of preachinge?
shall we commend the clothing of wood, and stoanes, and leauinge of the
poor destitute of relief, pinched with hungre, and oppressed with nakedness?
what is the duty of a Busshop? to preach Gods word unto his people. But
this they did not. and what should he do more? he ought to feed the hungrye,
and to cloathe the naked. But it can not be said, that they did it. For the
poor were spoiled, and in their stead wood, and stones, were clothed this we
must confess, for this (says their own writer) was true, but let their own
Doctors go further, of whom one says thus? Thyrdlie the religious men, and
cloisterers ^aldus
are hypocrites, who by many and sundry means do counterfaicte the myeldenes
of a sheep, but they carry within the fiercenes of a woolfe, some of them
fayning the mourninge noise of a dooue, have the very mind of a doagge. I
ask therefore, of these religious men, whether such dealing be good religion?
I crave to know at the hands of their Cloysterers, whether this ought to be
the part of Christians? is it Christianity to counterfaicte myldenes and to
have inwardly pride, cruelty, and fiercenes? is it the custom of Cloysterers,
to feign the mourning noise of a dooue, and to have the very mind of a
doagge? hear that unto Viualdus, we may add another witness, and so that by
the mouth of two or three their hypocrisy may appear. Saint Hierome
finding great fault with them, says thus: Beware of fained humilitye (...)
^eme.
follow that which is true that which christ taught, and wherein no pride is
shut, for many there be that go after the shadow of ver tue, but few do follow
the truth thereof, it is an easy thing to have in contempt some attire, to
salute humbly, to kiss the hands, and knees, and with the head being bowed
unto the ground, and with the eyes loking downward to promise humility, and
mekenes, it is easy with a gentle, and smoth voice to frame your speech to
sighe often, and at every word to say: that thou art a sinner, and a
wretch: but if you be offended never so little, then to lift up your brows,
to set up a stiff neck, and to change your fotmer mild speech, into an
outcrie, and rage, it is an other humility that christ taught, who exhorts
us after his example saying learn of me, for I am meke, and mat. 11.
humble of heart. And shall we marvel at the hypocrisye of such
Cloisterers: not at all. For Satan him self is changed in 2 cor 11.
to the fashion of an Angel of light, therefore it is no great thing, though
his servants fashion themselves, as though they were the servants of
righteousness: whose end shall be according unto their deeds. For if they
deceived the world with Hipocrisye, shall they not sustain shame, if they
seduced the people of GOD, shall they not suffer pain: if under their
counterfaycte attire there was no troth, if in their dyssembled Humylytye,
there was nothing else but pride, if in their feigned fasting, there was but
surfeiting, if they abused the Gospel of our savior Christ, shall they not
comme to extreme torments, to hell fire, to a foul end, and that according
unto their deeds? the leadinge of a wicked life is yuell, but the cloaking
thereof is woorsse, the pride of such Cloysterers is to be comptrolled, but
their dissimulacion, is to be detested. And shall we yet again, hear in what
wise Viualdus proceadethe? viualdus
his words are these: Fourthelye, those religious men are Hypocrites, who
under the pretense of poverty, and need, do seek after gain, and rapine.
Therefore if truth may prevail, if reason may take place, if autorities may
serve in any stead: then have Friars good cause to acknowledge their own
factes, Moonkes have just occasion to consider their lewd disceaptfulnes, all
those counterfaicte religions have right matter to bewail their Hypocrisy,
and we, unto whom God has disclosed the dissimulacio^ of our adversary, we
I say, on whom the Gospel shyneth, and amongst whom the truethe it self
speaks, have great cause to thank our heavenly Father, and, in sign of due
thankefullnes, to be obediente unto his will. And to make it more apparante,
of whom it is, that Viualdus writes, to cite the words of Saint Augustine,
I know it shall not be a miss: What a number of lib. de opere monachoru^.
Hypocrites (says he) under the habit of Moonkes, has the wielie enemy
scattered abroad every where? they rogue about every province, they ask of
all men, and they get, either the expense of their gaynfull necessity, or
else the price of their dissembled sanctity. what should I speak of their
pedlerie, of their choppinge, and changinge, and of their chapmanship? in the
time of saint Hierome, the priests, and such religious persons, were so
drowned in seculer affairs, and so addicted unto Merchaundize, that writing
unto Nepotianus, Hierom.
he gives this warninge of them: A priest (says he) that is a chapman, and
him, that of a poor man waxethe rich, or being before base, that is now
glorious, of such Of ped lers they be came priests.
a one take heed, as of a plague. Yea, and he further says: The most part
can not lack their old pedlerie, and arts, for, cha^ging the name of
Pedlears, they haunte the same trade, not seekinge food, and raymente, which
the Apostle byddethe, but scratchinge together greater gaynes, then the
temporal men do: Yea now under ad rust. monachu^
the title of religion, they exercise unjust advantages, and the honor of a
Christian name does work rather deceit, then suffer persecution: which is a
shame to say, but it is needful, that so at the length we may be ashamed
at our dishonestie. We live as though we were poor upon gold we attire
our selves with cloathe, and contrary unto all men's minds, we dye very
rich with full coffers: If such then was the estate of the Church in
Hieromes days, consyderinge the wickedness of the time that followed, and
weyghinge into what a disordered case their proud prelacie fell, might we
not with Bernarde say? Serpsit hodie putrida tabes hypocrisis per omne corpus
ecclesiae, and quo to Barnard.
lerantius, eo desperatius, eoque periculosius quo co^munius: This rotten
contagion of hypocrisye in these days have creapte over the whole body of the
Church, which the more it is suffered the more desperate it is, and the
co^muner that it is, by so much the more perilous it is. What answer can
any Papists hear make? can they deny, that in their Prelacye, there was no
such enormitye? nay can they disprove any of this, which shall be further
said: In chronica.
Sulpitius Seuerus says of them thus. As they sytte they look for rewards,
and all the honestye of their life, is corrupted with hyre, setting as it were
out their hole lives fully to sale. Neither leauethe Saint Hierome of so,
for in this voyse he further says: The Moonkes be richer ad Heli. Monac.
now, then when they were seculer men, and under poor Christ they possess
the riches, which under rich Satan they had not, and so the Church has
them now to be rich, whom the world had before to be poor. To reprehende
these and to beat down their passing couetousenes, the rehearsal of an
historye, that Laertius writes, shall not be unprofitable. Aristippus upon
a time as he sailed, perceiving the ship, where in he was to be a pirate,
for sauegarde of his life, he threw all the Gold that he had into the sea
saying (for so some other write of him) Satius est vt haecper Aristippum, Lib.
2.
quam propter haec pereat Aristippus: it is better that these should perish
by Aristippus then that Aristippus should peryshe by them. Meaning in deed
by this fact, that throwynge his Gold away, he had cut of the occasyon,
which else should have had moved the Pirates to murder him. O that the
Prelacye of ^ome had been of Aristippus mind. O that they had considered
how this world, is but a pirate ship, for, so doing: their pride had not
been so great, and their pride once diminisshed, their pompeous estate had
not been mayntained, but their proud estate being abated, simplicity had pre
uayled, the Gospel had floorished, and then in knowledge we Christians had
increased. If the Busshop of Rome him self had down this: then should not
the Grecians have had such occacion to write unto Ihon the Pope in this
wise. Potentiam mandeu. lib. ca. 7.
tuam summa^ ergatuos subditos, firmiter credimus, superbiam tuam summa^
tollerare non possumus, auaritiam satiare non valemus, Diabolus tecum, dominus
nobiscum: That is: The over great power that thou use toward thy
subjects, we stedefastlye believe, thy passinge pride we can not bear, thy
couetousenes we can not satisfy, the Devil be with thee, and God be with
us: Thus they then wrote unto him, when he through passinge Pride, and
ambition, did affirm that there was but one Church, whereof he him self was
the head. If the Busshop of Rome had learned but the first Point of
wisdom, that is, if he had known him self, then had not Platina written of
Hiltebrande, and of Paschall, both being Busshops of Rome in this sorce: Hi
duo nebulones, Imperatores Platina.
Henricos excommunicant, and ab obedientia, and juramento subditos absoluunt,
and principes subditos contra proprios Imperatores arma^t. Apostolicum esset
immitari Apostolos, qui praecipiunt vt pro magistratibus oretur, hi vero suos,
and quidem Christianos excommunicant, and quod indignissimum est, pedibus suis
co^culcant: That is co say: These two varlattes do excommunicate Henry's the
Emperors, and do set at liberty their subjects from their oath, and
obedience. Yea, and they set in armor, Princes that are subjects, against
their own Emperors. Yt had appartayned unto an Apostleship calling to follow
the Apostles, who command that magistrates should be prayed for, but these do
excommunicate their magistrates, yea, euon those which are Christians, and that
that is most unworthy, with their feet they tread upon the^. Is there any
papiste, that, reading this, will maintain Rome? is there any being learned,
that will defend this hellish Hiltebrande? can any one of any honesty speak in
the defense of Paschall? who will like, yea, who will not mislike the tyranny,
the pride, and the avarice of pope Ihon? if authority may avail, if truth
may prevail, then let the letters of Lewys king of the Romans, declare what
Pope John was, the said Lewys writes in these words: Nos Ludouicus
Romanoru^. Rex, etc. We Lewys king of the Romans do allege these things
Obenh.
against John, who says him self to be Pope, that he does abuse the
Testamente of Christ, altogether disquieting the common peace of Christianity.
Neither remembers he, that what honor so ever he now has, the same to have
been graun ted by hollye Constantine, unto Syluester then of small account. He
is little thankful unto the Roman Empire, whence he took all the glory,
which he now abuses, etc. Plato called Aristotle for his vnthankefullnes a
mule, but the emperors of Rome, might worthily account the busshop there, not
only to be a mule, but an ass, a mule for his vnthankefullnes, and an ass
for his great v^curtousie, and rudenes. What? he receauynge all that he has
at the hands of the Emperor, shall he curse him: shall he excommunicate
him? shall he tread him under feet? Hic pietatis honos? is this the reward
of pietye? is this the profession of Peter? but what say we unto Clemente the
Syxte, of whom Marius says? Hieron. Mari.
Clemens sextus, homo mulierum, honoris, ac* potentiae cupidissimus, diabolico
furore percitus, etc. Clemente the Sixte, a man most greedye of Women,
honor, and power, a man moved with a deuelishe furye, etc. Well let us touch
farther the whole flock of their Romyshe roagges, for so we must term
those, who forsake God, who judge without auctoritye, who usurp regimentes
without equity, who defend erroures who maynetaine heresies of these it is,
that Gregory thus says: Because Earthelye princes do with great In mora
humility submit themselves unto god, therefore lewd religious men are
turned unto deceipte, for beholdinge those princes to reverence religion,
these men do put on the attire of humilitye, and so under despised garments,
they press down with wicked works, the lives of such as are good they are
certainelye the lovers of the world, in that they brag to be in them
selves, that which others do reverence. they refuse honor only, that they
may have, and come by it. Such was the behauioure of Relygiouse men; in the
time of Gregorye, (...) was their Hypocrysye, for above nine hundred years
agonne. But go we so Bernarde who lived above four hundred years agonne, and
let us hear what he says of his time, his words be these: I see a thing,
which without grief ought Hom. 4. sup. missus est.
not to be seen, that is: how many, having once professed to be soldiers of
Christ, do now again entangle themselves with seculer affairs, being drowned
with earth lie desires. these with great care do build up maine walls, but
they neglect manners. Also under the pretense of a common utility, they deceive
rich men, and matrones, yea, and against their Emperors Edict, they couete
other men's goods, and seek their own with strife. So that they have
crucified neither themselves unto the world, nor yet the world unto them. But
those, which before were scaresely known in their own towns, and villages,
are now wandering about countries, haunting courts, and getting the
acquaintance of kings, and familiariatie of Princes. Here (gentle reader)
thou see how they then entangled themselves with the world, how they were
drowned with earthlye desires, how they neglected manners, how they deceived
rich mon and matrones, how they coueted other men's goods, and thou see
how they wandered roagging about countries, how they haunted courts, and how
flattringli^ they got the acqu^yntaunce of kings, and Princes. Yea and in
the same place, against such does Barnarde go further, saying I see that,
whereat I am not a little sorye, I Ibidem
see a number after they have contemned the pomp of the world, and being in
the school of humility, that now do rather learn pride, and under the
wings of an humble, and meke master, they wax maruailous proud, and in the
end, they wax more unruly in the Cloister, then they did when they seemed to
be worldlinges. Let the munkes make here their answer, let they friars
defend themselves. What have they to say? they learned pride, they waxed
maruaylous proud, and they were unruly in their cloisters. Go we then
further, even unto S. Hieromes time again, and let us hear what he says, his
words be these: Crates the Thebane, being a man very ad pauli.
rich, as he travailed to Athence to learn wisdom, he threw away a
great deal of gold, neither did he think, that he cold possess both
virtue and riches, and that at one time. But we (of the priests he speaks)
having our lappes full of gold, do follow Christ, that is poor, and under
the pretense of alms we cleave still unto our former wealth. How then can
we distribute other men's goods faithfully, when we hoorde up our own so
fearefullie? Such hipocrites they were in the time of Hierome, such
dissemblers they were for a. xi. hundredth years agonne, and more. but
afterward, how of lewd men they waxed to be mere loordens, and of vicious
men, how they proved to be rank varlattes, by the testimonye of Antonius
Patauinus their own writer, it may more then evidently appear, for he
says: By the fair, and foolish woman, is understood the priests, who
being nice, and kemmed, Sermon: Domi.
do set themselves as drabbes to sale for a penie. they are fair in the
glory of their garments, in the number of their nephews, and in the
multitude of their prebendaries. they are foolish: for what so ever either
they or others do speak, they understand not, they cry all the day in the
church, and bark like doagges, and yet they know not what they themselves
do say. for though the body be in the quite yet is their heart in the
street, or market. these having the golden circle of knoweledge, and
eloquence, do not stick to bestow it in riotousenes, and couetousenes almost
all the religious men have stoallen this golden rule, for, they walk not
according unto the truth of the Gospel, they live not according unto the
institucions of the fathers, but they lead a crooked, and a dissembled life,
the moonkes of benedicts order have stoallen this rule, so have they of
Augustines orders, the chanons, and all the rest, who seek their own, and not
that which is Jesus Christ's, and therefore in the day of judgment, they
shall be stoaned with sharp rebukes, and then, they shallbe burnte in
everlasting fire, and so shall they be curssed for ever, separated from
Christ. O Lord how have our forefathers been abused, and by whom? by those
nyce, and kemmed Priests, by those riotouse, and most couetouse company, by
those who lead a crooked, and a dissembled life, by the Moonkes of Benedictes
order, and of Augustines order, by the chanones, (I use their own words) and
all the reaste: but what gain they in the end by their hypocrisy? even to be
burnt in everlasting fire, to be curssed for ever, and alas to be separated
from Christ. Antoniaus also, who was Archebusshop of Florence, speakethe, and
wrytethe of them in this wise: Abbas Siluanus, Diu in excessu Anto. part: 2.
mentis factus est, and exurgens fleuit amare* rogantibus aute fratribus
caussam fletus, ait: ego ad judicium raptus sum, and multos vidi de habitu
nostro euntes ad tormenta, and multos seculares ad regnum: That is: The Abbote
Siluanus being long in a trance, at the length rysinge up he weapte, and
when his brethren asked of him the cause of his weping, he said: I was taken up
into judgment, and there I saw many of our company going into torments, and
many of the lay me^ going into the kingedome of heaven. How plain be these
words? the religigiouse company went into hell, and the lay men unto
heaven. how could they the^ guide rightly the floacke of Christ, when they
them selves fell into the dytch of perdicio^, into the doungeon of death, and
into damnable torments? but if he were a moonke no man might reprehende him,
no man might blame him, and therefore S. Augustine findinge great fault with
such foolishenes says: Yt is a thing very much to be ad ^ure.
sorowed, if we puff up moonkes into so ruinouse a pride, as to say: that an
yuell Moonke is a good priest, whereas in very deed a Moonke being sometimes
good, can yet scarselye be a good priest. Such hollynes you se, was in their
Moonkeship: such perfection was in their Moonkerye, that a good Moonke could
scarselye (for so S. Augustine. says) be a good Priest. perceive we not
therefore what they were? shall they lulle us still a sleeape? shall we set
by them? shall we make any account of the^? in the quyre they prayde not, but
they played, they sange not, but they slepte. and thence it in exa^p.
is, that Bernard says this. He is a singular moonke, who is diligente to
get a private gain, and to get a commune proffite is slouthefull, who in
his beadde wakethe, and in the quiere sleeps. And again, in pol^.
touching their Hypocrisye, he wrytethe further in this wise: Yt is a great
abuse, for it is the graetest care, how the body may be regularelye attyred,
and contrary unto rule, they leave the soul destitute of his attire. If with
such an indeuore, the coat, and the hoodde must be prepared for the body,
without which he is thought to be no Moonke: why then do they not in like
manner, provide spiritual attire for the spirit? which attire is piety, and
humility. How can here the hoode defend them? Ibidem.
how may the coat excuse them? yea, Barnarde goes further, and says: Our
apparaile, which I speak with grief, is proudlye worn by the Moonkes of this
our time. we can not find in all our country wherewith we may be called. for
the knight makes his cloak, and the Moonke his hoode, and all of one cloth.
This was the attire, and the proud attire of the Moonks in Bernards time. where
the^ was humility? yt was banished. where was simplicity? it was suppressed.
and on ye (...) Pride reigned, arrogancy ruled; hypocrysye tryumphed, God was
displeased, and Satan rejoiced. O heaven what an unhappy heard of Moonkes
were then? o yearthe; what an unhappy brood dydst thou then bear: but let
Bernards say further* Ibide^ in epistola.
Our eyes (says he) look all on hy^* our feet do, compass about all
the Marquette, our toungues are heard in every man's matters, our hands
do^ snatche away every manes Patrimony: What are they then? pro^de, busye
bodies, and P^rers, An honest Company* mere to be reverenced, m^u woorth^^
to be obeyed, ^^^cke deserninge to be favored. well, what says Hugo
Victori^ of them? he was their very friend, a Papiste for ly^e, let us hear
him* The Moonkes says he do make them Cl^^sters, that the outward man may
be de clau* anima. Lib. 1.
kept in, but I would to God, that they would make Cloisters, wherein the
inward man might be keepte ordinarelye^ yea, and further in the person of a
Moonke he says: I am in the quiere with my De an lib. 1.
body, and in some wordlye busynes with my mind, I am now within, and now
without, I singe one thing, and I think another, I utter the words of the
Psalm, but I give no heed unto the sense. in my mind I am a vagabonde in
mine apparaille, dessolute, and in mine eyes amassed. I gase here, and there,
beholding what is every where done. I have the habit of a moonke but not the
conversation, yea, amongst a great company, if my large hoodde be saffe, I
think that all is well. By this time (gentle Reader) what thinkeste thou of
these men? be they not Hypocrites? by the confession, of Hugo, be they not
Uagaboundes? it is in vain to be to vehemente, only let us crave at Gods
hands, tha^ he will admende the^. and for mine own part, I praise God, I
daily thank him, that I know them, yea, and I like in my self, that I
myslyke them. Now let us return again unto Viualdus, for, in opus. regal.
these words he says: Fyfetelye, a number of religiouse men, have black
spoatof Hypocrisy, like unto a Lybarde. For, they being rude of nature, and
vile in birth, yet in the Cloister with a hoysed nec^e, they feign them selves
more delicate, and noble in all their doings, then other men. these do
indeuore to live in outward co^uersacion ciuillie, and politicallye, but
inwardelye they are puffed with the wynd, and vanity of pride, ambicion, and
envy. Yt is long to recite all, and every authority, and the same at large,
read therefore in this behalf an epistle, yt S. Hierome wrote unto Nepotianus,
and therein thou shalt find these false prophets pictured out in their own
colloures. There are sixtelye (says Viualdus) other clearkes, religiouse men,
or Moonks, Ibidem.
who do conterfaicte sobriety, and abstine^ce, to the intent they might seem
to lead a straighte life, to be indewed with modesty, and to be adourned
with chastity. but within they are full of filthiness, delighting in seculer
pleasures, and devouring the pore in secret. but shall we believe only Viualdus?
na, let us go also unto Hieronimus for in these words he inueygheth against
such: He is a drink master who with a full (...) nepo-
beallye disputethe of fasting. in deed a thief may blame couetousenes, but
the mouth, the mind, and the hands of a priest should agree together. We
have seen the late fasting of Priests, we beheld their deyntie disshes, we
saw their junkettes, the Popish frydaye fair is to Hypocrytall, and therefore
Saint Hierome having good cause doethe say: What does Ibidem.
it proffite me not to feed on oil, and to seek after strange disshes, and
fare almost not to be found? as Carettes, peaper, nuttes, dates, ryce, honnie,
and bake meats. all the gardens are tylled, and why? because we should not
feed on bread, but whiles we seek after deynties, we are drawn back from
the kingdom of heaven. Fie for shame, blusshe we not at these foolish toys,
and doethe it not loathe us of our superstition? Here is a proper fast, to
abstain from bread, and to feed on bakemeate, to eat carretes, peaper,
nuttes, dates ryce, honnie, sugar, and such like. Let those that have reason,
regard this thing, and then they must needs confess, that the popes
fasting was counterfaicte, that his Chaplens were Hypocrites, and that their
profession was mere Hypocrisye, take away their cappes, and what are they?
take away their hooddes, and what be they? take away their outward attire
and then naught are they, what more? mary. There is an viualdus
other kind of Hypocrites (says Viualdus) who under the cloak of religion,
being unmarried, yet do seek a new kind of wives, and so. S. Hierome says.
for wrytinge unto Eustochius he has these words: A number do attain unto
priesthood, and deaconship, id eusto^ium.
that they may more freely see and talk with women, they feign them selves to
be spiritual fathers of simple women that under the color of obedience
humility, and mor^ieficacion they might at the length allure them unto
filthynes. O not spiritual, but spightful fathers. O the foes of
christianity. O the enemies of true piety. What? vnd^^ the color of
religion, to allure women unto fornication? what passing heathenes was this?
what? will not their shaven faces be ashamed? will they hear what Sayn^t^
Hierome says? Why delights it thee to Ad Oce^,
talk with maids? why doeste thou freequent the company of Noonnes, contrary
unto thy professyon? why fyndeth Sainct^ Hierome with priests this fault?
because they were saultie, and that they were so, you may read in the same
epistle unto Oceanus at large. further, and to conclud. Many (says Lud:
Viualduus.
Viualdus) of the clergy, of the Moonkes, and religious men are hypocrites,
who being ydiotes, and unlearned, do yet feign themselves to know, and to
understand much, and when they are bound by reason of their degree, and
professyon, to study, and to read the hollie scriptures, they occupye
themselves in light, vain, vnproffytable, and seculer matters, which
appertain nothing unto their purpose. what vain, light, and unprofitable
things they read, may appear by an epistle, that Hierome wrote unto Damasus
wherein these words are: But Ad damasum.
now the priests of god, settinge a side the Gospelles, and the prophets, do
read comedies, they sing the louinge songs of sheepehardes tune, they are
skillfull in Virgill, and they do this, not as children do which is a fault,
of necessity, but willingly. and shall we willingly go after them? shall we
willingly reiecte the scriptures and receive those sects? he there unto here,
in settinge forth tho hypocrisy of the Romish prelacie, I have used the
auctorie of Lactantius, of their own lawers, of Laurentius valla, of Hierome,
of Barnarde, of Gregory, of Viualdus, of VVierus, of Hugo Victorinus, of
Augustine, of Sulpitius, of Mandeuill, of Platina, of Obenhin, of Marius, of
Antonius Patauinus, of Antonianus, of the old Testamente and of the new, and
of others, by whose writtinge it is plain that Friars are to be myslyked,
that the Moonkes are to be refused, and that their Priests are to be
despised, and that, because they were ignoraunte, arrogant, false seducers,
false Prophets, and the hypocrites of who^ it is written in the vii. Chapter
of the Gospel after S. Matthewe in this wise. Beware of false (...). 7.
Prophets, which comme unto you in sheep cloathinge, who inwardlye are
raueninge wolffes. These false prophets, in the time of Moses law, were the
Baalites Malochites, Marothites, Baalmites, the proud Scribes and the lewd
Pharisees: in the primitive Church, the were the Simonianes, Cherinthianes,
Nicholaits, De^ionites, Nestorians, Sabellians, and Arrianes, in this our time,
the are the terminalles, nominalles, reales, and all the roagges holdinge with
the sinagogue of Rome, from whom God the father of his mercy defend us.

Amen
OF THE IGNOrance, iniquity, and blasphemies of the Romayne Prelacie. Capit.
II.
I Have set furthe (gentle Reader) in the former Chapter, who they are of
whom S. Paul writes in these words unto Timothee: Habentes quidem speciem
2. ti^. (...)
pietatis, virtutem eius autem abnegantes: Having in deed the show of
hollinesse, but forsakinge the virtue thereof. And here in this Chapter, thou
shalt have a taste, and that in very few words of their further abuses,
neither do I know with what first to begin, their faults be so many. of
their ignorance, I will say nothing, but, Consta^ plures Papas adeo
illiteratos fuisse, Alfou^ de castr^ co^tra h^res. lib. (...)
vt Grammaticam penitus ignorarent. It is evident that there were many Popes
so unlearned, that they utterly were unskillful in Grammar. Touching
adultery, and fornication, ^ncestus, adulteria casto co^nubio pr^fert. council.
W^
The pope does prefer inceste, and adultery before chaste matrimony. As
for Pope Ihon the twelfe: Is adeo a se pudicitiam abijerat, vt mulieres ad se
public ingr^^erentur. ^aucler.
He did so baneshe shame fastenes and chastity from him, that he suffered
light women to comme in communely unto him. For heresye: Li^evius was an
Arrian, so was Leo, Pope Ihon doubted of the immortality of the soul, and
Mercellinus offered incense, and sacrifice unto Dyuels, Honorius was condemned
for an heretic by two general counsailles, Ana^^asyus was a Nestorian,
Siluester a nigroma^cer, and Eugenius gyltie of simonie, and perjury: these
things considered, let us pronounce with the counseil of Basil. Certu^ est
Papam errare posse. Yt is certain that the co^s. basil
Pope can err. It is confessed that he has erred, it is true, that he is
most erroneous. But that we may see at large their follye, let us see what
is written in a popisshe book entitled: Liber co^formitatum. In the third
lea^e of the same book, they call Frauncos. Fol. 3.
The Chancellor, the Treasourer, the sta^darde bearer, and the Councellor of
Christ. And must Christ have a Chancellor? mu^ he have a treasourer, shail
he have a standarde bearer? nead he a counsailloure? (...) where is this S.
Fraunces? In sede Lu^ ri* In Lucifers feate. For so they (...), w^^ninge Fol. 4.
that he is in heaven. and how prove Fol. ^ode^
they it? by this. Ipse Diabolus pres bitero Jacobo de Bononi^ hoc dixit: The
Dyuell him self told this unto sir James a priest of Bononia. shall we
believe sir James, who ^^^ened the Dyuell? or shall we believe (...) of them
both? who, except he had be^ bewitched, could have written such dreams? but
with such lies (a thing to be pi^) were our forefathers blinded, feadde, (...)
seduced* and will you see how wicked^ they abused the hollye scriptures, in
re^ings the same unto their ^eraunc^^? (...) of the (...) Chapter of the
genesis, thus Fol. code^
they (...) Fa^s (...), id est Franci^, ad (...) and similitudinem nostra^*
That is to (...) Let us make man, that is ^^auntys after our image, and
similtude. And what followethe? Ut praesit piscibus maris. That he should rule
the Fisshes of the sea. O sea, o Land, o Fire, o air, o ye Elements all,
what an exposicion is this: made not God at the beginning manne after his
image, and similitude? made he not him, to bear rule over the Fisshes of the
Sea? why then (Gentle reader) wy^^ they expound that to Fraunces
particularelye, which was spoken of mankind universally? weyghe this, judge
it well. but what say they further? forsoothe: Franciscus potest dici Petra.
Fraunces may Fol. 12. Ibidem
be called a roacke, and why? Quia filius fui^ Petri Barnardonis, Because he
was the son of Pieter Bernardo. Is not this Learning? what a proof is this?
let us bring it to their argument, and then it shall appear, as it is, most
ridicolouse s. Frances was the sone of Bernardo, ergo S. Fraunces was a roacke.
this is their reckeninge, this is their logique, this is their learning and can
they content them selves with this follye? nay. For thus they proceade:
Franciscus est melior Apostolis. Francis is better then the Apostles. what?
then the Apostles? O Fol. 39.
Fatuelle: well you have not yet heard, what gifts sir Fraunces had in
preaching, what Eloquence he had, what gravity he was endewed withal. If
you will hear then read the. 51. ^eafe of the book, and there you shall
synde these most foolish words: Multitudo maxima auium congregata ad
audiendum Fol. 51.
praedicationem. B. Francisci: A great company of byrds were gathered together
to hear the preaching of blessed Francis. and woate you when this was? when
Esope made his fables, when the Fox spoke, when the crow had her voice, to be
brief, when ye ^yrdes kept their parliament when tales went for ^rothe, when
fables were credited, when folly prevailed. But because we speak of birds,
let us go further, and let us se what is written more of them. And then we
shall Fol. 53.
have these words: Jacent in loco, S. Mariae fratres, qui audierunt, and
viderunt aues alaudas, congregatas, canta^tes super tectum ecclesiae S. Mariae
in obitu beati francisci: There lay brethren in a place of. S. Mary's, who
heard, and saw larkes gathered together singing upon the top of. S. Mary's
church, at the death of. S. Fraunces. And is it so strange a thing to hear
a Lark sing? these men would make a miracle feign, if they could neither
care they of what. For what say we of doting Drodro, of whom they write Fol.
75.
in this wise: Brother Drodro was so holy that one Angel served him at Mass,
and an other Angel prepared him hoarsses to travail with. With such lies
the people were fed, with such vain tales, were Christians at that time
taught, to set forth their moaming mass, such dreams were invented. So that
with Irenaeus we may well lib 1. aduers. haeres. val.
say: Hi anicularum fabulas, assumentes, post deinde et sermones, and
dictiones, and parabolas huic inde afferentes, vt aptare volunt fabulis suis
eloquia Dei: These men do take in hand old wives tales, and then, even thence
they heap together talks, words, and parabales to the intent in deed that
they may bring gods word to agree with their fables. These are the words
of Irenaeus sometime Bushop of Lions in France, who lived in the year of our
Lord God, one hundredth, three score, and syxetene. but shall we go further? and
shall we see how saint Fraunces his order is proved? to prove the same, they
have these words: Nullus dZ ambigere de ordine F. Minorum, patz ex
visionibus, inter Fol. 83.
quas est etiam haec. Quidam vidit B. Franciscum cum vexillo crucis euntem per
coelu^, et infinitam multitudinem fratrum suorum ad christum: Nonne ought to
doubt of the order of saint Frauncis, as appears by visions, whereof this
is one: a certain manne saw saint Frauncis with the sign of the Cross,
goinge through heaven, with a great multitude of his brethren, unto Christ.
O Christ what a fondenesse is this: where was this man, when he saw Sayncte
Frauncysse in Heaven? What manne was this? his name is not in the book of
life, and shall we credyte a certain manne? to use no more words, what
maddenesse is this? and what was the rule of Sayncte Frauncysse? his rule was,
(as he himself says). Liber Fol. 101.
vitae, spes salutis, medulla Euangelij, clauis paradisi, status perfectionis;
pactum aeterni foederis. This book of life, the hope of salvation, the marrawe
of the Gospel, the kaye of paradise, the state of perfection, the decree of
the everlasting couenaunte. What blasphemies be these? how intolerable are
they? who if he favor the Gospel, if he believe in Christ can abide
them? yt is in vain to trouble the reader with any more of their vanities, and
therefore to omit a great number of other blasphemies, to let pass their
sundry dreams, not to speak of the great absurdities contained within that
book, let us end with these words Fol. 103.
of the same. Franciscus surgens de oratione, venit ad fratres turbatissimus,
dicens: Ego vellem, quod istum habitum non inuenissem, dominus enim mihi
reuelauit, quod de ordine meo exibit Antichristus, and secta eius. That is,
Frauncis risinge from prayer came unto his brethren greatly troubled, saying:
I would that I had not invented this habit for God has revealed unto me,
that out of my order, Antichriste and his sect shall come. Now you hear what
master Frau^cys says of his own flock, how that of his rule Antichriste
and his sect shall come, how can yt then be, The book of life, the hope of
salvation. etc. It was not without good cause, yt Bernhard, spekinge of the
miseries of mankind, divided the same into three: which he sets forth in
this wise: Faciles sumus ad seducendu^: debiles Sermon. 7. de adue^: Domi.
ad operandu^: fragiles ad resistendum: We are esie to be seduced: weak to
work: frail to resist: And be we not easy to be seduced, when ye very
wysest did believe such dreams? when the truethe it self was not regarded, and
when these vntrothes were esteemed? then were men foolish, but now are
children wise, then the learned were blind, but now the unlearned do see.
therefore in that we do se, let us thank God. hythervnto we have spoken of
the Ignorance, of the adultery, and of the heresye, of the prelacie of Rome:
we have seen the follye, where in they are drowned, touching Frauncys, and
others. wherefore let us go further, and to begin, hear we what Bernharde
says: his words are these: The offices Super psa.
them selves of ecclesiastical dignity are turned into filthy gain, and
into the affairs of Darkness, neither is sought in these the safetye of
souls, but the riotousenes of riches. For these things, the Priests resoarte
unto the churchs, they say masses, the singe psalms. Yea, they strive
impudentlye about Busshoprikes, and Archedeaneries, wastinge the revenues of
the Church in superfluity, and vanity. Such was their abuses for four
hundredth years a gone. Afterward into what follye they fell, it is apparante
by hystories, which that I may speak somewhat of Antichrist, I may omit. of
Antichriste Hilarious says thus: Nominis Antichristi proprietas, est Christo
esse contrariu^. The property of the name of Antichriste, co^tr aurentiu^.
is to be contrary unto Christ. Well, to the intent that every indifference
reader may beware of Antichriste, who endeuoreth to diminishe the glory of
God, to suppress the Gospel, and to banishe away all Godliness and piety, I
will first speak of Antichrists seat, then of his servants, of his
miracles, of him self, and so of his end.

Of his Seat.
Rome the whore of Babylon, the mother Fra^cisc. petrach.
of ydolatrie, and fornication, the sanctuary of heresye, and the school of
error.

Rome is as the secound Babylon. August. Joach: Abba^. Hieron. ad allga. 9. 11.


Antichrist has already his beginning at Rome, and shall advance him self
higher in the Apostolic See. According unto the reuelacio^ of s. Ihon, there
is written in the forehed of the purple harlatte a name of blasphemy, that is,
of Rome aeternal.

Of his servants.
Spekinge of the Priests, which were for three hundredth years agone, he says
thus: For the most part they be thieues, and murders, S Albert. ^nagnus L
rather katchers, then feeders: rather killers, the^ kepers: rather deceauers,
the^ doctors: they be the messengers of Antichrist, and the subuerters of
Christ his sheep.

Would god they were not gonne whollye, with general consent, from religion,
to Cornel. bitonti.
superstition, from faith, to infidelity: from Christ, to Antichrist: from
god, to an Epicure.

His Doctors shall fall from the understanding Antoni.
of scriptures, geuinge the^ selves deceptefullye with great eloquence, and
subteltie of words, to expound the same.

Of his Miracles.
The people are most deceived with feigned miracles, wrought either by the
priests, Nich. Lyra.
or else by their adherentes, for lukers sake.

In the sacrament it self, there appearethe Alexan. de Hales
fleass he, somtymes by the devise of men, and sometimes by the workinge of the
Dyuill. My god has made me ware of these huck augu. in Joan.
sters of miracles: for he says falsse prophets shall rise up in the latter
days, workinge signs, and wonders, to deceive the elect of God, if it were
possible.

They have deceived my people with their Hier. 23
lies, and with their miracle. Of him self.

Who so ever is exalted above all, yt is called 2. the. 2.
God, or that is worshipped, so yt he as God, sits in the temple of God,
shewinge him self that he is God: such is the manne of sin, and the son
of perdicion:

The Bushop of Rome is exalted above all yt is called God, and is worshipped,
so that he as God, sittethe in the temple of God, showing him self that he is
God:

Therefore, the Busshop of Rome, is the man of sin, and the son of
perdicio^. for proof of the less proposico^, behold with indiffere^cie,
what, and how blasphemousely ye papists have written of their pope. Our lord
god the pope In gloss. council. latronum hostiens. panormi. Cornel. Biton.
Zarabel. Cardin. Lib, 5.
To thee is given all manner of power, above all powers, as well of heaven, as of
earth.

The pope is all and above all.

The pope can do as much as Christ ca^ do.

The pope is the light, that came into the world.

The pope is more then a God. Of him writethe Irenaeus in this wise:
Notwithestandinge that Antichrist be but a slave, yet will he be worshipped, as
if he were a God.

That Beast which is spoken of in the book of Bern. epist. 12^
Reuelacio^s, unto which beast is given a mouth to speak blasphemies, and to
keep war against the Saints of God, he is now gotten into Peter's chair,
as a Lion prepared unto his pray.

Of his end.
Then shall Babylon, which is Rome, fall, Prima.
when she shall last of all take power to persecute the saints of God.

Whom our lord Jesus shall slaie with the breathe of his mouth, and shall
destroy 2. the. 2.
with the brightness of his coming.

When thou see that dark iniquity has Chris: in Matthew: hom 34.
taken hold upon the priests being placed in the high top of spiritual
dignities, how may it be doubted, but that the end of the world is at hand?

Jesus himself with his presence, shall end Aug: de ciuit: dei cap: 18.
that last persecution, which shall be wrought by Antichriste. Apoc. 8.
Great Babylon is fallen, her plagues shall come in one day, death, and
sorrow, and hunger, and she shall be brent with fire.

A prophesye of Rome.
Long totring Rome at length shall waste, in errors long being thrall.

She shall consume, and cease to be, the head, and chief of all.



Here we see, by the authority of Petrarcha, that Rome is the whore of
Babylon, whereunto. S. Augustine: also does agree we see that Antichriste (for
so writes Joachimus) has already his beginning in Rome we see by the words
of. S. Hierome, that it is the purple harlatte. Next unto this, Albertus
witnesses that in his time the prestes were thieues and murderers, yea, and
the messengers of Antichrist, neither dissenteth Cornelius Bitontinus therefro.
Antoninus also anoucheth the same. For his seat therefore, what answer can
they have? that it is not Rome what have they to say? and to excuse their
priests what excuse can they bring? that they be not the ministers of
Antichriste, by what means can they prove? touching his miracles: Vim habebit
in imperio, dolum in miraculis. He shall have (says S. Augustine) in praef.
rage in his reign, and deceapte in his miracles. Whether he has used
deceipte in his miracles, or not, let the words of Lyra declare, and to join
with Lyra more witnesses read again what Alexander of Hales has written, and
read further what S. Augustine has set forth. Concerning Antichriste
himself, that the Pope is he, S. Paul does manyfestlye declare, weyghe the
argument consider their blasphemies, peruse again^ the words of Irenaeus,
ponder what Bernharde does say. and here I might have cause to remember the,
of a book most vehementlye written, by doctor Steven Bardiner, against the
Busshop of Rome, unto which book doctor Boner, who now o^ late dyed, has
made a preface, wherein he calls the Busshop of Rome, an vsuper, a wicked
man, an Antichrist. Last of all, and of ye fall of that beast Prymacius does
write very well. S. Paul has written best of all: Chrysostom writes not
amysse: saint Augustyne did write right true. Therefore unto us, that
believe these testimonies, God has s^e his Gospel to our comfort, his
truth to our edefyenge, his word to be a light unto our words, and to be
a pathe unto our works: but of the contrary part, of them which have eyes,
and yet will not see, we may say, as it is said, Mittet illis deus
operation^m erroris, vt credant 3. the. 2.
mendacio. God shall send unto them the operacio^ of errors, that they may
believe lyeng. Yea, and as it is further said: seducentur Idem.
eis signis and prodigijs, qui seduci merebantur pro eo quod dilectionem
veritatis non receperunt, vt salui fierent: They shall be sednced with those
signs and wonders, who deserved to be beguiled, because they have not received
the truth, that thereby they might be saved. what deceapt was it, to have
flesh to appear in the sacrament: what follye was it, for men to be seduced
thereby? these things and the like, did the Priests by most wicked means
bring to pass. the priests I say, of whom S. Hierome writes in this wise:
Per dulces sermones, and benedictiones decipiunt In malach. cap: 2.
corda innocentiu^: and qui inique agunt, benedicuntur ab eis: adulanturque
peccatoribus, du^modo diuites sint. By flatteringe speech, and vain
blessings, they deceive the hearts of the innocents: who do yuell, those
they bless: and they flatter sinners to the intent they may be rich. If
we examyne the estate of the Scribes, and pharisees, we shall find no greater
abuses in them, then in these: if we consider the Priests of Isis, and
Serapis, we shall find these and they in all things to agree, for, the
priests of Isis did shave their headdes, and so did these. the Priests of
Serapis did shave them selves, and what did these? this they did against the
express commandment, which is: caput autem suum non radent, ezchil. cap. 44.
But their head shall they not shave, we see, (and therefore what need we
to read any further?) the abuses that has be^e, and we see that this is
the time, whereof Chrysostom spoke thus: ad nullam rem in Mat:
fugient, nisi ad scripturas: alioqui incident in abominationem desolationis:
Then will they flyed to nothing, but unto the scriptures, otherwise they shall
fall into the abomination of desolation, that is (as he says) Into heresye.
neither can I forgette the words of Gregory, (who making mention of the
great troubles, and persecution, which the people of Christ shall suffer)
declarethe the end, and the estate wherein they shall be. His words be these:
Ecclesia post eosdem dies, Greg: In Job.
quibus de primitur, tame^ circa finem mundi, grandi praedicationis virtute,
roborabitur: The church after those days, wherein she is persecuted, shall yet
at length about the end of the world, be strengthened with the great power
of preching. what playner words can be then these, to touch this our time?
let papists nodde, let enemies devise, let men practice, let the people muse,
and yet, maugre all the malice of Satan. The truth is great, and preuayleth.
As for the note of 3. esd. 4.
heresye, wherewith the adversaries daily accuse us, for mine own part, with
s. Paul I say: This I confess unto the, that after act. 24.
that way, which they call heresye, so worship I the God of my fathers,
believing all things, which are written in the law, and the prophets, and have
hoape toward God, that the same resurrection of the dead. (which they them
selves look for also) shall be both of just and unjust, and therefore stu die I,
to have always a clear conscience toward God, and toward man also. From this
belief, let us pray, that we may never starte, and let us put away all
worldly respects: for, if we be banished, Domini est terra, the earth is the
Lords: if we be sawen a sunder, we have Esaye to our guide: if we be thrown
into the seas, let Jonas be our example: if we be cast into the Lions den,
then let Daniel comme to our remembrance: if we be stoaned to death, let
Steue^ be thought upon: if we loase all our Goods, let us then call this to our
mind, naked we camme into this world, and naked we shall go hence. to be
brief, if we be spytted at, buffeted, mocked, scourged, wounded, reuyled,
and put to death, then let Christ be our Captain, he went before, let us take
his cross, and follow him: which thing if we do unfeignedly, then in this
world we shall have quiet consciences, and in the world to come we shall
live with Christ, unto whom, with the father, and the holy Ghost be all
honor, glory, praise, and dominion, now and euerlastinglye.

Amen.
A vewe of certain rebellions, and of their ends.
IN the year of our lord god. 1088. one Odo bushop of Bayon, the Earl of
Northhumberlande and others rebelled against w. Rufus King of England, but
they were discomfited.

In the year. 1380. one John wall a priest was the auctor of a rebellion, and
this spread very far, so that the King, Richard the second was in great
danger, but the rebels came to confusion.

In the year. 1466. a rebellion began where in the king, Edward the fourth, was
banisshed and that by his own subjects, but in the end God restored him unto
his kingdom, and all hisenemies were discomfited.

In the year of our lord. 1486. a rebellion was begone, wherein King Henry
the seventh stood in great distress, but at length, the rebels were
executed.

In this time also one sir Simond a wielie priest, was the author of a
^ommocion, but in the end he was taken, and his enterprise came to naught.

In the year. 1496, a rebellion began in Cornwall, and they rebels did so
prevail that they came to black heathe, and there ^aue a field, but God
overthrew them, an^ gave unto the king the victory.

In the year. 1535. an insurrexion began at Lynconshice, by the means of
Abbattes, and priests but they prospered not.

In the year. 1540. a new rebellion began in yorkshire, sturred up by
certain priests and gentlemen, but their end was according unto their
treason.

As for the time of late memory, how rebels have spedde therein, we can
well enough remember, therefore for fear of the like end, and to avoid the
plague of 2. peit. (...).
God: Submit your selves unto all ordinance of man, for the Lords sake,
Whether it be unto the King, as unto the chief head, or else unto rulers,
as unto them that are sent of him. And when Idem. 5.
the chief shepeharde shall appear, you shall receive an incorruptible crown
of glory. Otherwise, in this world a miserable death remains for you, and in
the world to come death everlasting.

IGNATIUS IN epistola ad Heronem.
Every one that says otherwise then is set forth, although he seem to be
worthy of credit, although he fast, although he keep his virginity,
although he work wonders, although he Prophecy, yet take him to be a Wolf
among the floacke of shiepe, sekinge to destroy them.

If there be any fault in the Printing, the gentle Reader will bear with
me, for, mine absence at the correcttinge of sum leafes may excuse it.

LVCRECIA-ROMANA


Imprinted at London in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Lucrece, by
Thomas Purfoote.


