TWO SERMONS.

THE CHRISTIANS COMFORT IN HIS CROSSES, CONDVCTING him in the tempests of
tribulation, to the happy haven of Heavenly tranquillity.

AND THE IVDGES, AND IVRIES INSTRVCTION.

By William Est, Master of Art, and Preacher of Gods word.

Rom: 8.18. (...) count that the afflictions of this present time are not
worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto us.

AT LONDON. Printed by Tho: Creed, for Arthur Johnson, Dwelling at the sign
of the white Horse in Paul's Churchyard. 1614.

To the Courteous Reader.
I Have here (Gentle Reader) exhibited to thy view, the chiefest Observations
and Doctrines of the best Learned, and most approved writers in the Latin
tongue, upon this Text, both ancient and modern, besides very many of mine
own, never before published. Wherein (as the searcher of hearts knows) I
have not affected the popular applause of the world, which I hold but the
wavering wind of men's mouths, breathing out the vain blastes of that
many-headed Monster, whose mind is ever mutable, Vulgus belluo multorum
capitum.
which I have ever reputed no better then a verbal simonie. I can hardly
think him to be a good man of whom all men speak well; for this plainly
proves, that he can apply himself to the person, how odious soever he be: to
the time, how wicked soever it be: to the place, how dishonest soever it be. But
the glory of God I have ever prefixed, as the only scope and mark whereunto
all my labors do aim: and the love of Sion enforces me by all means to
seek to further the course of godliness. Wherefore Christian Reader, I do
request thee iudicially to judge, Christianly to Censure, and charitably
correct, whatsoever has passed my hands, pingui crassaque Minerua, through
some oversight. Awd above all, assist me with thy prayers to Almighty God,
that these, and all other my labors, may be as I have intended, to the glory
of God, and Edification of his Church. As for the Cynick strains of Critical
Zoilus, or blacke-mouthed Momus, which wanting other means, think to
vindicate unto themselves an opinion of learning among the simple, by censuring
and carping at the honest enterprises of others, which will sooner find two
faults in another, then amend one in themselves. Let such know, that I
disdain to give them any other answer, then Martial the Poet (though of
far greater desert) did once to one of that cursed crew: Mart. lib. 9. Epigr.
99.
Rumpitur inuidia, quod amamur,
quodque probamur,
Rumpatur quisquis, Rumpitur inuidia.
With Envy some in sunder break,
to see me loved well:
Asunder let him break,
whose gall with Envy so does swell.
And thus I commit my good meaning to the judgment of the honest, who are wont
to take good meaning ever in the better part.

Thine in the Lord. W. Est.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM EARL OF BATH, HIS Majesty's Chief
Lieutenant in the Counties of Deuon and Cornwall: all happiness in this life,
and eternal blessedness in the life to come.
MY continual imployme^ts (Right Honorable) in the function of my Ministry,
might put a strong Remora to my pen, to stay me from farther bewraying my
unskillfulness in writing, had not my entire love to Sion ouerswayed all
difficulties, and vanquished all labors and impediments. These 2. Sermons I
preached before a great and iuditious Auditorie. The one, which I have
entitled; The Judges and Iuries Instruction, by command of authority, long
since before the Judges, at the Assizes at Lanceston, when that worshipful
Gentleman, Sir Bernard Greynuile, my good Patron, was Shieriffe of Cornwall.
The other (The Christians Comfort) is more recent: And chancing of late upon
certain Copies and notes, pretended to be taken from my mouth, as I then
delivered them, I found some maimed and defective, some patched together in an
indigested manner, and other utterly false and mistaken; which has enforced me
(and the rather through the importunity of some of my best friends) to search
out the original, and to disrobe this forlorn offspring of his counterfeite
colors, and patched coat; and to put upon him his own suite, though in the
playnest fashion, without any curious decking or trimming. Which when I had
effected (I confess) my ambiguous thoughts were tossed too and fro for a
while, in a deep and doubtful dilemma (every way conuincing) under whose
Pratrocinie I might send forth this my poor abortiue Orphane abroad into the
world: But at length my distracted resolution presumed to alight upon your
Lordships Honorable name, to seek shelter against envy and detracting
tongues, being imboldned by the general report, and my own trial of your
Honors heroical propension, and noble disposition to piety, learning, and
religion: Wherewith, and with all other ornaments of virtues fit for such a
Personage, God has so plentifully endowed you, that it were better in silence
to pass that over, which I cannot sufficiently commend, then by taking upon
me to illustrate your deserved praises: I might (perchance) seem to derogate
from the worth thereof, by speaking too little (especially being so perspicuous
and eminent to the eyes of all men) that I might justly be taxed with this
proverb; Solemn lucerna ostendere. And it might be said unto me, as Antalcides
Antalcides.
said to an Orator, who had made a long speech in the praise of Hercules; Quis
vnquam sanus eum vituperauit? What man well in his wits ever dispraysed him?
The searcher of hearts knows I speak without flattery, which I ever
detested as a verbal simonie. These my poor labors I commend unto your
Honorable protection: poor (I confess) if you look into the manner of
handling of it, and the substance of the gift. But my desire and hope is, that
it shall find that acceptance with your Honor, that Sinetas handful of water
did with the great Artaxerxes, Artaxerxes.
King of Persia, who kindly received it with alacrity of mind, and serenitie
of countenance, estimating the wikingnesse of the Giver, before the value of
the gift, being the best that the poor man had to offer. And as Pliny Pliny.
says; The poor people that had no Frankencense did offer Milk, and they
that wanted Milk, did offer Salt unto their gods, with good acceptance;
according to the proverb; Mola salsa litant qui non habent thura. The God of
all mercy, power down the riches of his mercies upon your Honor, and multiply
your days upon earth, to the good of the Church and Commonwealth, that you
may long continue a stay and comfort to these Western parts, and after the
race of this mortal life being run, grant you the eternal blessedness of
his heavenly Kingdom. Amen.

Your Lordships in all duty devoted, WILLIAM EST.

THE FIRST SERMON.
Mat. 8. verse. 23.24.25.26. 23. And when he was entered into the ship his
Disciples followed him.

24. And behold there arose a great tempest in the sea, so that the ship was
covered with waves: but he was a sleep.

25. Then his Disciples came, and awooke him, saying; Master, save us: we
perish.

26. And he said unto them, why are ye fearful o ye of little faith? then he
arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea: and so there was a great calm.


THis part of scripture, is historical, and shows the miraculous calming of
an horrible tempest, Christ and his Disciples being in the ship, and therefore
pertains ad genus demonstra^ium.

In the description of this miracle.

1. Certain circumstances are expressed. 2. The tempest it self is described.
3. The calming of the tempest i^ noted. 4. The co^seque^t effects are added.
Analysis or resolution of the first part. Mar: 4.
First the circumstances are set down, whereof the 1. is ab adiuncto tempore,
taken from the time when it happened, when he was entered into the ship, which
was about the evening: the 2. circumstance is a subiecto loco, the place:
namely, the sea: the 3. ab adiunctis. for as S. Mark says, there were also
other ships with him: where per metonymiam subiecti, the hearers of Christ are
understood, which were carried in other ships.


Ordinary means to be used.
Ex. ver. 23. Christ's entering into the ship, that he might sail over unto the
other side of the lake, teaches us, that the ordinary means appointed by
God, i^ they may be used, Mat: 4. Deuteronomy: 6.16. Eccle: 3.27.
are not to be neglected. For it is written, Thou shall not temp^ the Lord thy
God. Mat. 4. Deuteronomy: 6.16. qu^ amat periculu peribit in eo, He that loves danger
shall perish therein. Ecc: 3.27. And Aug (...) quis periculum, in quantum caueri
potest, ^on caueret, ma^is deum tentaret quam in de^m disperaret: for, nunquam
periculum sine ^ericulo vincitur. Aug:
He that auoideth not a dan^er as much as in him lies, rather temoteth God,
then trusts in him. For danger (says Seneca Seneca.
) is never overcome without danger.

2. Again, Like the apples of Sodom which appear beautiful to the eye, but
within are full of stink, and rottennes.
he entered not into a stately Merchants ship, but into a little fishers ^oate,
that he might teach us to contemn ^he pomp and glory of the world: seeing ^he
Lord of al, showed his contempt ther^f, and that we should embrace humility,
and lowlines of mind, which the world holds most co^temptible. The glory of
^his world is like a sower grape, or unripe fruit, which sets ye teeth on
edge: the devil shows the green side, but hides the bitterness, until it
be tasted.

3. In that the Disciples followed Christ into the ship, where they were in
great danger and peril of their lives, we are taught what is the nature of
true love, The nature of true love
to cleave fast unto Christ, as well in adversity, as prosperity, that we
suffer not our selves for any worldly respect to be separated from Christ. The
use is, The use.
that we follow Christ in all temptations and dangers. Among the thorns, that
is, in tribulations, crosses, and afflictions: Christ is soonest found, Cant:
2.2.
which is a Lilie among thorne^ rather then in the Meadows and green pastures
of pleasure. Similie.
But many are lik^ unto the lazy hunting hound, which w^ follow ye game unto
the brake and thorns but no farther, for fear of pricking him self, when yet
the wild beast is ther^ more easily taken: So many will follow Christ in the
joyful and pleasant time o^ prosperity, which in the troublesom^ times of
persecution forsake him. Man^ follow him on the land securely when they fear
no danger, but few in the troubled seas, and stormy waves of adversity, as
the Apostles do, when the sturdie storms of adversity arise, they by and by
shrink away. Simile.
All such I may compare unto those that lend money unto Merchants, upon
condition to be partakers of their gain, but not of their losses.

Here again is represented unto v^ the nature of true friendship which w^
should hold with men in the world, The nature of true friendship.
an^ at all times keep our faith and fidelity with our friend, after the
example of the App: which followed Christ, as well by sea, as land. Pro: 17.
For as that Mirour of wisdom says wisely, A friend loves at all times, and
a brother is borne for adversity. But alas this friendship is too common in
the world, whereof the wise man speaks, Ecc. 6. Ecc: 6.
Some man is a friend for his own occasion, and will not abide in time of
trouble. Again, some friend is but a companion at the table, and in the day of
affliction continues not. This true friendship cannot be but, inter bonos,
among good men, (says Cicero. Cicero.
) And when a man in prosperity is beloved, it is uncertain whether the man,
or his prosperity be beloved; and who so in adversity forsakes his
neighbor, shows plainly that he was never his friend. And so, as Petrach
Petrach.
says truly, non fides est sublata, sed fictio, De remedijs vtriusque fortunae.
His fidelity which he never had, is not lost, but his dissimulation detected.
Such kind of friends love their neighbors as the dog loves his bone, which
is, as long as he finds any flesh or sweetness about it, and when that
fails, Like a dog with his bone.
he forsakes it. I have read a tale, (but it has a true moral) of a certain
man that had three especial friends, whom he invited to dinner, and at the end
of the dinner, set before them three apples, every one in some part corrupt and
rotten; The first friend would not so much as touch them, whom therefore he
rejected from the number of his friends. The second did take one of the apples:
and devoured both the sound part, and rotten together: whom he reputed as a
fool, and therefore unfit for friendship. But the third, did take one of the
apples, and did eat the sound part, but left that which was rotten and
corrupt: and him only of the three, he entertained among the number of his
friends. These three friends, signify sundry kinds of men, whereof some are
so obdurate in malice, that though a man be never so virtuous, Non amo te
(Sabidi) nec possum dicere quare. Martial. Li. 2. Epigram 33.
never so kind, though he have never so many good parts, yet they cannot love
him, speak well of him, nor patiently endure to hear him commended. Such a
one was Saul, who for the praise that the women gave David, after his victory
against Goliath, conceived deadly displeasure against him. 1. Sam: 18. 1. Sam:
18.


There is a second kind of men, that are so infatuated through inordinate ^oue
of their friend, that they approve and defend all the actions of their friend
^ndifferently, good or evil, and know ^ot how to divide the corruptions, from
^he sound parts. There is also a third ^inde, which wisely and discreetly love
^n their neighbors their virtues, but ^ate their vices; commend them in their
well doings, but wink not at their wickedness; and those only are the loyal
and true friends.

The second part.
THus much for the first part, namely, The Analysis of the second part.
the circumstances. Now to the second part, which describes the tempest which
arose Christ being in the ship. The Analysis whereof is:

First he describes it, A causa procreante, which was a great storm of wind,
as the Evangelist: Mar: the 4. and Luc: the 8. do witness.

Secondly, It is described from the effects, the waves dashed into the ship, so
that it was now full (says Marc:) and the ship was covered with waves, Mar.
4.37.
(says this Evangelist.) Third, ab accident, inopinato, that this happened,
Christ being a sheep.

Obser. and doctrines.
First here I observe, (in that the Apostles were no sooner with Christ in the
ship, but presently troubles, dangers, and tempests followed them,) That God in
his merciful providence, permits tribulations and adversities, to fall upon
his best beloved, either to show his greater glory afterward through their
deliverance, or that he might stir up his elect the more to gratitude, and
the love of God. God has respect of three things in afflicting his children,
And surely most sweet is the providence of God toward his children in
afflicting them, and that in three respects; First, for the exercising of the
virtue of patience: Secondly, for their greater provocation to the love of God:
Thirdly, for the more signification of the love of God toward them. For seeing
that patience to every action of godliness, Virtus in arduis.
is no less necessary then is bread to all kind of meats: (because
patience overcomes all difficulties which are naturally incident to the
operation of virtue, as bread gives a relish and taste to all other meats) so
the virtue of patience is ever needful and very necessary, Similies.
as a certain instrument by which we work all other virtues. And even as a
sword which has been ^ong in the scabert, becomes so ru^tie, that sometime
a man is wounded or ^layne of his adversary before he can draw it: So our
patience, if it be not exercised, oftentimes gives the Devil ^eaue to wound
the soul, before it can ^rme it self against any difficulty or ^emptation.
And for this cause God ex^rciseth his children with outward tri^ulations, that
they may be the more strong against all inward temptations: And therefore our
Savior suffered his Disciples to be tossed and endangered on the sea, Simile.
that he might exercise them to patience, against the persecutors of the
faith, or against the assaults of the internal enemies of the soul. That tree
is not solid and firm which stands in the low watery valley, and never
proved the winds and tempests: for the agitation of the winds makes it to
take more firm and deep root. So those men are delicate and weak to suffer
affliction, which were never before practiced in the school of adversity.
Simil.
The Tyro or young soldier, looks pale at the least suspicion of a wound;
but the Veteranus and old soldier, boldly indureth the bloody brunts of
battle: which after blood has often won the field. Simile.
We see the gallant horses, whom nature has framed for the course and wars;
if they be kept long in the stable idle, they become lazy, and full of
diseases, and lame. Iron through use becomes bright.

Assiduo splendore micat, vultuque nitenti,
Audet ad argenti deus aspirare superbum.
Mantua^us.
The iron with continual use, is brandished so bright,
That it contends with silver pure, in luster to the sig^t
But lying long in the earth, it gathers ruste, and is turned into earth: So
virtue, being not stirred up by affliction, droupeth, withers, and fades.
He that is tempted, afflicted, and vexed, whether it be by Satan, Simil.
wicked men, or by God himself striking him: If he be gold, he is purged and
purified: If he be silver, he becomes more bright: If he be iron, he loses
his ruste: ^ut we (says a Father) Quia ferrum po^us quam aurum sumus; Because
we be ^ron, rather then gold, (for the most ^arte) great tribulation is
profitable unto us, for the casting off the ruste of ^nne. And hereby God
shows, that ^hey are more dear unto him, whom ^ee permits, for the good
of their ^oules, to be exercised with affliction. ^or when God was angry with
the Is^aelites, he said; Esa. 5. Esa. 5.
I will lay my ^ineyard waste, it shall not be dug nor ^runed: And this
pruning is by cros^es and tribulations, which makes it ^he more fruitful. S.
Basil.
As Saint Basil very learnedly observes upon that place; The tree that it may
grow and fructi^ie the better, must suffer many incisions, and be despoyled of
many superfluous branches. To conclude, Simile.
the sweet Aromatical gu^mes, except they be bruised with the pestle, yields
not their odoriferous smelles; so many things are there in rerum natura, in
the nature of things, which teach the necessary use of afflictions in the
godly: and lays before our eyes this of the Apostle; Romans 5.
That tribulation brings forth patience, and patience experience

2. That tribulation inciteth us the more to love God, and to cleave vnt^ him,
it is apparent by this place: for the Apostles seeing themselves in danger o^
the sea, ran presently to Christ, an^ awooke him, Hom. 20.
saying; Lord save us, we perish: Well, (says Christ) Deus tribulationes
irruere permittit, vt ad eum frequentius confugiamus; God permits
tribulations to fall upon us, that we may the more of ten fly unto him.

Simile.
As the loving parents, seeing their children often to go from them, and t^
play with their equalles, causes their servants to make them afraid, that
they may run (for fear) into their mother bosom: So God not only suffers
unto be vexed by others, but also himself sometime strikes us, that he may
reduce us unto him, when we sinfully go^ astray from him. Even as the rain
falling into the earth, causes the seed to spring; so tribulation and
affliction, entering into our mind, erecteth our desir^ and love to God. And as
a trauelle^ walks most warily, Simile.
when he trauelleth in dangerous deserts, infested wit^ thieues, but going in
the populous and safe places he is most secure: so in tribulations and
afflictions we gather our selves together, tread more warily in our walks,
consider more attentively the will of God, and implore the aid of God: and so
tribulation exciteth and stirs us up to the greater love of God.

3. Thirdly, tribulations sent from God, are an undoubted sign of his love
toward us; as it is manifest by this history: For what might be more dear
unto Christ then his Apostles? who more innocent? who more holy? which forsook
all, that they might follow Christ. Yet he suffered them to be in peril at
sea, and so to be tossed that the ship was even covered with waves; so that
they were so near unto death, that they might say with David, persecuted by
Saul; There is but a step between me and death: 1. Sam. 20. 1. Sam. 20.
But all this was a token of his love: For when the Lord would prove and crown
his best beloved children, the way to the crown, and the manner of their
probation is affliction and tribulation. God can take from us all things that
are grievous; (as Chrysostom. wisely says; Chrysostom. ad popu. Anti.
Hom. 4 ad popu. Antio.) but until he sees us purged of our sins, and our
conversation upright, he dissolueth not the tribulation. Simil.
The Goldsmith, until he sees his gold purified, takes it not out of the
furnace The Musition leaves not strayning o^ his strings, until he perceives
a perfect consent of harmony: So God takes not away the cloud of affliction,
before he sees the amendment of our lives. Joseph's affliction. Haec Chry. Genesis
37.24.
Joseph was most innocent among all the sons of Jacob; yet all the rest
living quietly at home in prosperity, he only was afflicted: He was cast
into a pit, where he was like to perish with famine: from thence he was
drawn up and sold for a bondslaue to the Ismaelites, Verse 28.
which carried him into Egypt, where again he was sold to Potiphar: Genesis 39.1.
then greuouslie tempted to adultery, which he resisted, keeping most chastely
his fidelity unto God and his Master; Verse 7.20.
yet falsely accused, he was condemned and cast into prison, where he remained a
long time: He was deceived by the ungrateful chief Butler. Genesis 40. Verse. 23.
But to what end was all this affliction? that by this means he might be
exalted by Pharao, and be made lord of Egypt, and that by him, his ^ather,
Brethren, and all the people ^f God might be relieved in the ex^reame of
famine, God is a patient rewarder.
which he could never have done, except he had first suf^ered this affliction
in Egypt. Gods ^akefull providence never failed here^n; as he himself said to
his Brethren; Now then you sent me not hither but GOD; ^ut to what end? to
preserve your posteri^ie in this land, and to save you alive. Genesis 45. Genesis 4^.
Joseph's exaltation.


But see now how bountifully the Lord rewarded every one of these afflic^ions
which he suffered: For the hatred of his Brethren, God gave him favor with
Pharao and his Princes: For that his Brethren contemned and mocked him, saying;
Behold this Dreamer comes, Genesis 37. Genesis 43. Verse. 26. Genesis 4^. Verse.
40.42.43.45.
he was honored of them, bowing down to the ground before him. For his exile,
he was exalted in a strange land: For the labor of his hands in serving
Potiphar, he received a ring from the Kings own hand: For his fetters and
chains in prison, he was houored with a chain of gold: For his parti-colored
coat which his brethren took from him, the King arrayed him with Princely
Roabes: For that he ministered unto them that were bound in prison, in great
dignity he ministered unto the King: For the prison and the dungeon, he was
carried in a Princely Chariot: For that he was despised of all men as a
stranger and a servant, he was honored of all men with bowing knees (...) For
contemning the unlawful pleasur^ of adultery, he took to his wife a Noble
woman: For the loss of his father^ house, he was made Ruler over all Egypt Who
sees not here, that these afflictions that God sends to his faithful
servant Joseph, were signs of Gods tende^ love toward his children, in him,
whereby he advanced him. To conclude, afflictions therefore are signs of Gods
fatherly favor, and not of his hatred to his elect: For the Lord corrects
him whom he loves, as the father does the child^ in whom he delights: Aug.
Pro. 3.12. Pro. 3.12.
Ideo premuntur, vt pressi clament, clamantes exaudiantur, exauditi deum
glorificent. They are therefore afflicted, that being afflicted, they might
call upon God, that calling upon God, they might be heard that being heard,
they might glorify God. And therefore well says Seneca, Seneca.
Miseri sunt qui nunquam miseri fuerunt; They are wretched which never were ^n
misery.

2. This ship, wherein were Christ and his Disciples, The Allegorical sense.
Allegoricallie represen^eth the Church militant in this life: The Church is as
a ship tossed on the most ^urbulent seas of this world: the godly, elect, and
faithful, are carried in this ^hip. The boisterous winds, storms, and waves,
are diverse vexations, tribu^ations, and persecutions, wherewith the godly in
this life are persecuted: and these are raised up of Satan, and his band; as
Tyrants, Persecutors, Heretics, and wicked men, which so rise up in fury
against the Church, that sometime it seems to be oppressed and almost
extinguished, It is to be doubted whether they that commit themselves to the
power of the waters, be to be reckoned among the living.
so that to the world they seem (as Anacharsis Anacharsis.
said once of Nauigators; Dubitatum fuerit, inter viuos ne habendi, qui vitam
vndarum, ventorumque arbitrio committerent. In these storms of afflictions the
godly sometime begin to faint, especially when they see the ship even covered
with waves: But our Archinauclerus is Christ, wh^ sometime seems to sleep,
when he does not presently deliver his children, but suffers them awhile to
be^ afflicted. To him in all our miseries, tanquam ad asylum; as unto a
Sanctuari^ we must fly, and awake him with our prayers, saying; Lord save us.
It is grown into a common proverb; Qui nescit orare discat nauigare; He that
knows not how to pray, let him learn to sail, which our spiritual
navigations, Affliction teaches to pray.
especially in the seas of affliction, teaches; then Christ being stirred up
by prayer, calmeth the tempest of tribulation by the power of his word, and
changes all things into a joyful Catastrophe of tranquillity.

The use The use.
is, that we be not offended at the smalnesse of Christ's number, when we see
the greater part to walk the broad way to destruction; when we see many to
resist the truth; and with Liberius object unto us; Quota pars orbis mortalium
vos estis? What a small part of the world are ye Christians? Christ's flock
is a little flock: Luke 12. Luke 12.
Persecutions (says Nazianzene Nazian.
) Christianismum nobiliorem potius quam debiliorem reddunt: Makes
Christianity rather nobler then weaker. And these are the notes of the true
Church: Ioa. 15.16.

Lord, carest thou not that we perish? Mar. 4. Mar. 4.
Lord how ^ong will thou delay? Psa. 6. Psa. 6.
and Psa. 13. Psa. 13.
How long will thou forget me Lord for ever? How long will thou hide thy face
from me? But in very deed, Psa. 121.
he that keeps Israel will neither slumber nor sleep.

It is surely a wonder (says one) that he, of whom it is said; He that keeps
Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep: Psa. 121. Psa. 121.
is yet now said to sleep. What means this sleep? 1. He sleeps, that he
might show the verity of his humane nature. This was a true, not a counterfeit
sleep, which watching and wearisome labor did enforce; carrying an humane
body, subject to such affections as our mortal bodies are. 2. God is said to
sleep, either when he does not presently help the godly, or punish the
wicked: According to this of the Prophet: Psa. 4.4. Up Lord, why sleep thou*
awake, Psa. 44.
and be not absent from us for ever* Again, he is said to Arise, either when
he delivers the righteous, or destroys the wicked: As he says again*
Psalm. 78. The Lord awaked as one out o^ a sleep, Psa. 78.
and smote his enemies in the hinde^ parts, and put them to perpetual shame.
The Lord therefore is said to sleep, when he seems for a time to wink at
the miseries of the godly, and the wickedness of the ungodly, because he
exercises hereby the patience of his children, and expects the conversion o^
the wicked. Romans 2.
The bountifulnes of the Lord leads thee to repentance: Romans 2. Christ is
said to sleep when faith faints, charity is cooled, and the fear of God
an^ devotion is extinguished in us; then the winds of wicked desires arise; as
ambition, covetousness, etc. which trouble the tranquillity of the mind, and
threaten destruction to the soul, except Christ be awake, by fervent and
faithful prayer.

He can no more forget his elect, then a mother can her child. It is said of
Joseph: Genesis 39. Genesis 39.
That God was with him in prison. For Joseph lost not his faith and hope in
God, neither when he was cast into the pit; neither when he was a bond slave,
neither when he was cast into prison, at which time (in the judgment of man)
God was farthest off from him; yet Gods providence never slept, but followed
him when he was in the pit, and never forsook him in prison, nor in all his
adversities. It was God that held the hand of his angry Master, that he
should not kill him upon suspicion of defiling his wife. And so Gods watchful
eye, though he seemed to sleep, ever waked with Joseph. So was God ever with
Jacob, Genesis 28.13. Genesis 29. Genesis 30. Genesis 31.
in all his brunts of affliction: He was with him in his journey into
Mesopotamia, that he might direct him in the way. He was with him when he
served Laban, that he might multiply his flock. He was with him in his
return, Genesis 33.
least wrathful Laban should draw him back. He was with him at his entering
into his native country, least he should be oppessed by Esau. To conclude,
he was with him when he went down into Egypt, as he promised: Genesis 46.
Genesis 46. I will go down with thee into Egypt, and I will also bring thee up
ag^in^. And thus (brethren) ye see that Gods merciful providence never
sleeps toward his children.

A question.
Why then does he sleep? why does he hide himself? Why does he defer to
help and succor his children in their distress?

The answer
The answer is easy: 1. That being destitute of all succor and help of man,
the godly might acknowledge him to be the only and opportunate helper in all
their affliction: Psa. 9^.15. He shall call upon me, and I will hear him; I
will be with him in trouble and deliver him. Psalm. 91.15.


2. That he might prove them, and the more provoke them to crave his aid.

3. That he might try their constantie; Et quasi igne excoctos iustiores et
puriores faciat. Hiero. sub. Hab.
Hiero. sup. Hab. And as it were by purifying them in the fire, make them more
clean and pure.

4. Then the Lord seems to the godly to sleep, when he permits them so
to be plunged in calamities, that all hope of escaping being taken away, his
mercy may be the more welcome when it comes: Aug.
Vt tardius dans dona sua commendet, non neget; says Aug. That by his slownes
in giving, he might commend, and deny his gifts unto us. Desiderata diu
dulcius obtinentur, cito data vilescunt; Things long desired, are the more
pleasant being obtained, and what is easily gotten, is vilely esteemed.

Again, Aug. in Psa. 55. says; Aug. in Psa. 55.
Forte nauis tua ideo turbatur quia Christus in te dormit; Perchance thy ship
is troubled because Christ sleeps in thee. And Christ sleeps in them whose
faith sleeps; Excita Christum, recole fidem; Awake Christ, recall thy faith.

To conclude this part; This sleep of Christ after the wearisome labors of
his ministry, teaches us: 1. That our natural sleep, that refreshes our
bodies after labor, so it exceed not the mean, is not displeasing unto God.

Quod caret alternare quie durabile no^ est.
Without succeeding rest, be sure
No creature long may toil endure.
2. The verity of his humane nature hereby appears; He hungered: Math. 4. He
was weary: Ioa. 4. He wept: Io. 11. and took upon him all our infirmities,
and was true man, sin only excepted. For these (...) and affections are
competent and agreeable to our humane nature; which makes against the
Marcionites, Maniches, Valentinians, and other such Heretics which deny
Christ's true humanity. 3. That Christ watches over us sleeping, and by his
Angels keeps and preserves us: Psa. 121. and Psalm. 34.

Pars tertia.
The analysis or resolution of the 3. part.
THe alaying and calming of the tempest is described: 1. A causa efficiente
impulsiua, which was the petition of the Disciples: the form whereof is
expressed, verse. 25. this is amplyfied by the adiunct pusillanimitie of the
Disciples. 2. The primarie efficient cause was Christ himself. 3. The manner,
or the isntrumental cause is described, which was the rebuking of the winds
and the sea: the form whereof is set down: Mar. 4.39. Peace and be still.
Lastly, the form of the miracle is expressed, which is, that at the words of
Christ the tempest ceased, which is amplified by the effect and adiunct there;
and there followed a great calm. So much for the analysis, now to the
observations and doctrines.

Observations and Doctrines.
1. First, we are here taught in all dangers, afflictions, and necessities, to
fly unto Christ, and to call upon him by fervent prayer; if we would that
Christ should awake and hear us, it is needful that we our selves should
first be awaked, and devoutly pray unto him: yea for this cause he sends
tribulations, that he might awake and stir us up to consider our misery and
the estate wherein we are, that we might afterward awake God with our prayers.
So dealt he with his beloved Apostles, even he that brings forth the wind
out of his treasures. Ps: 135. it was he that stirred up this tempest, and
struck this fear into his Disciples, that fear might provoke them to pray,
and that their prayer might stir up Christ to show this miracle, whereby they
and all his elect might be the better confirmed in the faith. This promise he
has plighted, this law of mercy he has left unto us: Come unto me all ye that
labor and I will refresh you, call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will
hear you. Mat: 11. Similies.
The Shepherd is quickly stirred up at the voice of his sheep, the loving
mother, at the cry of her child, the hen at the noise of her young, and to
all these God in holy scripture is compared. So King Iehosophat being environed
with an huge host of his enemies, prayed unto the Lord, saying: There is no
strength in us to stand before this great multitude that comes against us,
neither do we know what to do, but to lift up our eyes unto thee, 2. Chro:
20. 2. Chro: 20.
And he obtained of God a marvelous victory. So the Apostle Peter exhorts
1. Pet: 5. 1. Pet. 5.
Cast all your care upon him, for he cares for you, Phil. 4.
and Phillip. 4. be nothing careful but in all things let your request be
showed unto God in prayer and supplication with giving of thank^s: Simile.
For as it grieueth not the nurse whose breasts are full of milk when the
child sucketh them, but rather eases and delights her: so he is not
troublesome to the most plentiful goodness of God, but very acceptable unto
him, which offers unto him occasion to show mercy; this mercy of God most
prone and ready to succor all them that call upon him, the Lord commends
unto the faithful, saying; Mat. 7. Mat: 7.
If ye that are evil can give unto your children good gifts, how much more
shall your heavenly father give good things to them that ask him? A
comfortable consideration.
Who then would ever despair of his cause? who would not expect a most
certain victory, when the judge himself exhorts the Plaintiff to crave,
and prescribes him a form of craving, and promises that he shall easily
obtain? And this does our Judge Jesus Christ, that we might overcome all
difficulties, he exhorts us to ask, he teaches us a form of prayer, and
promises again, and again, Ask and you shall receive. Mat: 7. Mat. 7.


This example of the Disciples therefore teaches us, what we should do when
we are pressed down with the waters of tribulations, which when they saw the
imminent danger of death before their eyes, they cried unto the Lord, sleeping,
Lord save us, we perish: for prayer is the common refuge of humane infirmities.
And therefore a certain ancient father (as Theodoret reports) said; that
Physicians did use many kinds of medicines, Prayer the medicine for all
maladies.
according to the variety of the diseases of their Patients but for the
expelling of all diseases o^ the soul, for the undergoing of all
discommodities of this life, prayer is the only remedy and common medicine
because it draws the omnipotent Go^ unto it, who only is the sovereign
medicine, for every malady. The efficacy of prayer, the ancient Fathers could
never sufficiently commend: Augustine called Prayer clauem coeli, Aug: ser:
226. de temp. 1. Regum. 18.38.45.
the keye of Heaven. With this keye Eliah opened heaven, and brought down fire
which consumed the sacrifice, and also with his prayers, caused the heaven to
power down rain to make the earth fruitful. An other calls prayer tabulam
naufragorum, the table or planke for such as suffer shipwreck in the seas of
temptations of thi^ life, Chrysostom.
which in the dangerous seas and waves of this world carries us safe unto the
haven of all happiness. Chrysostom^ calls it animae solemn, the sun of the
soul because as the sun inlightneth the world, so prayer illuminateth the
mind. Innumerable almost are the examples both in holy scriptures, and other
writers of all ages, which manifest the wonderful efficacy of prayer, but at
this time, this shall suffice.

2. Ex. verse. 26. In that the Lord reproved his Disciples, for their
distrustful fear, saying, Why are ye fearful o ye of little faith? We are
taught in the midst of our tribulations and miseries, never to suffer our
confidence and trust in God to quail. The Disciples were not without faith,
for in this present danger they called upon the Lord, which they could never
have done, except they had believed that he could have helped them. Yet their
faith was but little, as it appears by their distrustful fear: for as
perfect love casts out all fear, Io: 4.
so a perfect faith expels all timorous distrust, and cries with the
Prophet, Ps: 27. Ps: 27.
The Lord is my light and salvation, whom then shall I fear? the Lord is the
str^ngth of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? Some by the word [faith]
understand, confidence or trust, and take it metonymicos, whereby the cause is
taken for the effect, for a strong faith brings forth confidence. And
therefore some translate it, exigua fiducia praediti, endued with little
confidence. And worthily our Savior reproved them of their diffidence: for
they that had seen so often the Divinity and power of Christ, confirmed with
so many miracles, what cause had they to fear? as if he were not the same God
on the seas as on the land: And surely many such there are at this day, which
though they have oftentimes, proved Gods aid in their tribulations, yet if any
new thing happen unto them, they by and by murmur against God, and distrust his
goodness: and as the world is changed with them, so withal their confidence is
changed. Such were the distrustful speeches of the wicked, which are
mentioned, Ps: 78. Psalm. 78.
They speak against God, saying; Can God prepare a table in the wilderness? he
smote indeed the rock that the waters gushed out, but can he give bread also,
or prepare flesh for his people?

We see that sometime it chances among men, that an enemy (if he be of any
generous and heroical nature) succoureth an enemy, that in extremity flies
unto him for succor, reputing it an honor unto him; How much more will God
protect and defend them which humbly fly unto him in their extremities and
miseries? Let us therefore hold fast in all our miseries, our confidence in
God, as an answer of the soul both sure and stedf^st Heb: 6. Heb. 6.
And again, he said unto them which suffered for Christ's sake, the spoiling of
their goods: Cast not away your confidence which has great recompense of
reward, Heb: 10. Heb. 10.
Surely all godly men, in their greatest affliction, hold fast this
confidence. So holy Job in the midst of his calamities said: Though he should
slay me, yet will I trust in him: Job. 13. Job. 13.


It is recorded by Aeneas Siluius, Aeneas Siluius in histo. Bo^.
in histo: Bohem. of Wenceslaus, King of Bohemia, that when his great army was
vanquished, his power subdued, and himself taken prisoner: being asked how it
fared with him, answered never better, for when I was guarded and environed
with the aid of man, I had scarce any leisure to think upon God: but now
being destitute of all humane succors, I fix my whole hope in God, who I know
will not forsake me, bu^ will hear me when I call upon him.

3. Out of verse. 26. That faith in al^ the Saints is not alike, and in the sam^
quality, but in some more and stronger^ and in some less and weaker. This
infirmity of the Disciples is not set down^ to this end, that we should
flatter ou^ selves in the like weakness, but that w^ should labor by all
means to stir up and strengthen our faith by prayer, hearing of the word,
holy meditations, etc.

This example yields most sweet consolation to the weak and fearful
consciences: for even as Christ does not reject his Apostles ob: (...), so the
Lord does not despise the weak faith which apprehends Christ the Mediator,
as his object, though it be not yet of the strongest. Let none therefore
despair of the goodness of God. For a bruised reed shall he not break. Esa:
42. Esa: 42.
but pray with the father of the possessed, Mrac: 9. Marc: 9.
Lord help my unbelief: and with the Apostles, Luc. 17. Luc: 17.
Lord increase our faith: and then will God make us perfect, confirm,
strengthen and stablish us. 1. Pet. 5. 1. Pet. 5.


Let us beware therefore of diffidence, and distrust, and by all means abandon
all doubtfulnes of Gods grace, mercy, and free remission of our sins. To
distrust is, First to make God a liar. 1. Ioh. 5.10. 1. Ioh. 5.10.
2. It fights ex diametro, against faith ^n Gods promises, Rom: 4.16. Rom:
4.16.
and the ^ath of Almighty God, Ezech. 33.11. Ezech. 33.11.
Ioh. 5.24. Ioh. 5.24.
Third, it is directly repugnant ^o the true justifying faith, which is (...)
and Hypostasi^, Heb: 11.1. Heb. 11.1.
and is opposed to doubtfulnes, Mat: 21.21. Mat: 21.21.
against which very pithily speaks S. Bernard: Tria considero in quibus tola
spes ^nea consistit, charitatem adoptionis, S. Bern:
verita^em promisionis, potestatem redditionis, etc. I consider three things in
which my whole hope consists, A sweet consideration.
Gods love in adopting me, the truth of his promise, and his power to perform:
let now my foo^ish cogitation murmr as much as it will, saying; What art
thou? or how great ^s that glory? or by what merits do ^hou hope to obtain
it? Et ego fiduciali^er respondeo, Scio, Credo, Certus sum; But (...) will
answer confidently; I know, I ^eleeue, I am certain, quia in Charitate ^imia
adoptauit me, quia verax in permissione quia potens in exhibitione, Because in
his abundant love he has accepted me: Because he is true of his promise:
Because he is of power to perform.

5. In that the waters at the word and command of Christ were silent, calm and
still; as it is an undoubted argument of Christ's Divinity, that he is the
true, eternal and omnipotent God. We read of X^rxis the mighty Monarch of
Persia, that being about to pass over the sea of Hellesponte, struck and
beat the waves with his rod, charging them, that they should not presume to
rise and swell against him, but to be calm; but the waters yielding no
reverence to the king, nor obeying his ridiculous charge, kept their natural
course: But Christ the Monarch of heaven, who has prescribed to the waters
their bounds which they shall not pass, Psalm. 104.9. Ps: 104.9.
whose word, the fire, and hail, snow and vapors, stormy wind and tempest
do execute, Ps: 148.8. Ps: 148.8.
commands the wind and seas, and all his creatures, and they obey him. Let
us say therefore with David, the Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man
can do unto me.

6. To conclude, we have here a most sweet testimony of the clemency of our
good God, who after the terrible te^pests of tribulations, sends a joyful
calm of tranquillity and peace: So our Savior here, did not only hear his
Disciples calling upon him and delivered them out of all danger, but also
showed his divine power in commanding the winds and the sea, and his admirable
goodness and love, which in our greatest miseries is nearest at hand to help
us. This happy end, and catastrophe of our calamities and temptations, our
loving God effects, if we truly trust in him, Ye shall weep and lament
(says he to his elect) but your sorrow shall be turned into joy, Ioh. 16.22.
Ioh. 16.22.
Again, ^or a little while have I forsaken thee, but with ^reat compassion I
will gather thee, Esa: 54.7. Esa: 5.7.
This is the great calm that follows ^he tempests of Gods Children. So
To^ias after his blindness received again ^is sight, passed the rest of his
life in joy, and saw his childrens children. Tob. 14. Tob: 14.
^o the Lord rewarded his servant Job, and after all his grievous plagues and
losses, ^estored him twice so much: and after this ^^ued Job an hundredth
years, and saw his ^^nnes, and his sons sons, even four gene^ations, Job
vltim. Job: vltim.
So Joseph after his exile (...) imprisonment, was advanced to great honor: So
David after the long persecution of Saul: So Jacob after his long sorrow for
the loss of Joseph, found exceeding joy and prosperity, Genesis 45. Gen: 45.
So the conflicts of the godly against the flesh, the devil and allurements of
the world, which are storms, tempests, and winds, wherewith they are tossed,
on the vaste sea of this world, and endangered so that if Christ sleeps in
them, they begin to sink, unless by fervent prayer, they stir up their faith
and confidence in him, that he may command and rebuke the winds, that there
may follow this pleasant and wished calm. This duty of piety if we perform,
we may joyfully say with the Prophet, Ps. 18.6. Psalm: 18 6.
In my trouble I did call upon the Lord, and cried unto my God, and he heard my
voice out of his Temple, and my cry did come before him, even into his ears.
Again, Psalm: 94.
Ps: 94.49. In the multitude of the sorrows which I had in my heart, thy
comforts have refreshed my soul.

The fourth part.
THe fourth part, contains the consequent effects of this miracle. verse. 27.
First, the peoples admiration of Christ's power, Secondly, their extolling and
commending of the same, by adding an exclamation, and prosopopaeia: To which
the Evangelists S. Mark and S. Luke, adds a third, namely, their exceeding
fear. Marc. 4.41. Luc: 8.25.

Observations and Doctrines.
7. Out of verse: 27. By the example of the people which marvelled and admired
at Christ, vt hominem dormi^ntem, Chrysostom: in opere imp^rs: hom: 23.
Deum imperantem, and creaturam obedientem, says Chrysostom, sleeping as a
man, commanding as a God, and the creature obeying, and extolling the Majesty
and power of Christ: we are taught not curiously to search the wonderful
works of God, or carelessly to consider of them, but in true simplicity of
heart, to admire and reverence them, and learn thereby the true fear of God,
who is so wonderful in all his works, for scrutator maiestatis, opprimitur a
gloria; says Prosper: de vocation: Prosper. de vocatione. Genesis
gen: the curious searcher of the Majesty is oppressed of the glory. And by
the humble man that knocks by prayer has the door opened unto him to find,
which the rash searcher into Gods secrets, in the proud spirit of curiosity,
shall never be able to find out, Bern: super Cant: 24.
says S. Bern:

8 Again, let us learn here to obey him to whom all insensible creatures
yield obedience. Hereof speaks the primeable Prophet, Psalm. 148.8. Ps. 148.8.
Praise ye the Lord, fire and hail, snow and vapors, stormy wind, which
execute his word. And is it not a wonder that all creatures with such readiness
and constancy, show their obedience to the Creator, and that man for whose
sake they were all created, should in an ungrateful and obstinate mind,
perfidiously deny obedience to the Lord?

Therefore the Prophet Esa. 1. verse. 2. Esa: 1. verse. 2.
that he might tax this shameful obstinacy of man's heart, calls heaven and
earth to witness against him, Hear o heavens, and hearken o earth, etc. the ox
knows his owner, and the ass his masters crib, but Israel has not known,
etc. As if he had said: all you (o my Creatures) are obedient unto my voice,
only man is of a stubborn and disobedient heart, and ye shall all be
witnesses against him; I commanded the sea, and it was divided in two parts,
so that the Israelites went through as on dry land, the waters giving them
free passage, Exodus: 14. Exodus: 14.
I commanded the earth, and it opened her mouth and swallowed up rebellious
Korah, Dathan, and Abyram, Number: 16. Numb. 16.
At my command the fire came out and consumed the sons of Aaron, Leuit: 10.
Leuit. 10.
I commanded the Sun at the prayers of Ioshuah, and it stood still in the midst
of heaven to give a glorious victory unto my people: Josh: 10. Ioshu: 10.
The earth trembled and quaked, (says the Prophet) the foundations also of the
mountains moved and shook because he was angry Ps: 18.7. Ps: 18.7.
when Christ suffered, the sun was darkened, the rocks claue asunder, Math: 27.
Mat: 17.
yet the heart of man harder the^ the very stones will not be mollified.

Let man learn then obediently to serve the Lord, The use.
and carefully frame himself to keep his commandments, to whom the earth,
the sea, and the winds, the elements, and all unreasonable creatures obey, and
execute his will.

Let us learn here to magnify, extol, The use.
and praise the Lord, as often as we behold his goodness, mercy and love toward
us, when he keeps us in dangers, delivers us in tribulations, takes us out
of the hands of our enemies, and protecteth us from the rage and power of
Satan, and incessantly, laud and glorify his name, who has called us out of
darkness into his marvelous light, 1. Pet. 29. 1 Pet. 29.


9 Lastly, we have here a testimony of the wonderful providence of God, which
plainly appears in this place, in confounding openly in the malignant
practices of Satan, the immortal enemy of God, and mankind, and converting
all his pernicious enterprises (maugre his rage and fury) to the benefit of
his Church, and the good of his elect. In this tempest at sea, Satan's practice
was utterly to root out the name of the Lord and his glory, by drenching his
ship in the floods, and drowning his followers. But by the admirable providence
of God it came to pass, that this tempest ministered matter of illustrating the
glory of Christ, and extolling of his Godhead: For when Christ rebuked the
winds, quieted the tempest, and calmed the sea; the people ravished with the
admiration of his divine majesty, and astonished, cried out, what man is this
that commands, and both winds and sea obey him? So the Devil thought by his
cursed ministers, to bury Christ with the glory of his name in the sepulcher,
when they made the Sepulcher sure with the watch, and sealed the stone: Mat.
27.^6. Mat. 27.^6.
But all this (the wisdom of God so disposing) was so far off from the
obscuring of Christ's glory, that it made for the manifesting of the same,
Mat. 28. verse. 4.11.
and confirmed the certainty of his resurrection, when the Keepers for fear
of him being astonished, ran into the City, and showed unto the High Priests
all the things that were done: Mat. 28. verse. 4. and 11. Wherefore in all our
miseries and afflictions, and in the furies of Satan and his instruments,
whiles we are tossed on the tempestuous seas of this life, let us with an
assured confidence fly unto the Father of all mercies and consolation, awake
him with our faithful and devout prayers, who only knows how, and is
willing and able to alay all the strormes of this troublesome life, give a
joyful issue to our temptations, and at length to conduct us to the safe
shores and happy haven of eternal happiness, where is the fullness of joy;
and at his right hand are indeficient pleasures for evermore.

To whom with the Soon and the holy Ghost, three persons in one most glorious
Trinity, one God in unity, might and Majesty, be ascribed all honor,
praise, power and dominion, now and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
THE IVDGES AND IVRIES INSTRVCTION.

WITH A WARNING TO Witnesses to shun the horrible sin of Perjury: The
greatness whereof is here laid before them: Very neeessary for these times.

By WILLIAM EST, Preacher of Gods word.

Zechariah: 5.4. I will bring forth a curse (says the Lord of Hosts) and it
shall enter into the house of the thief, and into the house of him that
falsely swears by my Name; and it shall remain in the midst of his house,
and shall consume it with the timber thereof, and stones thereof.

LONDON. Printed by T. Creed, for Arthur Johnson, Dwelling at the sign of the
white Horse in Paul's Churchyard. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, William Hinson Esquire, grace and peace, in the
Prince of peace Jesus Christ.
Right Worshipful,
I Have once again launched forth from a safe Haven into a turbulent and
tempestuous sea of Men's humors; and exposed my self afresh to the carping
censure of hatesome Critical Loylus, and filthy Black-mouthed Momus, whose
virulent tongue is no fuller of poison then the venomous Viper; and the
kindness of their lips no better then the vomit ^f Aspes: a profane and
degenerate gene^ation, ever readier to find two faults in another, then to
amend one in themselves. But because in my other works I have proclaimed ^pen
defiance unto such (but for modesty sake without name) and mean, if they
persist in their impious and irreligious humor, the next time to labor to
purge out their poison with a dram of Mythredatim, and anatomize their names
in print. In a work which I have in hand; entitled, The Anatomy of a
Christian.
At this time I think them not worthy of farther speech, but only in my
prayers. I confess, silence had been more secure: yet may I freely protest,
that no conceit of mine own gifts, nor the affectatio^ of the vain applause
of men's mouths, but an unfeigned desire to do good (according to my poor
talent) and that by all means, in the Church of God (being also heartned by
the good acceptance of my former labors, with the well inclined, and the
profit and comfort they ingeniouslie confess they have reaped thereby) has
encouraged me to proceed herein. This (Right Worshipful) I presumed to
censecrate, and dedicate unto you, as a pledge of my good will and
thankfulness, for many your kind favors; and especially (which I shall never
drench in oblivion) your readiness in supporting my honest and just cause:
nay, Gods cause, against certain ignorant, W. Iohnes.
proud, and malicious Opposites, which make a show of godliness, but have
denied the power thereof: which speak of sanctification with unsanctified
lips: For which (I doubt not) as also for your love to religion, good to your
country, protection of the oppressed, etc. there is a reward laid up for you
in heaven, even an immarcessible Crown of glory. If this (as indeed it is
not) be not answerable to your worth, impute it not (I beseech you) unto my
will, but rather to my want of ability, being loath to be branded with the more
then barbarous note of ingratitude, which I ever detested, cane peius and
angue, knowing the old proverb; Omnia dixeris si ingratum dixeris. Now I
beseech the God of peace to sanctify you, that your soul and body may be
kept blameless unto the day of the Lord.

Your Worships in all duty, WILLIAM EST.

THE IVDGES AND IVRIES INSTRVCTION.
Ioh. 7.51 Ioh. 7.51.
Does our law judge a man before it hear him and know what he has done?


TO omit all circumstances of time, place and persons: This question (as our
Masters of Logic say) may be resolved into a proposition: or (as ^e
Rethoritians say) implies a proposi^^on with an absurdity upon the contra^^e:
As that, Genesis 18. Genesis 18.25.
Shall not the Judge (...) all the world do right? and Romans 6.1. Romans 6.1.
shall we continue in sin that grace may a^^und? God forbid. So that it is
in effect ^s if he had said; Our law does not ^^dge any man before it hear
him, and ^now what he has done. Wherein observe three things.

The division.
1. That the law must judge, or the Judge by the law: Does our la^ judge? and
this requires in the Judge knowledge of the law, and obedience to the law. 2.
What is the subject of this judgment which must be judged? a Man: which
teaches the Judge to to judge warily, and without respect of persons
impartiallie. 3. The order that the law requires in judgment; To hear the
man speak for himself, and to know wha^ he has done.
For the first, the written law, ho^ good soever it be, is dead in it self
like a sword laid up in scabert, or precious Ointment shut up in a box: The
Magistrate therefore is added, to reuiu^ this dead body of the law, 1. King.
17.21.
as Elias di^ the child being dead, by stretching himself upon it: By which
conjunction, the law becomes a Magistrate, and the Magistrate a law: The
Magistrat^ lends a mouth to the law to speak and the law teaches him a rule
to spea^ aright. So that hence this point is mad^ plain; The law must judge by
the Magistrates mouth, and the Magistrate by the law, as the mouth by the
heart. This may be gathered by the words of Nichodemu^ here, when he makes the
law the Judge; Does our law judge a man before it hear him, and know what he
has do^^? by the mouth of the Judge, or the Judge, according to the law. And
therefore the Lord commands Joshua to meditate in the law day and night,
Joshua. 1.
and not to let it depart from him. Which also is meant of the Judicial law;
And an argument hereof are Paul's words to Ananias; Act. 23.
God shall smite thee thou whited wall; for thou fittest to judge me according
to the law, and command me to be smitten contrary to the law. Wherein we
learn two things: 1. That the Magistrate is set in place of Justice, to judge
according to the law. 2. That therefore the sin is great to judge beside the
law; but to judge contrary to the law, deserves to be smitten of God
himself. Neither must we think that this law of the Jews, had only this
prerogative: for every good law has the same that the Civil law has: lib.
40. institut de officio Iudicis.
As Justinian shows; lib. 40. institut. intitulo de officio Iudicis: Where,
in the very first words he faith; Imprimis illud obseruare debet Iudex ne
aliter iudicet qua^legibus, etc. The Judge ought especially to observe, that he
judge no otherwise then by the laws, etc.

And that the laws in several countries had the same authority, may appear
by Eschines Oration; Echines.
wherein he affirms, that the Athenian Magistrates were sworn thereto.
Whereunto it seems, Themistocles Themistocles.
in Plutarch had reference, when Simonides Simonides.
the Poet requested him to give sentence with him in a matter unjust, answered;
Neque tu bonus poeta si praeter musicae modulos caneres, neque ego Iudex iustus
si contra leges pronunciem: Neither art thou a good Poet, if thou violate the
rules of music; neither am I an upright Judge, if I give sentence against law.

I stand not here (though I might) to discuss that subtle question, disputed
in the schools; Whether is to be preferred before other, the Law or the
Magistrates? We are rather to give God thanks that we have such good laws,
and with all, good Magistrates to put them in execution, and to judge according
to the law: Neither yet do I so mussell the mouth of the Magistrates, as that
when the law is defective he should be mute: but this I say, when the law is
not defective, the Magistrate should judge according to the law. And hence it
follows that the Judge ought to know the law, and to obey the law. I need not
(Right Honorable) to mention your knowledge in the law: but the thing that I
would put you in mind of, is; That you would persist to be as you are
obedient to the law, in judging by the law. And here would I give you but the
same counsel as Claudian once gave to the Emperor Honorius. Claud. in consul.
4. Hono. panegy.


Vt te totius medio telluris in orb,
Viuere cognoscas, cunctis tua gentibus esse
Facta palam, etc.
Nec tibi, quid liceat sed quid fecisse decebit,
Occurrat, mentemque domet respectus honesti.
Remember that you live in the public view of the world, An excellent
counsel.
and that your actions are open to the eyes of all men: therefore think not
what lies in your power to do, but what is fit, and seemly for you to do,
and let the due respect of honesty rule your mind, and suppress your
passions.

All men's eyes are sixth upon you; if you keep the law, all will be the sooner
induced to do the same. And as Cicero says; Omnes legibus serui esse debemus
vt liberi esse possimus.

Which you shall do the better, if you consult and advise often with the law,
and not trust too much to your habitual knowledge: for though you may judge
right to others, yet it may be a sin unto your selves, and not rightly,
except it be upon your knowledge that it is law: for none is just, but he that
knows he does justly. And thus much for the first point; That the law must
Judge.

2. The second thing is the subject of this Judgment, which must be judged; A
man: and this requires in you both wariness, in that you must judge so
excellent a creature as Man; and imparcialitie, in that you must judge a Man
without respect of any state or condition whatsoever, but only as a man, and
for the excellency of man. To omit all co^mendations that the Philosophers
gather, and only as Caleb and Joshua, to show you but a cluster of these
grapes: the making of the least creature in the world (in that betwixt being,
and not being, there is no proportion) required as great a power as God
Almighty, so that each creature in the world is, if not Imago, yet vestigium
dei, a print of God; Genesis 1.26.
yet in Gen: shall we find, that of all other creatures God said let them be,
and they were: only when he comes to make man, does as it were (to signify
the excellency of the work he had in hand) call a counsel and says: Let us
make man, not as other creatures; a dark resemblance of us, but in our own
likeness and similitude. So that the whole work of the creation, is by some
compared unto a chain, reaching from earth to heaven, wherein man as he looks
up to God, is ranged in order with his fellow creatures, but as he looks down
upon the earth is Lord and chief of all. Dyonisius
But least some should reply, that these privileges belonged only to man in
his estate of innocence, but now they belong not to him, nor any such
excellency, no more then the kingdom of Sicilia to Dionysius, when he taught
in the school. I answer: As it is lost in one, so it is lost in every man
which is sufficient for this purpose; but that it is not absolutely lost in
any, Ge n:
God himself witnesses, Gen: 9. Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his
blood be shed, for in the Image of God has he made him. Mat: 2.16.
Consider now with what warines you should judge man, such an excellent
creature, even the image of God. This remembered, would have kept Herod from so
hasty murdering of so many harmeles infants, and the bloody Spaniardes from
their more then savage murdering of the poor Indians. The cruelty of the
Spaniards toward the Indians.
And surely I should hardly believe it, were it not reported by a Bishop of
their own, one Bartholomeus, how that in the conquest of the west Indies, they
were accustomed to slay the Indians to feed their dogs withal. This is so
horrible and contrary to man's nature, that me thinks it should be incredible.
But if they were so savage toward them that were men as well as they, but that
they wanted a little instruction, how would they (think you) deal with us
whom they count Heretics, and worse then Infidelles? But to return to the
point; The ancient Romans (for in the latter time they were more corrupted)
shall rise in judgment against those Magistrates which regard not as they
ought, what they judge. Ttus 9. flam.
Titus Flam: amongst them was put out of his office and disgraded, for that he
caused a man that was before condemned, to be hanged in his parlour. A man's
life is not a matter to be played with, or iested at: and this is that which
God would admonish his people of, Deuteronomy: 17. Deuteronomy: 17.
that their Judges should be of their own people and brethren, even men like
themselves, and not strangers, but of Gods people, instructed in his law, which
well knew the excellent subject of judgment, which is (Man) Gods most
excellent creature. Psalm: 8.4.
As did king David when in the deep consideration thereof he said, What is
man, say I, that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man, that thou
visitest him? Howbeit, far be it from me that I should seek to hinder the
severity of Justice: I know that there is no cruelty so bad, as that which
sometimes masketh under the name of mercy: and I know also that our age rather
requires severity then lenity, and fewer would do evil upon if they saw
punishment duly executed upon malefactors. But as the Judges ought to be
upright in all causes, so chiefly in matters of blood, for fear nor favor to
wink at murder, that when such a one is convicted before them, they may say
with the Elders of Israel, Our hands have not shed his blood, neither have our
eyes seen it. Deuteronomy. 21.
For if the Judge be partial herein, though he did no violence, yet his eyes
have seen it, and winked at it, and he said nothing. A notable example to this
purpose we have, 1. Reg: 20. where God sent this message unto the king of
Israel, because he let Benhadas go, whom God had appointed to die, thy life
shall go for his life, and thy people for his people. 1. Reg. 20.
But this is it I commend unto your Lo: which was so much praised in Sulpicius,
Sulpicius
of whom it is said, that he never judged any man unadvisedly, nor ever took
pleasure in the just execution of judgment: but his tears were often seen to
trickle from his eyes when he pronounced judgment of death upon any man. A^
Eagles (...) h^^d.
So when you come as Chirurgions to lance by law corrupt members, that the
sound part may be preserved, you must come, though with an eagles eye, and a
Lions heart, yet with a Ladies hand, and judge man as man: that is, as an
excellent creature, warily: yet as a man without partiality, boldly. In that
dangerous time when Gr^ece had almost lost her liberty, Adimantus and
Themistocles.
Animantus reproved by Themistocles because he was too slack: he answered,
that such were beaten commonly in the Olimpian games which were too forward;
yea quoth Themistocles, sed nec eos quise subdu^unt coronat quisquam, but none
crowns them that convey themselves out of the way.

Adimantus noted Themistocles of rash audacitie, and he again accused the
other of timerousnes, who detracted to fight when opportunity served. I wished
your Lo: to make no more haste then good speed, and now I must beseech you not
to stay when you should go forward, not to stay judgment though it be against
mighty men, though it may be you may have some to lay hold on the skirt of
your gown to stay you: not to punish in one, what you will spare in an other:
A fearful Judge that stands in fear of the mighty, will be swaied by the
authouritie of the mighty, and is made such a slave to his affections, that
the least thing will corrupt him. Thus says the mirror of wisdom, Pro: 28.
To have respect of persons is not good, for such a one will transgress for a
morsel of bread. Surely there is not one point in the Judges office whereunto
the scripture speaks more then to this. Iehosophat placing judges over
Israel, 2. Chron: 19.
exhorted the^ saying: Let the fear of God be upon you, take heed and do it:
for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, neither respect of persons,
nor taking reward. This is also commanded by God, Leuit: 19. Leuit: 19.
Deuteronomy: 1. Deuteronomy: 1.
You shall have no respect of persons in judgment, but shall hear the small
as well as the great, ye shall not fear the face of man. And the reason is
added: for the judgment is Gods. And it is the same that Christ says in this
chap: ver: 23. Judge not according to the appearance, but judge with righteous
judgment. Neither is it only unlawful to judge partially, but also
unprofitable in the end, for it has ever the curse of God, and the people
pursuing it. Pro: 24.
As Solomon teaches, saying; It is not good for to have any respect of person
in judgment: for he that says to the wicked, thou art righteous, him shall
the people curse, and the multitude shall abhor him: And for the curse of
God, Esa: 5. Esa: 5.
Woe be unto him that calls good evil, and evil good, ver. 20.
which put darkness for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for
sweet, and sweet for sower. Plutarch says, that the Thebans a very prudent
kind of people in Greece, were wont to painte in their temples this form of
an upright Senate, the Judges sitting without eyes and hands, as accounting it
no matter if they wanted both eyes and hands, if they had a tongue and ears,
inferring thereby, an incorrupt judgment.

Cur sine sunt manibus? capiant ne xenia, Alciatus. Emble. 144.
nec se
Pollicitis flecti, muneribusque sinant.
Why want they hands? to signify that bribes they should not take,
Nor yet with promises be won, true justice to forsake.
S. Bernard says: S. Ber^ad Eugenium lib: 2.
that a good Judge should fear God, and nothing but him, and look for nothing
in regard of his judgment but from God. Ageselaus, though otherwise a good
Prince, yet he had this noted in him as a great blemish to his justice, A great
blemish in Ageselaus.
that he wrote to the Judge in the behalf of his friend Nicias, that if Nicias
be not guilty, dimit^e hominem, acquit him; if he be found guilty, mihi
dimitte, acquit him for my sake: and howsoever it be, omnino dimitte, yet
acquit him. Pericles was wont to say, that when he put on him the person of a
Judge, Pericles.
he put off the person of a friend: so that this is plain, that no respect of
man is to be had, especially in matters of right and wrong. And this is the
cause that Nichodemus raised up this proposition, from the particular, to the
general, not saying [this man] but [a Man] any man whatsoever. For as the
proverb is, Let the Devil have his right. Cyrus in Zenophon Cyrus in Zenoph:
being made a Judge, thought he did justly, when he gave the longest cloak to
the tallest man, and the shorter to the little man: but he was beaten for it,
and taught to give each man his own without regard of conueniencie. I speak
not this as if there should not be distinction of laws for several estates,
others for Noble men, and others for common persons, but where the law makes no
difference, there in Anacharsis spiders web, the little flies must not be
caught, and the great drones must go through: Galbas judgment memorable.
Nay if Gentlemen offend their offense is worse. Therefore Galbaes judgment was
most excellent, when he was ruler of Aragon, and had adjudged a gentleman to be
hanged: he pleaded that he was a gentleman, and therefore should have more
favor then a common person: you shall says Galba^ for you shall not be hanged
on the common gallows, but you shall have one of purpose made for you, higher
then the other: and it shall be carved and painted too if you will. I stand not
on the circumstances, so the substance be performed. And so with this noble
pattern of Justice, I end this 2. point, which is the subject of judgment,
[a Man] which teaches the Judge, to judge warily, and without respect of
persons.

3. The third thing is the order to be observed in judgment, which is
expressed in these words: Before it h^are him and know what he has done Where
we are taught, that (first in general,) inquiry and knowledge must go before
judgment: 2. in particular, that this inquiry must be to know what the man
has done 3. How we must come to know this, by hearing him speak for
himself. Adam to know what he had done, before he pronounced sentence upon
him. Gods eyes cannot be blinded, for he beholds all things, yet herein he
deals with man, as if he himself were not God; to teach the Gods on earth,
which see but in part, how they should proceed in judgment: and this he
teaches: Deuteronomy. 1.16. Deuteronomy: 1.16.
First hear, and then judge the controversies between your brethren. And
Deuteronomy: 13. they are willed in causes of idolatry, in every City to make
diligent inquiry whether the report be true. This being so, where shall the
unrighteous Judge appear, which judges before the inquiry? The example of
Piso is very incommendable, who when a soldier returned into the camp
without his fellow with whom he went forth, condemned him forthwith to death,
as a murderer of his fellow: who coming in as he was going to execution, A
tyrannous, and cruel senence.
the Centurion that led him, brought both back again to Piso; who being
incensed therewith, commanded all three to be put to death. He shall die (says
he to the Centurion) because he is condemned: and the other for that he was the
cause that he was condemned; and thou because thou did not obey my
judgment in putting him to death. This was a cruel judgment, but the cause
hereof we see to be for want of inquiry before. Very memorable is the example
of Phillip of Macedon, Philip of Macedon.
who sitting in judgment to hear the cause of Ma^haetes, but being
dormitabundus, drousie and not sufficient attentive to the equity of the law,
gave sentence against him. But when Machaetes cried out that he would appeal
from that sentence; Erasmus.
The king very angry, stood up and said; To who^ will thou appeal from me?
He an^wered, to thy self (o King) if thou will ^wake and way my cause aright;
finding ^hen, upon better consideration, that he ^ad done him injury, revoked
not his ^entence, but paid himself the money wherein Machaetes was condemned.
What ^n example is this of patience, modera^ion and love of Justice in a Prince?

and tra^sgression of the law, for the intention of the heart Gods law only can
take hold of, and they intrude themselves into Gods office, which seek to
enquire of this: But this is it I say, that the law of man is to judge of the
outward action: and yet I grant that the action is to be considered as it
comes from the heart, for one and the same thing may be done by one well, and
by an other ill, so that we must in the action, consider the substance with the
quality, and therefore we enquire whether a man did take a thing away
felloniously or not; for sometime and in some case, the intention may alter the
consideration of the action, as in case of defense: but this is true, sine
causa nemo iust^ punitur, sine culpa nemo.

3 The manner to know what the man has done, is by hearing him speak for
himself, for it is not just only to hear^ the plaintiff speak, but the
defendan^ must also. This God taught in coming down to see Gomorah before he
destroyed it. Joshua: 7.
So Joshua could not judge Achan before he had confessed the fault and this is
not only Gods law, but the law of Nations, Act: 24.
as of the Romans, a^ Festus proceeding against Paul shows* Act: 24. And of
the Athenians, as Demosthenes notes in an Oration. Where he urges it, as part
of the duty of a Judge to hear both parties: Audi alteram partem.
and this is it which Alexander was so much commended for, who was wont to stop
one ear when he heard the Plaintiff, and being asked why he did so, answered,
alteram ^e^ntegram seruo, I keep the other free for the Defendant. And this is
the practice in matters of right and wrong. Wherein I would beseech you Lo: to
put in mind these skillful pleaders and Lawyers, that they remember the trust
that is reposed in them, that they do not as many that will not speak at all:
and why? (...), bos in lingua. Or as the proverb that sprang of Demosthenes:
Argentangina^ patiuntur, they are sick of the silver sickness. For as Aul:
Gellius reports, when he pleaded very sharply against the Milesian
Ambassadors which came to Athens to crave some aid, so that they were like to
have the repulse: the matter being referred till the next day, the Ambassadors
went in the mean time to Demosthenes, and gave him a great sum of money to
hold his peace, and not to plead against them. The next day when the matter
was to be heard, he fained himself (...) that is anginum pati. to be sick of
the squinancie, and therefore could not speak. Then one who had smelled out
his hypocrisy, cried out, that Demosthenes non (...) sed (...) pati (that is)
argentanginam pati that he was siluer-sicke, or a right muck-worme. So as one
says of such, pestifera est causidicori^m lingua, nisi funibus argenteis
vincias the Lawyers tongue is dangerous, and pestilent, unless thou bind it
with silver cords: for not only their speech, but also their silence is
venall. I hope there be no such pestilent cankers of the commonwealth, if
there be any such, which set their wit, eloquence, and conscience, and all to
sale, to boulster out unjust causes, I c^unsaile them betimes to repent, for
God himself has already denounced woe against them. Woe be unto them that
speak good of evil, and evil of ^ood, etc. And others there are which speak
so coldly, Isai: 5.
as if it nothing concerned them, which was so heinous a thing among the
Romans, that they counted it no better then plain theft, as Tullie says in
his Oration for Roscio. To reason a little this point, I have chosen thee to
speak for me in my cause: and it may be the undoing of me lies in thy hands:
Is it then ignorance or negligence, that thou do not speak so as thou
should? If thou plead ignorance, then why do thou deceive an other man,
by selling that which thou have not? If thou say that thou would learn
law by pleading, it is all one as if a Surgeon should kill men to learn
skill by practice: If thou be ashamed of ignorance, and plead negligence, then
thou make thy fault greater, and deseruest the punishment of a false witness;
Is it then to maintain thy estate, and to leave thy posterity rich? Know
thou not that the spirit of God says, Pro: 21.
The gathering of riches by a deceitful tongue, is vanity tossed too and fro
of them that seek death. First tossed like a tennis ball from one heir to an
other, and purchases death to the gotter. And it is the just judgment of God,
that they that prey upon their inferiors, as the great fishes upon the small,
shall in the end be a fatter prey unto a greater then themselves.

Dum praedo vis esse minoris,
Praeda es maioris.
I would therefore beseech your Lo: (as I said) often to put in mind these
Pleaders of their duty in that behalf: and this is the manner of just
proceeding in matters of right and wrong.

The Iuries charge.
2. Chro: 1^.7.
NOw to the Jury and witnesses, not I, but the Lord speaks, by the mouth of
good king Iehosophat, as I said before: Let the fear of the Lord be upon you:
take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, neither
respect of persons, nor receiving of reward: for if for fear, favor, hatred,
or to gratify some great man, ye give wrong verdite, (besides the execrable
and damnable sin of perjury) ye are no better before God then men of blood,
and the fearful vengeance of God must needs light upon you, to the co^suming,
both of root and branch, as the Lord has threatened, Esa: 5.24. Esa: 5.24.
Therefore as the flame of fire consumes the stubble, and as the chafe is
consumed of the flame; so their root shall b^ as rottenness, and their bud
shall rise up like dust, because they have cost ^ff the law of the Lord of
hosts, and contemned the word of the holy one of Israel the truth whereof is
verified by many woeful examples before our eyes.

Saint Hierom^ expounding this place of ^erem^: 4.2. Hier.
And thou shall swear the Lord lives in truth, in iudg^ment and in
righteousness. For the avoiding of perjury, Tres in am^nti com^^es ess^
^^bere; That there ought to be three companions of an Oath, to truth it
pertayneth that we swear not falsely; unto righteousness, that we swear
nothing that is unjust, filthy, or dishonest; to judgment, that we swear not
vndiscreetlie and rashly, that is, for every light occasion we usurp not the
most reverend Name of God.

Now, The horrible sin of Perjury.
how grievous this sin of Perjury is, it appears many ways; as the spirit
of God, after a wonderful manner showed to the Prophet Zacharias in the vision
of a flying Book. Z^ch 5. Eccle. 23.11.
And the wise man says; A man that uses much swearing shall be filled with
wickedness, and the plague shall never go from his house etc.

1. The perjured person is a sacriligious thief, because he assumeth the holy
Name of God, against the will of God, and God forbidding it, to be a testimony
of a falsehood. A sacriligious person, in that he inuadeth holy things to build
his sin upon them; as the Name of God, his body, his wounds, etc. which
other sinners do not. Yea, the very Devils do tremble and fear at the
reverend Name of God, and by the invocation thereof, depart out of the
possessed: but these (worse in this respect then the very Devils) profane and
blaspheme the holy Name of God without all fear. O horrible impiety!

2. The false swearer does homage unto the Devil, in holding up his hands in
false protestations, or touching the book, by his false oath, he worshippeth
the Devil, and renounceth God. Therefore as an ancient Father says; Manus tam
diu manet di ^bali quousque paeniteat.

3. The false swearer falsifieth the Seal of the high King: and therefore, as
a Traitor unto God, is to be cast into the perpetual prison, there to be
tormented in the Luke that burns with fire and brimstone for ever, Apoc. 21.
because he usurps the Name of God, which is the Seal and witness of all
truth, to be a seal, testimony, and confirmation of lies and falsedood: And
therefore the Lord calls false swearing, A defiling and polluting of his
holy Name: Leuit. 19.12.
Ye shall not swe^r by my Name falsely, neither shall thou defile the Name of
thy God: I am the Lord.

4. The false swearer (as much as in him lies) makes GOD a partaker in his
wickedness, when he brings him to be witness and a iustifier of his
falsehood: And therefore in the particular Judgment, and in the last Judgment,
the Lord has threatened to be a swifte witness against false swearers: Mala.
3.5. Mal. 3.5.
I will came near to you into judgment, and I will be a swifte witness
against the Southsayers, and against the Adulterers, and against false swearers.

Such perjured persons (as much as in them lies) seek to do Christ greater
injury then they that crucified him: For they (says a Father) Intulere
Christo malum paenae, sed periuris (quantum in se est) Christum vult inuoluere
malo cul^ae; For they laid upon innocent Christ the punishment due for sin:
but the perjured persons (as much as in them lies) will make Christ guilty of
their wickedness, which is far worse: for he makes Christ to be a false
witness, a liar, and a iustifier of an untruth; men worse then the very Devil
himself: for though he be a liar, Ioh. 8.
and the father of lies, and by lies seduceth the world, yet he never
approves his lies with an Oath, making God a partaker of his malice, that he
might the sooner deceive, as the false swearer does.

5. The false swearer excludes himself from the protection of the Name of
God, against whom he sins. It is a common saying; Frustra inuocat legis
auxilium qui in l^gem committit; He does in vain crave aid of the law, which
offends against the law: Our help (says the Prophet) is in the Name of the
Lord: And Pro. 18. Pro. 18.10.
The Name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous runs unto it and are
helped.

O that by any means I might persuade all Christians which tender their
salvation; especially such as are called to this great and weighty business
of Pleading, or to be of the Jury, or Witnesses concerning the life, living,
or right of their brethren. O that I might (I say) so much prevail with them,
as that among so many hours of the day which they spend in idle, vain, and
futile thoughts, talk, play, or fruitless exercises, they would employ, if it
were but one hour of the day (after the example of a certain holy man) in
reading, meditating, and pondering of one little Book, but trium foliorum, of
three leaves, which I will commit to your Christian confideration. I have read
of a certain holy man, who at first had led a sociable and dissolute life;
that chancing on a time into the company of an honest and godly man (such is
the force of godly society) he in short time so wrought by wholesome
persuasions with his affections, that he utterly renounced his former course
of life, and gave himself to a more private, austere, moderate, and secluse
kind of living. The cause whereof being demanded by one of his former
companions, who would have drawn him (such is the nature of evil company)
to his usual riot. Note this.
He answered; That he was as yet so busied in reading of a little Book, which
was but a Book of three leaves, that he had no leisure so much as to think of
any other business. And being asked again a long time after, whether he had
read over these three leaves: He replied, that these three leaves were of three
several colors, The Book of three leaves, Red, White, and Black.
read, white and black, which contained so many Mysteries, that the more he
meditated thereon, the more sweetness he always found, so that he had devoted
himself to meditate therein all the days of his life. In the first leaf,
which is read, I meditate (quoth he) on the passion of my Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, and of his precious blood shed for a ransom of my sins, and
the sins of the whole world, without which, we had been all the bondslaues
of Satan, and fuel for hell fire. In the white leaf, I cheer up my spirit,
with the comfortable consideration of the unspeakable joys of the heavenly
Kingdom, purchased by the precious blood of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
a motive of thankfulness. In the third leaf, which is black, I meditate upon
the horrible and perpetual torments of hell, prepared for the wicked and
reprobate; as liars, perjured persons, murderers, adulterers, extortioners,
bribers, oppressors, etc. and all impenitent sinners, from which the godly are
freed, by the death of Jesus Christ.

This Book of three leaves, if we would always carry in our hearts, and
meditate often therein, great (surely) would be the benefit we should make
thereby, to restrain our thoughts and actions within the regularitie and
limits of the fear of God.

But (o good God) what periuries are are now used every where, especially in
buying and selling? custom has brought it to such a shameless habit, that
he is counted an Idiot in his trade, that cannot grace his wares which are
naught, with a thousand oaths and periuries: Merces suas plus periurijs quam
pretijs onerando; Cassid^r.
Lading his wares more with periuries then with prices.

And surely (not without great cause) God commanded lying Witnesses severely
to be punished: for in this one sin, many and most grievous sins are
included. It is commonly joined with perjury; and what an horrible thing is
it, that Man should not be afraid to take a false Oath; and call God, the God
of truth, to be a witness to an untruth? What is this else but a reproach
that touches the person of God himself? and therefore a polluting and
defiling of the reverend Name of God: as God himself calls it; L^uit. 19
Leuit. 19.
What is this else but voluntarily to forsake God, and all the sweet promises
of everlasting life and his Kingdom (all which are contained in Gods book on
which they swear) and willingly to betray their souls into the hands of
Satan?

6. Hence it follows, that the perjured man is in his heart (undoubtedly) an
Infidel, and says in his he^^t, there is no Go^: for if he were verily
persuaded of the Godhead, which knows al things, searches the heart and
reine^, and is a just revenger of all wickedness; he would surely tremble and
be afraid in an untruth to appeal to the God of truth.

7. He grieuouslie sins against his Neighbor, by taking from him by
perjury, his living, life, or good name.

8. The false witness is also a murderer, for (as much as in him lies) he
gives his neighbor a deadly wound, when by his false oath he hurts him, in
body, goods, or name: therefore the false witness, by the law of God, was to
endure the same punishment which he thought to bring upon his neighbor, an eye
for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, Deuteronomy: 19.21.
life for life: as if with violent hand he had plucked out his neighbors eye,
or taken away his life.

9. He violateth judgment, and in the sacred place of Justice, he exercises
injustice.

To conclude, he sins against the common good and safeguard of all men, and
(as much as in him lies) overthrows it. For it is certain, that without the
sacred administration of iudge^ent and justice, no commonwealth ^any long
endure. Though God did suffer many sins in Ahab, yet when he had by false
witness oppressed poor Naboath, the Lord brought him with all his house, to
destruction and ruin. O let all Magistrates think upon this, that they rashly
admit not whomsoeur to give evidence, that they straightly examine the
witnesses; least they seem to patronize these pestilent and damnable men.
Think also carefully upon this, you that shall be at any time produced for
witnesses, that you neither dissemble the truth, nor wickedly pervert, nor omit
it, and so sin against God and man, and destroy your own souls. And thus I
conclude, beseeching the God of mercies to power down the riches of his grace
and mercy into our hearts, that we may truly serve him, and have his fear ever
before our eyes, that we fall not into the horrible sin of perjury, which
has always Gods curse, and terrible plagues pursuing it. 1. Pet. 5.10.11.
Unto the God of all grace, who has called us unto his eternal glory by
Christ Jesus, be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

