THE SACRIFICE OF A CONTRITE HEART: In Tears, Meditations, and Prayers.

Penned by JOHN EVANS Minister of Gods Word.

JAMES 5. If any be afflicted, let him pray: If any be merry, let him sing
Psalms.

LONDON: Printed by A. M. for Richard Hamond, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the upper end of Fleet lane. 1630.

The Contents.
A Consideration of man's miseries, and Gods goodness. page 1 A Meditation for
the morning. p. 10 A morning Prayer for one alone. 14 The confession of a
sorrowful sinner. 23 A Prayer unto Almighty God. 28 A Prayer for Christian
virtues. 30 A general confession of our sins. 34 Another morning Meditation.
35 A prayer for the morning with company. 40 Precepts of Christian duties. 48
Another morning prayer. 53 A Meditation for the Evening. 56 An Evening prayer
for a private person. 60 Another for the Evening. 64 An Evening prayer for a
whole Family. 74 Another for the Evening. page 81 The repentant shows his
unfeigned grief for offending so merciful a God. 85 An Evening meditation. 90
A prayer for the increase of Faith. 93 A prayer for the remission of sins. 96
A meditation upon the miseries of man. 101 A prayer for the forgiveness of
sins. 103 The Repentants complaint against sin. 108 A prayer for
sanctification of the Sabbath. 110 A prayer for godly zeal. 116 A meditation
to gain favor from God. 119 A prayer for Faith, Hope, and Charity. 122 The
sighs and complaint of an afflicted conscience. 124 A prayer for
sanctification. 128 A prayer in adversity or affiiction. 131 Meditations upon
the passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 133 What to be learned by the
passion. 150 A prayer for patience under the Cross. 164 A thanks giving for
Gods blessings. 172 A meditation inciting us to seek God. 180 A prayer before
the Communion. 187 A meditation before the Communion. 192 Meditations upon Gods
mercies. 197 Lachrim. 1. Wherein the distressed prays for constancy and
patience in his time of afflictions. 205 A thanks giving after the Communion.
213 Another prayer after Communion. 214 A prayer for the Catholic Church of
God. 218 A prayer for the Kings Majesty. 221 Lachrim. 2. Wherein the
distressed expresses his confidence in God. 224 A prayer for the increase of
Christ his Kingdom. 230 A prayer against Antichrist. 238 Lachrim. 3. Wherein
the distressed prays that his faith and zeal may be increased. 246 The
complaint of an afflicted mind. 254 Lach. 4. Wherein the distressed prays
against the dangereus sin of despair. 264 The Merchant aduenturer his prayer.
269 A prayer for the fruits of the earth. 274 A thanksgiving for benefits and
Benefactors. 276 Lach. 5. Wherein the distressed shows his desire to hold
fast the promises of God. 279 A general thanksgiving. 283 Lach. 6. The
distressed craves pardon for his sins. 295 A prayer to be used in the time
of any contagious sickness. 302 The prayer called, O bountiful Jesus. 305 The
sick man's prayer. 308 A prayer for the sick. 311 Lach. 7. The distressed
detesteth the world, and all worldly things. 316 The young man's prayer for a
virtuous wife. 321 The mayds prayer for a godly husband. 326 The prayer of a
woman with child. 332 The 8. Lachrimae. 337 A prayer for love and charity. 346
The 9. Lachrimae. 351 Te Deum laudamus. 352
TO ALL THAT desire with faith and reverence to call upon the name of the Lord,
by the mediation of Jesus Christ: Gods most holy Spirit be given for their
inward consolation in this life, and their eternal peace and glory in the life
to come.
THe holy Prophet David, in a thankful commemoration of the in* numerable
blessings, he had received from the hands of God, said, Quid retribuam domino?
what reward shall I give unto the Lord, for all the benefits he has done unto
me, and apprehending that God was not so well pleased with ceremonial
sacrifices, as thousands of oblations, or whole streams of the blood of young
bullockes or goats, or with rivers of oil; as with Psalm. 51.
a troubled Spirit, and a contrite and a broken heart; resolves therefore to
humble his soul with fasting, with weeping, and with mourning, to seek the
face and favor of the Lord, to pay his vows, to pray unto the Lord, to call
upon his holy name, and to praise him for evermore, assuring himself that the
Lord would neither reject nor despise such a sacrifice.

Good Christian Reader do thou the like, which art as far indebted as ever
David was. And seeing that Jesus Christ himself calls unto thee, saying.
Come unto me all you that labor and are heavy laden with the burden of your
sins, and I will refresh you: Oh ^et thy resolution be as ready as David's was
when the Lord called, seek my face, he answered, thy face O Lord will I
seek, even with my whole heart: so let thy answer be to the Son of God, I
come Lord Jesus, I come, I will pay my vows promised to thee in the presence
of thy people, and confirmed under the Sacramental Seal of Baptism, thy
covenant of grace and mercy; I will come and offer unto thee my heart, I will
come and praise thee for all thy benefits, I will come and hearken to thy voice
in thy most holy and blessed word, I will abandon all secure, licentious, and
voluptuous living, and wholly delight in thy Testimonies and in thy
Commandments which are not grievous to thy children, but more pleasing then
honey, or the honey comb, and more inualuable then all earthly treasure. I
will come with reverence, repentance, Charity and Faith to receive the cup
of salvation at thy holy table in remembrance of thy most precious (and for my
sins sake ignominious) death.

And forasmuch as the Math. 26
Spirit is willing, but the flesh frail and weak, pray therefore for
mortification of the flesh, and that Sanctification and strengthening of thine
own inward Spirit: oh pray for the presence and assistance of Gods most holy
Spirit to 1. Cor. 14.
help and strengthen thine infirmities: whereby the diligent sighs and inward
groans of thy heart may cheerfully ascend and pierce the heavens for a
blessing: oh stir up thy Math. 5. Acts 10.
heart and soul to pray earnestly, offer up thyteares with watching, with
almes-deedes, with abstinence and fasting, as the repentant Ninevites: as Iona.
3.
David, as Daniel; oh breath out powerful sighs with Hannah, oh stream out
rivers of tears with penitent Mary Magdalen. As some kind of devils could not
be cast out but by prayer and fasting; so some sins are not eiected, nor
pardon for them procured without prayer and fasting, and also bitter tears
with repenting Peter.

Oh pray effectually and cheerfully, and give thy self 1 Thessalonians. 5
continually to this divine and holy exercise, (for this is the alone means to
have heavenly conference with thy gracious God) oh pray without ceasing as the
widow, and as the importunate woman of Canaan: pray every where, though it be
in the vppenpart of thy house with Peter, or in thy chamber alone with Eliseus;
whether in the Kings Acts 10.
chamber, or in the Lions den with Daniel, or with Moses in Daniel. 6.
the wilderness: the blessed children prayed in the fiery furnace, King
Hezekias in his bed, Ionahs in the whales belley, and our Savior Christ in the
fields, in the gardens, on the mountain; even upon the Cross at the time of
his victorious passion: pray with David either seven times a day, and in the
night let thine eyes (like his) gush out rivers of tears, or with Daniel
thrice in the day, or with Paul continually be exercised with holy sighs and
sacred meditations: let not, oh let not the dullness of thine heart, nor the
greatness or grieuousnesse of thy sins hinder thee from this holy exercise,
suffer not the Spirit of God to be quenched in thee. To thee that art heavy
laden with sin, and pressed with afflictions for sin, does thy sweet Savior
call, to thee does his promise most properly appertain, none asks but he
that wants, none seeks but he that has lost, remember that our Savior
came to call sinners to repentance, and to heal the sick, and to cure the
wounded, to ease and refresh all such as are laden with the insupportable
burden of their sins! oh be of good comfort, strive against thy dulnes,
hear what is written for thy consolation; whosoever shall faithfully call upon
the Lord, shall be saved.

Let not thy afflictions hinder thee, but rather follow the exhortation of the
Apostle; if any be afflicted let him pray, let thine afflictions encourage
thee, and inflame thine heart to call upon thy merciful God who promises by
his Prophet to hear thee, and to deliver thee. You shall seek me says the
Lord and find me, because you shall seek me with all your heart, and I will
be found of you and will deliver you from captivity; Ask therefore and you
shall have, seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you:
oh mark and firmly believe the gracious promise of him that is the truth and
the life, whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my name you shall receive it:
who was ever denied that faithfully called upon the Lord? The Lord is true and
faithful of his promise, both able and willing to perform, and will regard
the supplications, and accept the prayers of his children; did not the Lord
hear the prayers of the Israelites, and did not he with a mighty arm plague
their enemies, and deliver them out of captivity and bondage: did not the red
sea recoyle back at the prayer of Moses; yea the waters saw thee o Lord and
were afraid, and at thy appointment made a way for the safety and deliverance
of thy people: was not the plague in the wilderness stayed at the prayer of
Moses, was not Miriam by prayer cleansed from his leprosy, was not Hanna by
prayer of a barren woman made fruitful, did not David by his faithful prayer
and repentance obtain remission and forgiveness for manslaughter and
adultery, did not Elias by prayer open the windows of heaven and brought
down plenty of rain, was it not by prayer that Sennacherib and his
innumerable host were slain and discomfited, by the Angel of the Lord. By
prayer Susanna was delivered from death, the blessed children from the
scorching heat of the Oven, Queen Hester and her people were delivered from
death, Jonas out of the belley of the Whale; by prayer Leapers were cleansed,
the blind were restored to sight, the Palsies were cured, many men and women
obtained health fortheir children and servants.

By prayer the lame have been restored to their limbs, the deaf to hearing,
the blind to their sight, and the dumb to their speech, by prayer remission of
sins was obtained, and the holy Ghost was sent down upon the Apostles.

What should I say more, by prayer Kingdoms have been subdued, miracles have
been wrought, the promises were obtained, the mouths of Lions were stopped,
the violence of fire has been quenched, the heavens have been shut and
opened, the dead has been raised to life, the Sun and Moon have been
commanded and stood still. O faithful messenger, oh divine prayer, thou will
strive and prevail even with the Lord of heaven, and obtain the blessing.

Wherefore good Christian and faithful Reader, be fervent and constant in this
holy exercise. Remember that when Moses hands failed, the enemies of Gods
children prevailed; and that Sampson lost his strength and glory, when he lost
his hair by the treachery of Dalilah: so when thou suffer Gods Spirit to be
quenched, thou art deprived of thy spiritual strength and heavenly glory, and
her soul despoiled of her beauty and comeliness, and thou exiled from the
protection of the most glorious Angels, which are ready with all cheerful
willingness to administer their aid and comfort unto thee, and to bear thee
safe from all thy enemies and dangers, while thou by faithful prayer do in
the name of the Angel of the Covenant that does sweetly and acceptably
incense all thy oblations, call upon the name of the most mighty and most
glorious God of all Archangels and men.

And for that experience of my long afflictions and sorrows have made me
apprehensiue of the hardness of our hearts, and our dullness and unaptness to
call upon God in the time of our troubles. I have composed these sorrowful
sighs, prayers and meditations, which I may well call the exercises of my sad
affections; to the end that if through Satan's buffets, the distemperature or
weakness of my corrupt nature, or the snares of evil men my poor heart should
be overwhelmed; yet I might have always presented to mine eye how to make my
moan unto my God.

And intending to public my labor herein, I have endeavored by variety of
meditations and prayers to make it profitably useful for all men. Most humbly
beseeching the God of mercy to accept and bless my endeauoure herein: and
grant that some glory to his holy name, and some benefit to his ch^ldren, and
comfort and consolation to all that groan under the burden of sin, may
redound hereby, and that for the alone merits and mediation of Jesus Christ the
righteous. To whom with the father and the most holy Spirit, as by the most
glorious Angels in heaven, so by us men, be rendered Halleluiah: all the glory,
the praise, and the honor for ever more. Amen. Amen.

John Euans.

THE. CONSIDEration of our miseries, moves sorrowful sighs, for our
enlargement from the thraledome of our sins.
O Wretched man involu'd in crimson sin,
Repent with speed, thy sinful life. Begin
Before the vials of Gods wrath, whose wine is red,
Be fiercely powered down upon thy head.
The Lord is mild, and wills not sinners death,
Prevent his wrath while thou have time and breath;
If he for sin do strike with dreadful hand,
Who can his fury stay? or wrath withstand?
Conceived, condemned for Adams ill,
To God arch-traitors we continue still:
Sin lu^^'d secure by Satan's charm and guile
Who watchful is to kill our souls that while.
From head to foot so leprous be our stains,
That in our selves not one good thought remains,
But if we do or think ought that is good,
It is in us the effect of Christ his blood.
Our bloody sins are numberless and daily call,
That thou in judgment should condemn us all.
But Lord our God be hold us in thy Son;
Forgive, forget, remit what we have done.
Corruption made us sons of wrath and firebrarnds of hell,
Thy grace in Christ made us thy sons and heirs to dwell.
In heaven where thy kingdom is, most glorious be thy name,
Which have in Christ elected us, before all worlds frame.
In glory thou in heaven art, in mercy here with us below,
In judgments with the damned crew: the seas thy wonders know.
Yet sea, nor earth, nor heavens high, thy essence can contain:
Thou art, have bin, and ever shall (I AM) of might remain:
Seeing thou art to us a Father dear of heavenly might,
Give us obedience to thy will, and in thy laws delight.
Humility, with godly fear, heavenly thoughts divine;
And whatsoever graces else may sign and scale us thine.
Most glorious, sacred, sanctified, acknowledged be thy name,
Amongst us all thy children dear that do profess the same:
Although none hallowing we can add unto thy essence pure,
Grant that our lives, our thoughts, our words, thy glory may procure,
E^due us with such godly zeal thy honor to maintain,
With reverence due to use thy name, and not in jest or vain;
Seeing that thy wisdom, greatness, clear and piercing eye
Beholds what is done, or thought, both far and nigh,
From swearing, lying, and blaspheming thee,
Good Lord in mercy still deliver me.
By all we think, shall do, or act indeed,
Grant that some glory to thy name proceed:
Let not our sins, nor Satan's strong temptation,
Nor our frail flesh gain sinful approbation.
Come thou Lord Jesus quickly: cleanse and garnish,
Our sinful hearts, and thine kingdom establish.
O Son of God, o Lamb pure undefiled,
The joy and solace which all Saints desired:
Inflame our hearts, let us not quench thy Spirit,
Make good to us what thy own death did merit.
God has ordained, and thou have dearly bought,
A glorious Kingdom, by us seldom sought,
Lest from that Kingdom we excluded be,
O work in us such works as pleases thee.
Thy will is holy, perfect, right and just;
Our wills perverse, possessed with sinful lust.
O grant us willing hearts for to perfome,
Whatsoever thy good will shall us inform.
Our will's perverse, corrupted, full of sin,
No good in act, or thought, we can begin.
If any thing we do that please thee may,
It is thy grace that does direct our way.
O Lord my God, do thou so rule my mind,
That to thy will, my will be still inclined:
Let me not think, nor will, nor wish to do,
But what thy will does well con^ent th^rto.
Thy holy words to feed our souls, and natures wants supply,
For all our base unthankful hearts; good Lord do not deny.
Thy blessings Lord continue still, and providence divine,
And when we daily call on thee, o Lord to us incline:
It is not wealth nor ophire gold that can enrich our need,
Nor pleasant dainties that we take, that can our bodies feed:
It is thy blessing (mighty Lord) thy strong protecting arm,
That feeds, defends, thy children dears from penury and harm.
No desert wild, nor person (...) (...) famine sore,
Shall long oppress^ thy children dear, or quite cosume their ^re.
The Rock, the Raven. Asses jaw, and eke the Lion strong,
Shall comfort yield unto all those that to thy grace belong.
The little birds, the dainty flowers are fed and clothed most gay,
And every creature in his kind feels thee most kind always:
But we for whom this universe, and all things in it were signed,
Do take thy gracious benefits, and prove to thee unkind.
For sinful debts to Justice due, no payment can we make,
Eternal death our payment is, unless thou mercy take:
Compassion Lord have thou on us, be thou a Father kind,
And sealed to us in Christ his blood, let us thy mercy find.
The blind, the lame, the dumb, and they possessed with devils;
The leaprous sinful stained souls, were cured of their evils.
They sinned had, thy counsel was, they should not sin again,
O souls sole cleanser, Savior dear, our hearts from sin restrain.
Small is the wrong that's done to us in body, goods or name;
By friends, or foes, we them forgive, good Lord do thou the same:
If comfort any we can yield, when they be^ in distress,
Grant we for thee our love to them, may willingly express.
Although our many grievous sins deserve thy ragefull ire,
Repenting hearts with mournful souls, and mercy we desire.
O let that precious blood of thine, to us be of such force,
That nothing from the love of thee, may ever us divorce.
Withdraw not Lord thy grace from us, when strong temptations are,
Lest gross notorious shameless sins, how frail we be declare:
Make us strong pillars in thine house, thy name on us engraue,
That neither Satan, sin, nor hell, of us the conquest have.
Though sometime Satan suffered is to try thy children all,
Defend them Lord and succor them, when they on thee shall call.
So shall the glory be thine own, the conquest be their gain,
And Satan with his engines all, shall know he wrought in vain.
The more assaults the Dragon makes, in conscience or in mind,
The more that man if constant be, the strength of God shall find:
That soul that sacrificed is by sharp afflictions knife,
By faithful sufferance to the end, does gain a Crown of life:
Most mighty and victorious Lord, that have the conquest gained,
Of all the foes of thee and thine, that in the world remain:
Let no temptations though full strong, a captive make of me,
But by thy strength and powerful grace, good Lord deliver me.
O holy sacred Trinity, that art of ^ll might;
Instrust, direct, inspire our hearts, to pray to thee aright*
And whatsoever may advance, or glorify thy name,
By gracious will, and powerful might, co^erre on us the same.
Eternal King, immortal God, all kingdoms are thine own,
Thy power, wisdom, and thy might, to us does make thee known:
All honor, glory, praise and laud, be rendered by all men,
Unto thy sacred Majesty, for evermore, Amen.
A Morning Meditation.
ALmighty God which have me brought,
in safety to this present day;
Keep me from sin in heart and thought,
and teach me what to d^^ and say:
Prosper me Lord in all my works,
help me with thy continual grace:
K^ (...) from Satan vile, that lurkes
^ soul in every place,
Almighty Lord and God of love,
dir^ct mine heart, and guide my ways;
Amend my miss, my mind remove
from all that from thy glory strayes;
Thou that of wisdom art true spring,
and fountain of felicity:
Let mercy mere, my prayers bring.
by Faith in Christ, to sight of thee.
Thou which art author of all peace,
and the true lover of concord;
Keep me from fees, that never (...),
to take my life from me o Lord:
Thy service is most perfect free,
to know thee, it is eternal life;
Reach out thy helping hand to me,
against my foes, that against me strive.
O God from whom all good desires,
from whom all just works do proceed^;
Whose wise, great acts, all men admires,
assist me in the time of need:
O Lord whose power and quality,
is sinners trespass to forget;
Being tied and bound with chains of sin,
for pity loose me, I entreat.
Assist me in this mortal age,
what change or chance so ere befall;
From Satan, sin, and enemies rage,
Lord still defend me from them all:
Almighty God which give us grace,
now in thy name to pray to thee;
And promisest in any place,
when ioynes together two or three.
Thou will give and grant what they request,
now Lord do the desires fulfill;
Of us thy ser^ts us seem best,
and most expedient to thy will:
In this world knowledge us granting,
of thy pure truth and sanctity;
And after death, let our new being,
be life with thee eternally.
O God that no time do despise,
the fighing of a contrite heart;
Nor the desires of sinners cries;
in troubles, anguish, grief and smart:
Assist our prayers in distress,
and graciously vouchsafe to hear;
When sudden evils us oppress,
and subtle craf^s of foes us fear.
Let them, o Lord be brought to naught,
and by thy goodness scattered be;
That so to us no hurt being brought,
we may give thanks and praise to thee:
Oh God of mercy we thee pray,
to look on our infirmities;
And all those evils turn away,
which we deserve cont^llie,
Grant that in troubles, and sickness,
we put our trust and hope in thee;
And serve thee in true holiness,
in awefull ^rueth and sanctity,
Through Christ the only advocate,
and mighty Lord of all mankind;
That works Gods love from wrath and hate,
toward his elect to be most kind.
Oh God, to whom all hearts are seen,
and hid desires are plainly k^owne;
My life reform, and mind make clean,
my spirit inspire to be thine own:
That I may love thee perfectly,
and magnify thy holy name;
Through Christ my Savior worthily,
and all the world confess the same.
Lighten my darkness Lord I pray thee,
from daily dangers me defend;
Let not flesh, world, nor devil dismay me,
keep me both to, and in the end:
Thy mighty hand, and arm protect me,
thy mercy in Christ be my salvation;
Lord ever let thy word direct me,
and thy Spirit give me consolation.
The peace of God which far exceeds,
all understanding of man's wit;
Preserve my soul from wicked deeds,
and g^ide my heart to do what is fit.
A Morning Prayer for a private person.
ALmighty God and heavenly Father, I make my prayer unto thee in an acceptable
time: calling most faithfully and fervently upon thee, in the name and
mediation of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, thy well beloved Son, in whom
thou art well pleased: trusting that for his sake, and for the multitude of thy
mercies, thou will hear me, and grant my petitions may be acceptable in thy
sight, O Lord my strength, and my salvation.

Almighty, immortal, and invisible God; who inhabitest eternity, and dwell
in light that none can attain unto, whom never man saw, neither can see (as
thou art in thy eternal glory with this eye of flesh and live;) unto thee (oh
Lord God) do I prostrate and direct my self, most humbly confessing that I am
but dust and ashes, not worthy to open my lips to speak unto thee, or once
with my eyes to look up to thy heavens, to behold thy glory in thy wonderful
works: for (oh Lord) I have sinned against heaven, and against thee, and am
not worthy to be counted or called thy Son, being by nature the child of
wrath, and a firebrand of hell, altogether both in body and soul: begotten,
conceived and brought forth in sin, and have ever since my first original,
lived and continued therein, adding sin unto sin, and heaping up
transgression, upon transgression, and drinking in iniquity as the beast does
water: so that (oh my Lord God) if thou should but behold me with thy pure
eyes, that can abide no iniquite; thou might not only punish and afflict me
with diverse crosses, with sundry pains, sickness and diseases in this mortal
life: but (O Lord) thou might, follow and pursue me with thy secret hatred,
with thy infinite and eternal displeasure: yea and for ever give me my part
and portion with the wicked reprobates, and damned spirits in infernal
darkness. But (oh Lord) though by nature and desert, hell be my portion; yet
thou have pleased for Christ his sake, in whom alone I believe the pardon of
all my sins, original and actual; of omission, and commission; of
ignorance, and knowledge, and of presumption: in all which kinds I have
mightily offended thee, mine own conscience (beside the testimony of thy word)
bearing witness, which is greater then if ten thousands of witnesses should
stand up against me: But (o Lord) for thy Christ his sake that immaculate and
unspotted I am be that was once sacrificed for the Redemption of the whole
world* do away all my sins and offenses* and let them not at any time,
through Sath^ns accusation or aggrauation, stand up against me; neither in
conscience in this world to accuse me, or in the day of thy second coming to
condemn me; wash them away (o Lord) in the precious blood of thy Son, and
for his sake be at peace with me; Seal up unto my soul and conscience this
day, and while I am in this life, the assured pardon of all my sins; of
thought, word and deed. Let thy Spirit dwell in me, and testify unto* and with
my Spirit this day, the assurance of my Justification and adoption.

O Lord sanctify and regenerate me to thy Image, through thy holy Spirit,
from whence through Adams sin, and my own actual, I am fallen, and should
for ever lie plunged therein, if thou Lord should deny to reach forth unto
me thy merciful hand, or thy hand full of mercy, and abundant kindness in
Christ.

O Lord, if when we were dead in sins and trespasses, and (inasmuch as in us
lay) thy most malicious enemies, when we were without God, and without hope in
the world, and sought not after thee, till thou (as to Adam in the garden)
did seek and find us out. How much more being in Christ, and in him
seeking thee, will thou be found of us, and nigh unto us, when we call upon
thee.

O Lord thou have promised, that if we ask we shall have, if we seek we
shall find, if we knock it shall be opened unto us; wherefore I beseech
thee pardon my weak Faith, O Lord, increase in me godly sorrow, for all my
offenses past and present, o let me sorrow that I cannot sorrow according to
the heigh^ multitude of my transgre^ Lord make me to know my s^, not only
open, but secret, not (...) the highest, but even in the lowest degree: and
breed in me a perfec^ hatred of them, not in respect of punishment temporal,
or eternal, but in filial fear and godly affection: grant for thy Christ his
sake, that I may hate and detest them, and my self in them and for them.

And to this end (Lord) open mine eyes, that in the hearing and reading of thy
word, as the linely and most effectual means, I may obtain the assurance of
thy love and favor, and let it be that to me, which it is in it self, thy
strong power and mighty arm to my salvation.

Let it be unto me the sweet savor of life unto life, and not at any time
through my unworthiness, the savor of death unto death; Good Lord hereby
create in me a clean heart, and renew a right Spirit within me, that I may
delight in thy word, above gold, above much fine gold; yea, above thousands of
gold and silver, let thy word be a continual light unto my pathe^, and a
daily lantern unto my feet; olet me not stand at a stay in grace, nor in any
measure of gift of grace, much less decline or go back in any grace or gift
of grace: but grant that I may in the use of all holy means go on in grace,
till I come unto a perfect man in Christ jesus.

Lord keep me this day, that I may not like Lots wife look back again, or
like the unthankful Israelites, esteem the homely fare of Egypt, (of this
world of things of this life) above the heavenly Manna (thy word the only true
food of life.) But like Abraham and the rich Merchant, leave and sell all that
this world can afford, to attain the Kingdom of heaven, unto which thou have
called me, by faith in Christ, at this day, and for ever.

Having begd these graces, I return unto thee humble thanks for all thy
benefits that I have received; not only before, but since my being, as for my
election before time, and for my vocation in time, from whence have followed my
justification, and some measure of sanctification in this life, and my assured
hope of glorification in the life to come.

For these inestimable blessings, which no mind can conceive, nor tongue
express, I return unto thee, all such possible praise and hearty thanks as
my understanding can conceive: beseeching thee that I may this day, and all the
days of my life, walk worthy of all these thy mercies. O Lord I thank thee
for these other inferior testimonies of thy love, which thou have made more
common with the unjust, then with the just; I thank thee o Father that thou
have shared me out so great a portion, even beyond many of thy Saints and
servants; Lord grant that while thou continuest the trust of them in my hands
(for they are thy talents and not mine) I may soberly use them to thy glory,
and to mine own comfort, and the comfort of the Saints.

O Lord grant I may abound in charity to all of all sorts, that I shall behold
to stand in need of my help: but especially to the household of Faith: and
grant that I may give no relief in worldly ostentation, or vain glory, to be
seen or talked of, of men, but in an upright heart and good conscience unto
thee. And all this I beseech thee to grant, for Jesus Christ his sake my only
Lord and Savior.

Last of all, I beseech thee as a seeling member of thy holy Church militant,
howsoever, or wheresoever dispersed, scattered, or afflicted; for all thine
that suffer any kind of sorrow, need, sickness, or any other adversity in
soul, or body, by sea or land: but especially for all thine that suffer bonds,
chains or imprisonments, (with Joseph) for righteousness sake, mittigate all
their pains and troubles, and give them Faith and patience in all their
several distresses as may be most for thine own glory and their comforts;
through Christ our Mediator and Redeemer. To thee o Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, the eternal and most blessed Trinity, be rendered all praise and
glory, not only by all men in general, but by me in special, with thy holy
Church, this day and for evermore,

Amen, Amen.
A particular confession of a sorrowful sinner.
MOst mighty, and all-knowing Lord,
^true spring of cons^ion;
J do confess with heart and voice,
thou art my preservation:
I have offended gri^uously,
by my transg^ssions done against thee;
And have drawn down a weight on me,
of thy great Judgments wilfully.
Under which burden cannot I,
but faint and fall in woeful sort;
Unless thy hand and thy mercy,
through Jesus Christ do me support:
Thou know good Father I am weak,
and cannot bear thy heavy Ire;
Not knowing what to do or speak,
or how to escape my sinful hire.
Unless thou point (...) o^t the way,
with thy wise Spirit me directing;
Unto my foe, I am made a pray,
were not thy power me protecting:
Not every one that hears thy word,
can understand thy wi^edome great;
Nor every one that cries, Lord, Lord,
shall enter in at heavens gate.
Who is not led by better line,
then does pro^ from fle^^ and blood;
Erres from the truth and does decline,
from right to wrong, to ill from good:
Whose end is death, though for a time,
seems sweet to please the outward man;
That's nothing else, but dirt and slyme,
or like a puff, in length a span.
As honor, riches, friends and health,
Preferment, life, and Worlds delight;
Esteeming these true happy wealth,
but the true bliss is out of sight:
They think that sickness, poverty,
imprisonment and enemies fell;
And worldly crosses verily,
are gates and entrance into hell.
So foolish and so ignorant,
are those thou guid'st not in thy way;
Mong'st whom even I, through wisdoms want,
have bin misled until this day:
But having found the truth by trial,
that earthly joys are transitory;
When they me tempt I make denial,
and only seek the eternal glory.
Now I disclaim all confidence,
in honor, health, in wealth or feature;
In wit or worldly Sapience,
or yet in any earthly creature.
And Lord I here do dedicate,
all thou have given me to thine honor;
My self I wholly consecrate,
to march and fight under thy banner.
And now I bid these toys adue,
that onely-please my flesh and senses:
Because they all are most untrue,
and still do cause so great offenses:
Because their glorious bounty fades,
and leaves naught but deformities;
Because they are naught else but shades,
and bring forth gross enormities.
Because they are most false and fickle,
because they are indeed hels fuel;
Because their rose has many a prickle,
because their slavery is most cruel:
Because they are not firm and stable,
because they are profane, not holy;
Because they are but as a fable,
because they are but sottish folly.
Because my soul they coll and kill,
because they give me Judas kiss;
Because my good they spot and spill,
and draw me from mine heavenly wish:
Because like swords they wound my soul,
because like Serpents they do sting me;
Because my conscience does control,
and says to hell gates they will bring me.
Because they do besot my senses,
because they dull my Spirits quicknes;
Because they cause so great expenses,
because they cause my sad souls sickness:
Because all virtue hindered is,
by this vile worlds accursed pleasure;
Because it will bereave of bliss,
and of that blessed heavenly treasure.
And therefore earth and world farewell,
adue fond fancies flattering favors;
Your joys are toys, your heaven is hell,
I hate your poisoned taste and savors:
And thou that art life of my life,
soul of my soul, o Jesus Christ,
Point down the period of worlds strife,
thou art the Prophet, Prince, and Priest,
That wentest up to prepare that place,
above Sun, Moon, and Planets seven;
O save me by thy saving grace,
and bring me to that highest heaven:
Where are such joys caelestiall,
as cannot be expressed by pen;
Bring me from things terrestrial,
to reign with thee for aye,
Amen.
A Prayer unto Almighty God to prepare and dispose our hearts rightly, unto
Prayer.
O Loving God and Father dear,
I humbly thee beseech and pray;
For Jesus sake my prayers hear,
and harken what my soul shall say:
My heart, and thoughts Lord sanctify,
thine holy Spirit inspire within me;
Me from corruptions mundifie,
and let thy loving mercies win me,
O let me ask and have of thee,
let me by Faith my suite obtain;
Thy loving favor show to me,
all other favor is but vain:
Restrain my vain imaginations,
prevent by Grace Satan's intrusions;
Let him not taint my cogitations,
nor ^^^nd mine eyes with vain illusions.
Which are the enticements and the baits,
of that great ghostly enemy;
That still for worldlings seeks and waits,
within which rank, poor wretch am I:
But as my mouth and lips have said,
words of a faithful servant true;
So let my soul of Christ crave aid,
with inward spirit to live anewe.
For now my poor soul is afraid,
and time misspent alas I rue;
To thee I run imploring aid,
within me do thy Spirit renew:
O Lord I see the bloody wounds,
of thy sweet Son my Savior;
(...) see thy mercies there abounds,
and promised by thy favor.
And therefore I, by sinful de^des,
that erst lived careless in despair;
Do fly unto those wounds that bleedes,
and pluck down grace by force of prayer:
Oh in that grace grant me to live,
and in that grace grant me to die,
And when I die, Lord grace me give,
to reign with thee perpetually.
A Prayer for Christian virtues.
OH my Lord God, grant that with a sincere heart I may desire thee, and in
desyring, seek thee, and in seeking find thee, and when I have found thee,
grant that I may constantly love thee: and not return to that filthiness of
sin, for which thou hate me, and I become odious and loathsome in thy
presence, that thou art constrained to withdraw thy gracious countenance from
beholding so great impuritie. Give me o my Lord God a repentant heart, a
contrite Spirit, eyes flowing with fountains of penitent tears: quench in me
all the concupiscense of the flesh, and kindle in me the fire of thy love. Oh
my Redeemer take from me the Spirit of pride, and most f^^ourably enrich me
with the treasure o^ thy humility, remove from me^ o my Savior, the fury, and
distem* perance of choler, and graciously arm me with the shield of pati*
ence. O my Creator root out o^ me all rank or and malice, and en* due me with
gentleness and meek^ nes, bestow upon me a perfec^ faith, a right hope, and
constan^ love.

Preserve me, o Lord, from a^ vanity, inconstancy of mind, wa^ uering of
heart, scossing and con^ temptuous speaking, reproaches tauntes and slanders
against m^ neighbor, busy curiosity, hun^ ger of riches, extortion, ambiti^
on, vainglory, from the vice o^ hypocrisy, the poison of flat* ry,
contempt of the weak, op* pression of the poor, from gree* die avarice,
cankered envy, deadly blasphemy.

Deliver me, o Lord, from ras^ boldness, contumacy, frowardness, idleness,
negligence, sloth, dullness of wit, blindness of heart, obstinacy of mind,
savage conditions, contempt of good things, the abandoning of wholesome
counsel, offense of the tongue, rapine of the poor, malicious and false
accusation against the innocent, violence against the impotent, neglect of
inferiors, cruelty toward my family, impiety and infidelity toward them
that repose trust in me, and from unjust and rigorous dealing with all men.

O my God, my merciful God, I beseech thee in thy beloved Son, bless me with
the works of mercy and zeal of godliness, to suffer with the afflicted, to
minister to the needy, to succor the miserable, to counsel them that go
astray, to comfort the sorrowful, to relieve the oppressed, to nourish the
poor, to cherish and comfort such as mourn, to forgive my debtors, to pardon
them that trepasse against me, to love them that hate me, to render good for
evil, to despise none, but to honor them, to imitate the good, to beware of
evil things, and evil ungodly society, to eschew vice, and to embrace
virtue; in adversity patience, humbleness in prosperity, to guard the door
of my mouth, to watch the enemies that compass my lips, to despise worldly
things, and earnestly to thirst after the heavenly.

O Lord my God, blessed be thy name for ever: dispose my heart, open my lips,
and guide me by thy holy Spirit, to a true acknowledgement of all my sins,
and an eternal detestation, renouncing and forsaking of them, that my prayers
may be heard of thee, in the name, and for the name of thy Son Jesus Christ.
To whom with thee and the most holy Spirit, three sacred persons, one mighty
and immortal God, be ascribed, attributed and given, all praise, all thanks,
all honor and glory this day and for evermore.

Amen, Amen.
A general confession of sins.
OMnipotent, and gracious Father,
I from thy ways have strayed and erred
Like a lost sheep, and followed rather,
mine hearts devises and preferred:
My foolish fancies, fond desires,
and broke the laws set down by thee;
I have not done what thou requires,
but done those things that should not be.
No health in me, but thou, o God,
have mercy on me sinful wretch;
Spare me, oh spare me, hold thy rod,
that to offenders thou do stretch:
I do confess my faults, restore me,
I do repent, (for Jesus sake;)
That promise ever is before thee,
which thou in Christ to God did make,
And grant for his sake live I may,
a godly, right, and sober life;
To thy names glory, still for aye,
possessing heaven where is no strife:
All laud, and praise be to thy name,
for ever and ever now and then;
To whom all nations sing with fame,
sweet Psalms of joy,
Amen, Amen.
A Morning Meditation.
I Laid me down to rest and slept,
and in the moring rose again;
God me sustained and safely kept,
and by his grace did me maintain:
His Angels pitched me round about,
sleeping and waking keeping me;
Both coming in and going out,
they guard me with security.
Lord hear my voice in morning bright,
when I my prayers do direct;
And wait till thou the God of light,
do hear and help me with effect:
O Father full of power and might,
mercy and love. How dare I cast?
Mine eyes unto thy heavenly light;
if thou remember my sins past.
How can I think or hope for good,
on me below to come from high;
Having so much thy laws withstood,
and sinned against thy Majesty:
Thou in thy power and knowledge deep,
Lord sees the wicked ways of mine;
Whether in sin I wake or sleep,
It is not hidden from thine eyne.
My vain corrupt and evil deeds,
my imperfections more and more;
My daily sins, by which it breeds,
thine anger worse then was before:
Thy judgments I might justly fear,
If thou should note what is done amiss;
Thou might in torture be severe,
yet give th ou rest, and peace, and bliss.
And have raised me up by thy hand,
for only thou preseruest me;
And me defendst by sea and land,
awake, or sleep (I serving thee:)
Whether I walk, work, eat, or drink,
or what ere else, do what I will;
Thou blessest all that I can think,
without thy blessings all were ill.
For I a creature weak and faint,
subject to dangers that are rise;
And closely work my soul to taint,
in this corrupt and evil life:
I lie alas in night and blindness,
and have no watch me to defend;
Yet am preserved by thy kindness,
from them that ill to me intend,
Whose owlish eyes do shun the light,
who lay their traps and snares in dark;
But thou defend'st me with thy might,
and with bright eyes their work do mark:
Thou dear kind Father full of love,
regard'st thy weak and little ones;
Thy many mercies do thee move.
to hearken to their sighs and mones.
O gracious God I give thee thanks,
for all thy mercies manifold;
Save me from all the plots and prankes,
of sin, and of that Serpent old:
Forgive me mine offenses Lord,
let true repentance make me right,
An humbled heart, and life reformed,
I know are pleasing in thy sight.
I am inclined to vanity,
to fall into one sin or other;
No day nor hour from sin escape I,
since first conceived in womb of mother:
With cruel foes I am beset,
corruptions in me daily fight;
They labor sore thy grace to let,
and make me loathsome in thy fight.
Wresting my will and settled mind,
from true sincerity to sin;
From good desires to be inclin'de,
to deep despair, and die therein:
To make me trust in blandishment,
of wicked world my soul deceiving,
And in my souls sad languishment.
of comforts all my soul bereauing.
I fly unto the sauctuary,
of thy dear care and providence;
Assured I shall not miscarry,
when I depend on thy defense:
Keep me therefore o King of Kings,
as precious apple of thi^e eye,
This day me shroud under thy wings,
from sin and Sathaus tirannie.
Teach me the truth, me knowledge give,
and wisdom with all humbleness;
Obedience, Zeal, and Faith; relieve
my soul with hope in all distress:
Change me from sin to sanctity,
from the nights darkness unto light,
Let my cold zeal most ardent be;
to serve the Lord both day and night.
Teach me justly to execute,
my outward calling; give success,
And happy issue to my suit^,
and all my lawful labors bless:
Give means with truth and ^quitie,
to me and mine with godly care;
In heart and mind true piety,
and all things else that needful are,
And let thy holy Spirit so nourish,
and govern me that more and more;
I may increase bear fruit and flourish,
in godliness and goodness store:
Until thou shall cut off this life,
that is corrupt with deadly sin;
And by Christ's merits end the strife,
of mortal wars my soul lives in.
And draw me then with cords of love,
to thee, and to thy kingdom;
The new Jerusalem above,
where thou alone bear ruledome:
And grant that I, may reign with thee,
with Christ and thine elect;
Sweet Father for thy mercies sake,
do never me reject.
Amen.
A Morning Prayer to be said with a whole Family.
MOst Mighty God, the Creator and Father of every living thing, both in heaven,
and in earth, the wonderful preserver, and constant vpholder of all things
visible, and invisible; not only in the days of our forefathers, but in these
our times. We thy poor sinful servants, do this morning prostrate and
deiect our selves, in soul and body, sorrowfully confessing unto thee, against
our selves, that we are so laden with daily transgressions, that we know not,
but with infinite shame, how to lift up our heads and eyes toward thee, or
once to open our mouths to speak unto thee: for when we remember how in the
morning of this world, in the first beginning of mankind, thou did make him
after thine own Image, a glorious creature, and planted him in the Garden of
Eden, where he wanted nothing, but was filled with joy and happy contentment.

But he despised thy holy Commandment, aduenturing to do that which thou
had forbidden: whereby thou wast so displeased with him, that immediately
did banish him and our grandmother E^ah, with all us their miserable
p^steritie: then in their loins, and unto this day issuing and proceeding
forth, into perpetual blindness and ignorance of thee, and should so for
ever have remained from generation to generation, if we did not believe in thy
holy word and Gospel; in which is contained the happy and joyful tidings of
thy everlasting love renewed unto us: as that in his seed all nations should
be blessed, meaning by his seed, the promised Messiah, which our first
parents then believed in, for themselves, and so instructed us their following
posterity for ever to do the like.

Wherefore, o Lord, we believing in thyword (our Messiah) who in these latter
days, has taken our flesh, and in that nature, by which thou wast most
mightily offended, has again reconciled us unto thee, and thee unto us, by
paying that price of our Redemption, even his most precious death and blood; by
virtue of which we first entreat thee, to par donour original sins, and all
other offenses which in knowledge against the motions of thy holy Spirit, and
checkes of our own consciences, accusing us for the least thing that we have
at any time done amiss, or have daily from the beginning of our manhood, unto
this present done against thee, even thisweeke, this last day, this night, and
this morning since we arose; yea, even now in this instant, while we are
speaking unto thee.

O Lord, for Christ his sake, pardon all our offenses of dishonesty against our
neighbors with whom we live, and converse in this life. O keep us this day
most sweet Savior, from that odious and common sin of lying, directly, or
indirectly, from swearing, and chasing rashly, vainly or irreuerently, in, or
against thy most holy name. And keep us from all manner of dishonesty, with
our bodies, with our tongues, with our eyes, with our hands, and with our
feet, unto which we are so exceeding prone. And that because we are thy
temples, and members one of another, and of thy Son Christ especially.

And for our help herein, give us grace, that we may every one, seriously
apply, and diligently mind the things thou have this day appointed us to do
in our several ranks and callings: as we are either fathers, masters,
children or servants, that we may both govern and obey, as becomes thy
children and servants, which fear thy holy name; and give us grace that we
may this day, and all the days of our life, persevere in the faith, and fear
of thee, and of thy Son Jesus, our most loving and blessed Savior.

And grant most loving Father, that as we have begun in him; so wheresoever
we are, at the last we may finish our mortal race in him, and change this life
unto his glory and our own eternal comforts.

Now having continued our accustomed suites for spiritual blessings and
graces, we return unto thee most humble and hearty thanks for all those
favors, which as assurances of all thy love, thou have given every one of us
here present: as in our births into this present world, thou did safely bring
us, through the straight gates of nature (which ^ike Herod in the act of birth,
^hreatneth nothing but present ^eath; and in infancy, childhood and ^outh,
considering our weakness and wildnes, might have befallen unto us many
mischances of de^ (...) in our bodies: so since ^e came to manhood, thou have
^ept us from the same dangers, a ^ousand manner of ways, for which we thank
thee. O Lord ^e thank thee also for our daily ^ead, and conti^all clothing,
that through thy blessing does daily comfort us in this present life: for
thee, and for a thousand more, of which we have continual experience both in
body and soul, we are bound to continue and conclude these our prayers,
thanksgiving and morning sacrifice unto thee, for our selves, and thy holy
Church, as thy Son our Savior has taught us, saying. Our Father which art
in heaven, etc. To thee the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, be given all
honor and glory by us and all thine this day, and for evermore. Amen, Amen.

Be merciful, o Father, of all mercies to thy Church universal, dispersed
throughout the whole world, and grant the they that d^e confess thy name, may
agree in the truth of thy holy word, and live in godly concord and unity. More
especially good Lord, be merciful to all such as be under persecution, for
the testimony of a good conscience, and the profession of the Gospel of thy
Son our Savior Jesus Christ.

Defend and save, o Lord, those silly souls, which as sheep are appointed to
the shambles and slaughter, and repress the rage and tyranny of such as are
bent to bloodshed, and mind nothing but murdering thy Saints and children:
be merciful to this sinful kingdom wherein we live, and be good and
gracious to thine anointed, Charles our most gracious King: bless the
honorable Counsel, the Reverend ^lergie, the Nobility, and Cominal^ie, of
this Land; and also bless ^s a portion of thine inheritance, the which our
Lord Jesus Christ was contented to redeem with his most precious blood, the
alone mediator of all mercies, to whom ^ith thee and the holy Ghost bee^ ^^l
honor and glory for and ever. Amen.

Amen.
Precepts of duty.
HIgh mighty God of righteousness,
in wrath a dread consuming fire;
Thou did in perfect happiness,
make man that did against thee conspire:
And break thy laws with all despite,
when thou had made him pure and holy;
Placed him in garden of delight,
so great and wicked was his folly.
That having leave to take or leave,
to choose, refuse, or use at pleasure;
He did himself by sin deceive,
of that divine surpassing treasure:
And by his mutabilitie,
(regardlesse of thy sacred laws;)
He brought in instabilitie,
lost his free will by breach of laws.
Thou God of Iusti^e must do right,
man wanting grace, with want of grace;
By grace substraction did requite,
and banish him that blessed place:
By means of which we are inclined,
from thy behestes to run astray;
Our tongue, our heart, our soul, our mind,
by sin is carried clean away.
Thou have us Lord by grace elected,
and thy free mercy) to inherit
Thy bliss, (if thy bliss be respected)
and sealed us with thy holy spirit:
Thou made us free by thy Sons blood,
to the end thou may be glorified;
In souls and bodies for our good,
his passion has us purified.
Thou freedst us to that end we might,
serve thee in holy righteousness;
Thou gave thy Son, and he us bought,
from thraldom of our sinfulnes:
Thou would he should for all men die,
to make him live in thine elect;
And they in him to ^ructifie,
and with his graces have them decked.
By grace, and holy inspiration,
rebellious nature seek'st to tame;
With precepts for instruction,
and leau'st us laws in thine own name;
The ready way of serving thee,
and profit to our neighbors bring;
And loving thee most zealously,
who art our Father, Lord and King.
Though by thy Gospel we be free,
from laws their sting and punishment;
Yet rules of life and piety,
thou have precrib'd and to us lent:
Thereby to manage all our deeds,
and guide us lest we step awrie;
Observing careful as we needs,
how well to live, and well to die.
These laws thou writ'st in Table two,
with the pure finger of thine hand;
Delivering them Moses unto,
that we thy will might understand:
The first contains precepts four,
Of precepts due unto thy fear;
The second six Commanrements more,
of love we should to neighbors bear.
The sum and substance of them all,
and that fulfilleth every part,
Is thee to love, on thee to call,
with all our soul, might, mind, and heart:
To other men (especially,)
thine household that are firm in faith;
As to our selves to give supply;
with all our help as Scripture says.
But we are weak, the case thus stands,
In this ^raile mortal life of ours;
No man can keep these thy commands,
but breaks them at all times and hours:
Yet thou thy children often do will,
themstlues to comfort hopefully;
There is left for them some measure still,
to come to thee regardfully.
Namely when they do bend their strength,
(daily prevented by thy Spirit)
And stand in hope to attain at length,
(what now they want by Christ his merit:
Walking and daily going one;
by steps thereof to Paradise;
Praising and lauding thee alone,
bewailing their infirmities.
The faithful know all and believe,
with thee our father mercy is;
Thou with thy Son do all things give,
how can we then of mercy miss:
Therefore my God now give to me,
all that thou give to thine elect;
Of thine eternal clemency,
good Lord do not my soul reject.
Illuminate my knowledge dark,
possess my heart with perfect love;
What Is done amiss, Lord do not mark,
the guilt of sin from me remove:
That I most constantly may walk,
the steps and paths of thy just laws;
And of thy goodness daily talk,
with fear end love and all applause.
To thee I wholly owe my self,
for thou have Lord created me;
And bought me not with worldly p^lf^,
but by thy Son have made me free:
Whence I do also learn to love,
all men in thee and for thy sake;
Who bear thy Image from above,
and unto thee themselves betake.
O let me thus thy favors find,
and peace of conscience understand;
Thy blessings and thy mercies kind,
protected still by thy right hand:
That filled my days, I leave this life,
to take a life eternally;
Where Angels sing continually,
all glory be to God on high.
Amen,
A Morning Prayer,
O Blessed Lord God, great in power, fearful in iudge^ent, and rich in mercy:
which ^indest and no man loses, and ^oo^est and no man binds, I yield ^hee
most humble and hearty ^hankes, for that of thy fatherly goodness thou have
vouchsafed ^e this last nights sleep in peace and rest: and again loosing the
^onds wherewith I was tied, have ^iuen me power to see this mor^ing light. Now,
o Lord, I be^ech thee, power upon me this ^y the heavenly dew of thy
com^rtable blessing, that through the ^eration of thy gracious beams that am a
poor tree, weak and ^rren in my self, may bud forth ^d bear the fruits of
true faith (...) my life and conu^rsation. Continue this goodness and mercy
toward me, and by thy power raise me from the deep sleep of all
unrighteousness, discharge me from the works of darken^sse, and cloth me
with the armor of light, that I may walk honestly, as in the day; and live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world.

Grant me, o Lord, true understanding and knowledge of thy word, which is the
glass of thy will. Increase in me all godly de^ sires, together with true
contri^ tion of heart, that I may vnfained^ ly despise the pleasures of thi^
world, and with hearty repentan^ be converted unto thee: send the holy Angel to
guide me and keep me in all my ways, and prosp^ the work of my hands that I
n^ uer fail in my vocation to d^ some good to all men, and esche^ if it be
possible all evil.

O Lord, I beseech thee, p^ serve and keep my senses ^a^ and sound, that I be
neither corrup ted by prosperity, nor dejected by adversity; nor be too
fearful of thy judgments, or too bold on thy mercies. But grant me grace o
merciful Lord, that I may apprehend all that comes from thee with a religious
heart, and contented mind.

O blessed Lord Jesus Christ, blessed be thy name for our redemption, great
was thy love, sore was thy passion, print in our minds we beseech thee the
continual memory thereof, that we may love thee which so louedst us, and
evermore praise thee that have bought us at so dear a price. Reject not our
prayers which we offer to be presented to thy Father, but mercifully help us
and heal all our infirmities, increase our Faith and teach us obedience,
forgive us our offenses, and hide us in thy wounds from thy fa^hers just wrath:
make good thy ^romises unto us for the world to come and enable us with thy
grace for the performance of all thy Commandments: prosper o Lord, the works
of our hands, and bring us safe to the end of this day for thy truth, and for
thy names sake.

Amen, Amen.
An Evening Meditation.
I Lay me down to sleep in peace,
for thou Lord only make me dwell
In safety with great quietness,
and do ill dreams from me expel:
My body to enormities.
is subject without rest and sleep;
Because of mine infirmities,
my life and health it cannot keep.
Good Father all sufficient,
my loving God I yield thee praise;
For this days blessings to me sent,
and guiding me in all my ways:
In that thou have this day now past,
me strongly guarded with thy hands;
With love refresht me, first and last,
with mercies more then seashore sands.
That have me brought to this days end,
black night and darkness drawing near,
Wherein all creatures rest attend,
and lay them down till day appear:
I finding my debility,
poor creature, run to the divine;
O strength mine imbecility,
and aid this soul and body mine.
Thou have me made of matter gross,
and brittle substance out of clay;
Which still is subject to the cross,
a tennis ball for worldlings play:
He wanting comfort cannot live,
after much sorrow and great grief;
Therefore I do my body give,
and soul to thee, Lord grant relief.
O Lord I do thee humbly pray,
as thou art fountain of all rest;
Be thou my succor, help and stay,
let me by thee this night be blessed:
Consider me in my weakness,
and let my careful eyes behold;
My miseries and my distress,
to cry for mercy make me bold.
And since it is time that night now brings,
the bodies rest and quiet sleep;
O shadow me under thy wings,
let thy protection safe me keep:
Look over me with watchful eyes,
when this corrupted flesh of mine;
In slumbring sleep and dullness lies,
deprived of sense with closed eyne.
Unable my poor self to save,
from dangers of the darkesome night;
Keep me, my bed else is my grave,
and I shall never see the light:
Lord thou that only make me dwell,
and in sure safety to abide;
(Thou watchest over Israel)
watch over me, be by my side.
Thou art my Castle and my Fort,
my sword, my buckler and defense;
My rock, my refuge and comfort,
save me from force and violence:
Alas without thee what am I?
a beast that rightly nothing knows;
A senseles block, silly fly,
that no good do, nor no good shows.
Thy loving favor Lord extend,
over the house wherein I rest;
My bed with Angels Lord defend,
and soul and body by thee be blessed:
Oh, lay me down in rest and peace,
in rest and peace o let me rise;
In rest and peace, o give some ease,
from torments, troubles, tears und cries.
Let not the sleights of sin deceive,
nor wicked practice overtake me;
Let nothing me of hope bereave,
oh do not thou (though all) forsake me:
Lord I am poor, oh make me rich,
with those great riches of thy blessing;
My soul, my soul is black as pitch,
let pardon follow my confessing.
In hope of this I lay me down,
depending on thy providence;
I care not if the world do frown,
for I am safe by thy defense:
Lord let it be, for I am thine,
my rest make sweet and comfortable;
To thee I do my self resign,
Lord grant all this, for thou art able.
An Evening Prayer, for a private person.
O Most holy Father, and my most gracious God which give unto all men, the
cheerful light of the day, that in thine assistance they may follow their
honest vocations; and likewise sendest the silent nights, that then they my
rest their wearied limbs, and busied minds, and so return their due thanks
for thy goodness: I sinful creature adore and praise thee for the total
sum of all thy mercies, whereof I have been this day partaker.

O Lord I am vile, look not upon mine unworthiness, folly, and wickedness:
but appease thy anger justly conceived against me, and forgive what has been
amiss in me this day, or at any other time, even for his sake who is thy well
beloved Son, and my dear Advocate.

Root up o Lord, the thorns of mine evil inclination, and affections, and in
their places make the fruits of virtue to spring: inflame my heart with the
desire of heavenly love, that I may love obedience to thy Gommandements with
zeal as hot as fire, loving thee above all things, and my neighbor as my
self.

Give me grace o Lord, to serve thee in true faith, fear, and holiness, all
the days of my life, and to overcome my mortal enemies, the desires of the
world, the pleasures of the flesh, and the suggestious of the wicked Spirit,
remembering my promise made to thee in Baptism, for the performance whereof I
depend only upon thy holy Spirit.

O God of glorious light, let thine Angels pitch their tents round about this
house, for our defense now in the time of this darkness, and grant that this
nights sleep may be quiet unto me without grief or trouble, preserve me and
mine both in body and soul from all dangers, and offenses, which may come
either by foolish dreams, noisome spirits, or uncleanness of corrupt nature;
waken me again, o Lord, in due time, and let me behold the light of the next
day to my comfort, prepare my heart and mind to thy service every day in all
truth and sincerity, that when I have run the race of this life, thou
may please to call me to be partaker of a better. Comfort me, o Lord, in
all those things wherein I have been any ways dismayed this day: take not thy
holy spirit from me, but continue the motions thereof in my heart, that when as
the tempter shall come with his assaults, I may be furnished with the shield
o^ faith to quench his fiery darts.

Confirm my weakness, and grant that this nights sleep may be sweet and
healthful for my body, and a profitable memorial of that sleep which at my
last end, in that great night, shall make a separation between my body and
soul.

Let always thine unspeakable mercies preserve me, thy endless sweetness
rejoice me, thy heavenly truth strengthen me, thy knowledge embolden me,
and thy goodness keep me now and for evermore from mine enemies visible and
invisible, that I may awake in the morning in perfect sense and good health,
and for the same be thankful unto thee, and carefully betake me to my
vocation and calling for Jesus Christ's sake, my only Savior.

Amen. Amen.
Another for the Evening.
MOst glorious and sacred Trinity, the most mighty God, the Father, the Son,
and the holy Spirit, which art the author and original of all things, both in
heaven and in earth, and that have appointed unto every thing his end and way
in this life. The eyes of all things are toward thee to finish in their
courses that obedience they owe unto thee. The Sun, the Moon, the Stars in
most constant order extend their light and heat to the comforting, not only
of fowls and beasts, but specially to the direction of man, how to know thee
and walk in thy ways, as being the books and characters wherein we may
read thy power, wisdom, and incomprehensible glory, for their sound and
language (as a Harold) is gone forth to proclaim unto the Nations, both Pagan
and Christian, that thou art the Lord God Almighty, and most worthy to be
praised, as in the Morning, so in the Evening also.

Therefore knowing the great dependancy, that all things caelestiall and
terrestrial have on thee, I do humbly entreat thee to take me into thy
custody this night: knowing that if a Sparrow cannot with safety fall to the
ground but by thee, that without thee so great refreshing of sleep cannot be
attained unless I beg it of thee, many are the visions of the night, as idle
dreams and fancies, that would interrupt my sleep, if thou Lord by thy
gracious power and presence of thy good Spirit drive them not away. And Satan
would (like Abi^hai unto Saul) in his sleep, with fearful darts of despair,
strike (...) dead at once, (as Jacl did Sise^) unto eternal death, in soul
(...) body.

Therefore unto thee the keeper of Israel, that neither slumberest nor
sleep, by night, nor by day, do I come beseeching thee, that laying my
self to rest in thee, I may in the acustomed time which thou have appointed,
wake again: but if thou please that this night shall be my last, and that
this mortal, shall be swallowed up in immortallity. O Lord grant though I
die in body, yet I may awake in soul, and live with thee for evermore; and
that my body so sleeping, yet again may awake at the resurrection of the just,
and with those that shall not sleep, be caught up, with soul united by the
same power, by which thou (o Savior) did at once rise from death to life,
even as that life which thou had with the father, before the world was. And
as thou art one with him, so grant that after my last sleep, I may be one with
thee in the presence of the Father, and the holy Ghost for evermore.

But (o Lord) if thou please to raise me up again, to spend more days in this
vale of tears, grant that I may live honestly in the works of my vocation,
which thou have ordained me to live in, or live by. Grant that I may set thee
before mine eyes, day and night, and behold thee always in my presence; that
when I am tempted to any eueill, in the work of my calling, or any other ways:
I may not be tickled with the profit or pleasures therein objected, and so
provoked to sin against thee. Keep my tongue from lying, lest thereby I
become the child of Satan, for he is a liar, and the Father of lies from the
beginning; keep my tongue from swearing, and that I may not take thy name in
vain: empty my heart of covetousness, of pride, of vainglory, and let me
not respect worldly vanity, let me not be selfe-conceited: but, o Lord, give
me to be of humble, gentle, harmless and courteous disposition and
behavior, both in my words and deeds, to my superiors and inferiors.

O Lord give me to be of a charitable nature, and of a pitiful affection,
toward all men in general, but especially toward all those that are (of the
household of Faith, of broken and contrite hearts, which thou Lord have
promised, that thou will not despise. Grant o heavenly Father, that Christ both
sleeping and waking, in this life, and after this life may be to me advantage.
O let me not fall into a custom or habit of sinning, lest therewith my heart
become hardened, that I cannot repent, but give me such a conscience of sin,
that I may never commit sin either great or small, but my heart may affright,
terrific, and amaze m^ (as it did David) when he cut off the lap of Saule^
garment.

And when I have sinned, let thy loving countenance shine upon me, (as it did
upon Peter, when he had denied thee) that I may pour forth a fountain of
tears.

And in bed if I happen to awake at midnight, give me thy holy Spirit, that
with sobs, sighs, and groans, in the secret closet of my heart, I may cast up
loud cries unto thee, not only for my sins past, in the dark night of my
childhood and youth, while I knew not thee, but even now, since I came to some
groath and manhood in Christ, I have broken all thy Commandments, thy Laws,
thy Statutes, thine Ordinances; not in ignorance, but in knowledge: for which I
have need again to pray unto thee. Wherefore Lord forgive me, forgive me
for thy Christ his sake.

O my Love, my Dove (the blessed and powerful Savior of my soul) thou
know that I have sought after thee, ever since I knew thee, by night in my
bed have I sought thee whom my soul loves. O my Savior, since thou have
first drawn me with the cords of thy love, let the strength thereof hold me
so fast, that I may for ever abide constant, in the like love to thee again;
Thou have promised, that him thou once louedst, that thou will love him unto
the end. Good God in thy love keep me this night in soul and body: and not
only me in mine own person, but all that belong unto me, for the love of
thy only Son Jesus, to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all
honor and glory by me and all thine, this night and for evermore, world
without end.

Amen, Amen.
An Invocation to God, humbly praying for remission of sins.
VVEll-spring of bounty, God of fear,
beginning that make all begin;
With what oblation to appear,
to appease thy wrath that is due for sin:
I know the blood of bulls and beast,
or sweetest Incense that does rise;
From earth of old they were the least,
and are not now of any prise.
O how should I be reconciled,
again unto thy loving favor;
How long Lord, shall I be exiled,
from my sweet Lord, and only Savior:
How long, oh! have I called to thee,
to thee in name of thy dear Son;
Yet what I asked, thou gave not me,
and what I would is left undone.
I long have knocked at thy door,
of mercy, but no ^n rance find;
Sorrows and troubles more and more,
increase and vex my soul and mind:
I daily wait most woeful motall,
before thy seat of clement grace;
But may not peep within thy portall,
nor see thy glorious beauteous face.
I sighe, I mourn, my tears are seas,
I sink under the burdenous load;
Of sin and shame, and find no ease,
provoke me forward with thy word:
My self chastising I desire,
to quench thy wrath with floods of tears;
Yet still increase thy fearful fire,
and so eucrease my daily fears.
By prayers thee to press who dares,
except by thy Sons mediation;
To seek thy glory's all our cares,
and the end of earthly men's creation:
What course should I then poor wretch take,
to do, or ask that is good and just;
But unto thee my prayers make,
and only in thy Son put trust.
If that my sins shall thee offend,
then all thy creatures rage and storm;
And all conspire by thy command,
to punish me poor silly worm:
Where shall I be, or whether fly,
from sight of thine all-seeing eyne;
As Noah's Dove, on earth am I,
and cannot look against thy shine.
But if thou show thy loving face,
all creatures on my service tend;
Men, beasts, and Angels, do me grace,
to help me all their powers do bend:
What should I then, say, give or do?
what pain can gain thy favor lost;
Rivers of oil, or ought thereto,
they are thine own, and of thy cost.
Accept yet Lord the sacrifice,
of heart, and calves of lips unfeigned:
This is that offering thou did devise,
to have thy grace to be obtaind:
The free will offerings of my zeal,
in sense of sighing still ascending;
They to thy mercies seat appeal,
and would make peace for mine offending.
Although mine heart and tongue do falter
Yet through my Saviors blessed mediati^;
Receive this offering on thine alter,
with all my best imagination:
Hear me in him, in him relieve me,
for without him no help can be;
None can my souls, or hearts ease give me,
nor can I inward comforts see.
Till I know that thy wrath's appeased,
and have thy Charter for my pardon;
Then shall I find my heart so eased,
that I desire no further gue^rdon:
And now I most unhappy man,
that did offend my God so kind;
By grace in him in all I can,
I Will seek with heart, with soul and mind
To honor, serve, obey and please,
him that is my gracious maker;
Whom I beseech to grant me peace,
and make me of his joys partaker.
An Evening prayer to be said with a whole Family.
O Most blessed Savior, b^ whose merits alone, the^ is granted unto us this
prese^ liberty, to approach unto the F^ there, and in thy name, after the end
of our labors this day accomplished: by which through thy goodness we have
profited our selves, and furthered the continuance of humane society, which by
no means could continue, if we did not seriously apply our selves in the
works of our vocation, in which thou have ordained, that every man should
live, not only to his present necessity, but unto the furthering of the
welfare of our children and alliance, which accordingly we have this day done,
so far forth as the approaching ^ight would suffer, and as our frail
bodies, soon spent and tired with the cares and labors of this world would
give us leave.

And seeing thou have ordained the night for man, by sleep to refresh
himself; Lord we entreat thee to give unto our bodies, such rest and sleep
this night, that the day following, we may be raised strong in mind, and
body, to go on, in our several labors, honest business, and employments, in
moderation, wisdom, and discretion, as may be most to thy glory, and to the
honor of thy great name.

O Lord we beseech thee, let not our sins, of which we be many ways
guilty: cause thee to remove away our sleep from us, nor frustrate this days
endeauours: let no blasting or mildewe, or any the evil that walks in the
darkness hurt the fruit of our labors. Let no sons of Belial, when we are
in our fast sleep, come in upon us, to spoil without, nor steal within, that
which thou through our honest endeauours, or the gift of our parents, have
blessed us withal for as the beasts of the forre^ which are of savage nature,
hunt after the prey: so wicked me^ that ask not their bread of thee, do in
the night by violent hands, rob and spoil thy people.

O Lord, we know not, but that for the wickedness of our hearts, hands, and
lives, by which we have this day offended thee, injured and oppressed others,
but that thou might (as on Jobs children) suffer the devil, by his
instigation of wicked men, to rob and spoil us, not only of our goods and
cattle, and other our personal estates, but also of our lives. But (o our
good God) we are confident that through thy mercy and love in Christ, no evil
shall come unto us, for thou have promised, that thou will be a refuge and
fortress, to keep safe all those that trust in thee: not only from the arrow
of the day, but from the terror of the night, which thou at thy will and
pleasure sendest for the punishment and correction of our sins (as thou
^iddest Shem^i with his railing ^ongue to a^^^ict David. O Lord, for the
w^rthinesse of thy Son our Savior, in whom only we lay down our bodies to
rest, turn back this night, and at all other times of our sleep, all the
evil and wicked purposes of those that intend us any hurt in our bodies or
goods; and send thy holy Angels to protect us with their hands, as they did
thee our Savior against the prince of darkness, when he had ended on thee
his three temptations in the wilderness. And as they fought against the
Assirans hoaste, that proudely boasted themselves against thy servant Hezekiah:
(So o Lord) let thine Angels fight against all our enemies, and the enemies of
thy church, not of flesh, but of Spirit, which resolve our hurt, whether
walking in the day, or sleeping in the night. And though our sins, in which
we so much abound, have deserved that thou should send those ministering
Spirits, as on Egypts first borne in the night, to take away this our dying
life, or life full of death: yet for thy mercies sake let them be our gardians,
not ouely this night, but all the days and nights of this life, for ever to
further our souls and bodies, in thy obedience; and in, and after death to
conduct them to Abraham's bosom, to rest in joy and bliss with thee for
evermore; yea let thine Angels of light, that continually behold thy face in
heaven, be about our bodies night and day, and with loving and kind
assistance, keeping evil from us, and us from evil: not only of sin, but
of temptation, with which that worldly Governor, and Prince of the Air never
cea^eth millions of ways to withdraw us from thee: if he cannot through
covetousness (as Judas,) ^or through the world (as De^as and Achan,) yet
through pleasure, (as into our first mother, Eve, David, Solomon, Sampson) he
will a thousand to one, craftily enter, and seat himself in our hearts. O
Lord, if by thy holy Spirit, we happen to be so strong as by none of these
baits to be caught, then he labors by temporal crosses, and afflictions
of body and mind, (as on Job) to draw us to distrust and despair in thy
mercy and love, in all which assaults let thy grace, and our faith keep us,
that we may not be overcome, but as valiant soldiers in Christ, and through
the Armory of God, in which by our holy calling we are girt, we may lead
captivity captive, and be more then Conquerours through him that loves us.
So that neither the fears of the day, nor the terrors of the night, of death,
and hell, should separate us from the assured guard of thee, and thy Angels,
the conductors and furtherers of our salvation. This thy great help, and
especial assistance, we are continually enforced to crave, not for our own
sakes: but for thy Son his sake, and that as he himself has taught us in
his most holy word, saving, Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

To the Lord of Hoastes and God of glory, our Creator: to thee o Christ Jesus
our Mediator, thee most holy Spirit proceeding from the Father, and the Son,
be ascribed all praise and glory this night and for evermore.

Amen, Amen.
Another for the Evening.
O Eternal God, and most merciful Father, we acknowledge and confess
against our selves, that our hearts and hands are full of all filthiness and
sins whatsoever, and we are altogether unworthy to speak unto thee, or to
come near thy presence: Nevertheless being so much bound unto thee, as this day
past and all other times of our lives do witness: we most humbly offer unto
thy holiness (by the hands of Jesus Christ our Mediator) our humble duties of
praise and thanksgiving for our Creation, Election, Redemption, Vocation, and
Sanctification, with all other good graces appertaining to this life, or that
which is to come.

And namely, o Lord, our tongues, and lips shall glorify thee, sitting above
the Cherubims, for preserving us this day past, from so many miseries, and
casualties whereunto we might justly have fallen, if thou would have
entered into judgment with us: but Lord, thou art merciful, and passest by
our manifold offenses, to win us by thy long sufferance: we beseech thee make
us thankful for thy mercies and careful to doethy will.

O Lord, pardon and forgive v^ all our sins, and grant us every day more and
more the sight o^ them, true, unfeigned sorrow, an^ repentance for the same.
Give us faith and grace to believe all the sweet promises that thou have made
to us in Christ Jesus, both for the remission of our sins, and the hope of a
better life, strengthen us from above with thy mighty hand to walk in every
good way; and to bring forth the fruits of a true and lively faith in our lives
and conversation all the days of our pilgrimage here. Arm us, o Lord, with
thy grace and holy Spirit against all the corruptions of the world, the
temptations of the devil, and the allurements of the flesh, and settle our
minds to the continual exercise of devout prayer, with the hearing of thy
sacred word, watching for thy coming both public and private.

Continue thy goodness toward us in providing for us such things as are
necessary for the maintenance of this present life, and bless the same under
our hands, that the little which we have by thy goodness may be increased,
and the increase may serve as well to furnish our necessary uses, as to
minister unto the necessity of others, according to our abilities. Keep us
Lord this night from all evils, which may happen either to our bodies or
souls: Extend thy goodness toward all those that depend upon us, or we on
them. Give us quiet sleep and rest, and when we shall awake, let all our
thoughts and cogitations be holy meditations on thee and thy law. Bless us, o
Lord, all the nights and days of our lives, and at the end thereof, send us a
blessed departure, and afterward a joyful resurrection unto life eternal,
grant us these good things most merciful Father, and all other needful
graces for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose name we further call upon thee as
our Lord and Savior has taught us in his Gospel, saying. Our Father which
are in heaven, etc.

A godly Meditation, wherein the distressed shows his unfeigned grief and
sorrow, for having offended so powerful a God, and so-mercifull and gracious a
Father
ALas that I offended ever,
this God of gods, this Lord of powers;
That can in pieces all men shiuer,
and ouerturne the stateliest towers:
Ah, woe is me that I offended,
and justly God stirred up to ire;
Who by his Law has sin condemned.
unto the pit of endless fire.
I daily see Gods creatures all,
justly for sin displeased with me;
Men's hearts are hardened and with gall,
feed me that have offended thee:
My God thy blessings all on earth,
tho duoest withold and from me keep,
Alas my soul sustaines a dearth
of grace, unto thy grace I creep.
But what to do, or what to say,
I know not Lord, but I know this;
My griefs increase more day by day,
my mirth is moan, bane is my bliss.
One evil does another call,
like waves on waves in raging seas;
My weary burden makes me fall,
I find no comfort, help, nor ease,
I hope of help, but that hope quails,
in crosses are my comforts ended;
I fly to Faith, but then Faith fails,
when I need most to be defended,
As if I were the only man,
prepos'd by thine intendement;
Whom heaven and earth must curse and ban,
as subject of all punishment:
Thy justice damnes me, I appeal
to mercy, then appealed I fear
To be rejected, thus cold zeal,
and secret sins with grief I bear.
Shall I think it a fruitless task,
unto my God for to repair;
That sinners calls and bids them ask,
and they shall have all things by prayer:
Can it be bootelesse down to fall,
before his throne of Majesty;
And with repentant tongue to call,
for pardon for mine iniquity.
May not unfeigned cries, at last
prevail with him that's pitiful,
To pardon mine offenses past,
revive my soul which now is dull:
I Will frame my heart to meditate,
my tongue to utter what may please
Him, whom best knows my estate,
and seek his wrath for to appease.
To him i will go in Christ his name,
in whom I know he is well pleased;
And will confess my sin with shame,
and so mine heart shall sure be eased:
For Christ's sake look on me again,
he is God all-sufficient;
He does behold and see my pain,
my inward faithful hearts intent.
He knows what I go about,
all I think, speak, or do amiss
He writes or notes without all doubt,
in his remembrance book it is:
I know he will in worth accept,
what justly I intend to be;
And cannot it perform, except
he put his helping hand thereto;
He knows that I am but flesh,
and what is flesh but frail and ill:
And what is man, a lump of trash,
whom vain desires do fully fill:
And will this God Jehovah high,
so strong and powerful set his might;
Against a worm so weak as I,
a silly man, a shade of night.
What conquest can there be in God,
to work revenge on me poor soul;
Who still corrects me with his rod,
whose Justice does my sins control:
Shall I dispute with thee, nay rather,
poor wretch I should fall prostrate down,
And humbly kneel unto my Father,
and pray with tears when he does frown.
If he afflict more, be it so,
if further plague me, le't be so,
If he will kill with pains and woe,
do what he will, let it be so:
For I am his, do what he will,
with me and all that mine can be;
It is his own, and must be still,
there is no disputing (Lord) with thee.
There is no Art, or Eloquence,
can quench thy coals of burning ire;
It is not words can make defense,
nor friends can save me from the fire:
Nor take me from thy powerful hands,
so full of might, force, strength and power;
Or break in sunder, thy strong bands,
nor ease one minute of an hour.
I Will yield me therefore to his will,
Lord do what thy good pleasure is;
Turn me as may, thy mind fulfill,
i will wait the time of happy bliss:
I Will wait thy pleasure, time will come,
wherein I may the issue see
Of my afflictions all and some,
and what thy purpose is with me.
The mean time I will with thy word,
consult and use my exercise;
And comfort take through hope o Lord,
refresh dull spirits, and clear dim eyes:
With dew of thy sweet promises,
laying aside all fleshly aid;
I only rest on thy mercies,
in holy word as thou have said.
And in true faith will I remain,
and seek thee (being the true way)
Wherein who walks, at length shall gain,
true bliss and happiness for aye:
Who this embraces shall not err,
wherein who lives, shall never dye;
But wear a crown past reason far,
and live with God eternally.
An Evening Meditation.
O Most dear Lord Jesus, to whose everlasting goodness we are daily engaged
for all the good things we have, which have granted the cheerful light of the
day unto all men, both good and bad, to follow their affairs and several
employments in: and mercifully give the sweet stillness of the night, to
refresh their wearred bodies, and to put away the cares of their minds, and to
assuage their sorrows we ^seech thee that those things(...)have done amiss
this day(...)our common imbecillit(...)gence, ignorance, or ^g(...)rash and
unadvised presumpti^(...)wherein we have offended(...)cred eyes, they may be
pa^ and forgiven for thy(...)goodness sake, and according(...)the innumerable
multitude(...)mercies. And grant herewithall that this night may be blessed and
prosperous unto us, safe by thy protection over us, and free from the dangerous
illusions of wicked spirits: so as this refreshment by quiet rest and sleep
may make both our bodies and minds more cheerful to morrow, and we the more
enabled to do thee service, and faithfully to follow those employments thou
have appointed for us, bless us o Lord, and water us with the dew of thy
blessings, and let the drops of thy Sons blood, shed for our sins, and yet
crying for mercy, distill into my heart by a lively Faith for the comfort of
our souls, and the amendment of our sinful lives, we beseech thee, o Lord,
take from us all manner of darkness, misbeleefe, infidelity, carnal lusts
and affections, and so strengthen us with thy grace, that the Bark, of our
weak Faith sink not through the storms of Satan's temptations: nor our hopes
be over whelmed through the weight of our unworthiness, n^r any of thy good
graces in us extinguished or blemished by the waves of a wicked conversation.
Enter thy Judgments into the tables of our hearts, that we may be content to
spare of our ordinanary sleep, to muse of all thy Co^mand^ments, and that we
may be more earnest upon the meditation of thy sacred word, then the Kings of
the Nations have been to turn over their Records in the night season.

Be mindful of us when well appen to forget our selves, and think upon us, o
Lord, sleeping and waking. Keep us, O Lord, this night present, even us, and
ours, that we be neither disquieted by dreams, nor surprised by any sudden
violence, nor affrighted by any terror: but grant us this fredome and
liberty, that we may lie down in peace and rest, and rise up again in due
time, safely; to the honor and glory of thy name, and the managing of our
worldly business in thy fear, through Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior,

Amen.
A Prayer for Faith.
O Lord our God, thou have re^ea^ed in thy word, that the just should live by
Faith, and that without ^aith it is impossible to please thee, and although a^
not faith, yet as many as are ordained to eternal life, by thy power and gift
do truly believe. O Lord, I do believe, increase my faith, and help my
unbelief; and grant that through hearing and reading of thy Word, I may grow
strong in this grace, and increase from faith to faith. And open my heart, O
Lord, as thou did Lydias, that I may believe the Word to be thy Word, and thy
promises therein contained, to be given not unto others but unto me: And that
when thy word says, Believe and ye shall be saved, my heart may presently
answer thee, Command or say what thou will, I believe Lord, not historically,
but sincerely from the bottom of my heart, Lord help my vnbe^eefe. And, O
heavenly Father, grant for thy Son, my Saviors sake, that when storms of
temptations shall fall upon me, as on Peter on the water, yet beyond his
example, having thy Word to support me, I may believe in thee; and though with
the eyes of my flesh, I see no hope, but that my faith may frustrate me; yet
like Peter I may not sink, but seek for further help from thee: and being
assured that every word of promise is most certain, let me still, above hope,
and beyond hope, believe in thee: yea, and though with holy Job thou kill my
body, yet will I trust in thee, for I know thou will save my spirit and unite
them again, in the day of the Lord.

Sweet Savior, whenever I shall be stung with the remembrance of my
present, or passed sins, grant I may like the faithful ^sraelites in the
wilderness, look unto the pillar of thy Cross on which thou suff^redst death
for my sins, and through the virtue thereof apprehended by faith (like the
diseased Woman in her bloody issue, and perishing grief,) with one glance and
touch of sincere and justifying Faith, be suppled, comforted, and cured, of my
troubled spirit and wounded conscience: O heavenly Father grant that the oil
of Faith in me, may never through temptation be weakened, much less utterly
decayed; but as the oil in the widows Cruse, through thy blessing, be more
and more increased: this grant for the honor of Jesus Christ my Lord and
Savior.

Amen.
A Prayer for the Remission of sins,
O Lord God in greatness infinite, in power omnipotent, in Counsel
wonderful, and in Judgment t^rrible, Although (...) miserable sinner, have by
thy justice truly deserved everlasting damnation for my horrible sins, yet I
bese^ch thee cast me not away with them that have not known thee, or such as
forget God, or such as run on in their wickedness and never say what have I
done; for I appeal from thy rightful justice, to thine unspeakable mercy, and
humbly cast down my self, at thy feet, and confess my sins, bese^ching and
begging compassion and pardon: behold, O Lord, I am a piece of that purchase
that cost so great a price, as the blood of thy dear Son, my body and soul
are the Temples of the holy Ghost, the posts whereof are sprinkled with his
most precious blood, which cries for mercy: And therefore enter not into the
course of judgment with me (for there I know I shall be overthrown) but
forbear me, forgive me, and acquit me upon that satisfaction which he has
made for penitent sinners. O Lord, though the stipend of my sin be death, and
the merit of my transgression, eternal perdition, yet is thy mercy above all
thy judgments, and thou can forgive more then I can offend; Wherefore I pray
thee set thy dear Sons Cross and Passion betwixt thy judgments and my
soul: Look upon me with the eye of mercy and compassion, as thou did upon
the sinful Woman at the banquet, and the Publican in the Temple, whole
pardons are registered in thy Book for my Comfort. O Lord bow down the height
of the Deity, to behold my vileness and misery (a lively image of the
prodigal Son) who knew no other help but only thee my most loving Father,
whom I have so highly offended; power the oil of mercy into my defiled and
fainting heart; search it that I may not flatter my self to extenuate my
sin, cleanse it, and season it with the oil of thy grace, to receive and
retain all goodness hereafter. Lord, I thank thee for thy patience, and
long suffering, that thou have not suddenly (after my desert) taken vengeance
on me, but given me a longer time of repentance: wherefore I beseech thee
appease thine anger toward me now, loose in me the works of darkness,
create in me a new heart, and because thou expectest my amendment, that I may
have thy favor; I beseech thee grant me thy favor, that I may amend: give
me grace to rep^nt unfeignedly with fasting, weeping, and mourning, and make my
faith lively to believe that I am forgiven in Jesus Christ.

Let not the faults of my Forefathers light upon my head, who have walked in
their sinful steps, neither be angry with me for their sakes; but let the
weldoing of Jesus Christ, who has shed his blood for me, succor me and
procure my pardon, for give all my sins of youth and age, negligences and
ignorances, thoughts, words, and deeds, and keep me from presumptuous sins.

O Lord, look not upon the Pharisie, for he dissembleth, nor upon the Publican
first, for he says little for himself in outward show, nor upon Mary
Magdalen only, for she had but seven devils; but look upon me, that of
sinners am chief, worse then either Pharisie, Publicane, or Marie, who have as
many sins as hairs upon my head, and a greater clogge upon my Conscience,
then any burden that man has to bear, and do therefore openly, earnestly,
unfeignedly and continually call upon thee. O Lord keep under Satan that he
compel not my conscience to despair, quench all the evil motions of my
mind, striving against thy divine pleasure, and restore in me the Image of thy
Son, that I may live in thy fear, dye in thy favor, rest in thy peace, rise
in thy power, and remain in thy glory, for Jesus Christ his sake, our only
Lord and Savior.

Amen.
In this Meditation, the distressed humbly confesses his sins, and the
vanities of his former times, lewdly misspent; and resolves (and exhorts all
others) to return unto God with speedy, true and unfeigned repentance.
AN heart that's broken and contrite,
to God is a sweet sacrifice,
Repentant sinners him delight,
far more then just men in their eyes:
What I have been, my God has known,
What I now am, the Lord does see;
What I shall be to him is shown,
from him no secret kept can be.
How I consumed so many years,
misspent so many months and days.
Both hours and minutes all appears,
to God who marks my life and ways:
Time is the mean that all things tries,
Time works what men's wits devise.
Time with his swiftness ever flies,
And Time in time will make men wise.
Fly from me follies of my youth,
pack hence my sins that burd'ned me,
Welcome to me is Age and Truth,
now I by faith in Christ will be:
Whose sins do make my heart to bleed,
let them examples take by me
Whose wickedness all men's exceeds,
come Lord in mercy: pardon me.
Lord now let me depart in peace,
I ^^ele thy rod, I find thy love:
My pains do grow, my joys increase,
this mercy comes from thee above:
My sickness is a present mean,
to heal and cure my wounds of sin:
Lord purge all my corruptions clean,
and let my death my life begin.
A Prayer for the forgiveness of Sins.
Eternal God and loving Savior, before thy Baptism, thou did send John the
Baptist to preach remission of sins, through repentance and faith in thy name:
And after thou were Baptized, and entered into thy Ministry, thou that did
exhort all that were weary, and laden with their sins, to come unto thee,
saying, that thou cammest to call sinners to repentance, and that the whole had
no need of the Physician, but the sick. Wherefore, o Lord, being deadly sick,
with the sense of my sins, and with the Samaritane wounded unto death: I
entreat thee in the tears of a sorrowful heart, to wash me, not only my
hands, feet, and head, but also my heart from sin. O Lord power into my
wounds the oil of mercy, that it may pacify and quiet my mind in thee. O
Lord wash me with the blood of thy Son, as with Hysop, for I have with the
Prodigal son, and Lost sheep erred in the vanity of my mind. But, o Lord,
as Philip found Nathaniel, when he looked not for him; So by true repentance,
and hearty confession, let me be found of thee, and in thee, now seeking after
thee. O Lord I thirst after thee, and for thee, wherefore send thy holy Spirit
into me, to mollify and comfort my hard and unrepentant heart.

O Lord, it cannot by nature, enter into my mind, that I am so wretched a
sinner, but by thy word as unto Nichodemus, thou have made me to see, that
except by true repentance I be regenerat, and so, as it were, borne again, I
cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven; that is, possibly be saved. But, o
Lord, thou have made me to know sin, and how sin became sin, by the
reverent use of thy word, for though there be sin in us, before the knowledge
of thy Law, yet sin without thy Law was not imputed: but thou have given us
Christians, this thy law as a touchstone, to know sin, and that sin is the
transgression of the Law, for if there were no Law, there would be no
transgression, wherefore thy Law which was ordained unto me unto life, by the
search thereof, has slain me unto death, and made me immeasurably sinful,
for by the Law, thou have made me to know sin, which by no other means I
could know, or should ever have found out, for how should I have known lust to
be sin, if thou had not said I should not lust. Wherefore, O Lord, seeing
it is so with me, that I do the evil which I would not, and leave undone the
good that I would, bind this strong man in me, that though Sin dwell in
me, yet he may not reign over or rule in me, yea mortify the wicked deeds
of my flesh, by thy holy word, and mighty operation of thy spirit. O grant that
by the dying of the Lord Jesus, sin in all his kinds and force, may be
subdued, and dye in me: lest that thereby I be made to come short of thy glory,
which thou have promised to all repentant sinners.

Good God grant, that I may not yield my members, servants unto sins, but
reserve them servants unto thee, in true righteousness and holiness, all the
days I have to live in this life. O Lord, as Ammon hated his sister Tamar,
after he had abused her with himself, and himself with her, so that he
could not abide ^ere, (nor (well might) himself) by reason of himself: give
me grace, I may hate sin, not only after, but before it is committed with
no less indignation then they did each other, and thou them both. O Lord let
the old man that is in me, be so crucified with Christ in the power of his
death, that I may henceforth be no more servant unto sin, for that thou have
said, that a carnal man living in sin, cannot please thee. O Lord give me
thy spirit that I may hate the things of the flesh, which are nothing but san
against thee, and love the things of thy spirit, as joy in the holy Ghost,
peace of conscience, longsuffering, patience in bearing, and forbearing wrongs,
with faith and the like graces and fruits of thy most holy spirit. O Lord,
seeing I have, to the subduing of sin, desired the gift of thy holy spirit, let
me be careful, by the use of all holy means, to walk in the spirit. And
seeing thou have condemned sin, in him that knew no sin, for my sake, O
Lord condemn it not in me again; and as the first birth is nothing but
sinful Adam, Lord grant that by this my second birth, I may be a continual
living spiritual man in Christ: thus having confessed my sins with hearty
sorrow, I beseech thee, for my Savior his sake, to forgive me my sin, and to
strengthen me all the days of my life to come, that with the man in the
Gospel I may follow thy heavenly counsel and sin no more, neither in
action, affection, nor intention, lest this my confession and contrition should
be in vain, which, O Lord forbid, for thy Christ his sake.

Amen. Amen.
The Repentant complains of the grieuousnesse of his sins, and desires
mercy and pardon, and to be delivered from Sin, and the guilt and punishment
thereof.
HIdden, O Lord, are my most horrid sins,
unto the world, though open plain to thee,
He never betters, that no time begins,
corruption kills all good thoughts in me.
What sin does dwell in this vild flesh of ours,
but does increase like monsters huge in me,
Committing them, both minutes, days and hours
as swift as time, so fast grow they in me.
Rent thine own flesh, and tear thy wretched hair,
scrape clean corruptions marrow from thy bones:
Put out thine eyes, cut off thy tongue stop ears;
lame all thy senses, to kill sin at once.
I feign would walk, that know not how to creep,
I am oppressed with such most heinous crimes:
When I should walk, sin drowneth me with sleep,
for one good thought I sin a thousand times.
Sigh, O my soul, weep, sorrow, and lament,
and seek for help, if any hope be left,
Pray unto Christ for grace thou may repent,
before his merits from thee be bereft.
Though by his rod, afflictions humble thee,
and for thy sins thou suffer grievous pain,
Yet with his flesh he still vpholdeth thee,
from deep despair, in bliss with him to reign.
All glory be to God on high,
and to his Son, our Savior wise and just:
To whom with joy, still pray and sing will I,
and to my Comforter the holy Ghost,
Whose being was from all eternity,
one Deity distinct in persons three,
According to the blessed Trinity,
distinguished to three, yet one in unity.
Abba, ben, Ruach, sacred trinity,
one drop of Nectar Lord on me bestow,
That glorious blood to cure sins misery,
that all mankind thy love to me may know.
Let not sins hire, nor grievous punishment
be condemnation to my stained soul,
Be pleased with Christ his all-sufficient payment,
who ransomed us from sins eternal thralls.
A prayer to be said on a Sunday morning, for the right sanctifying of the
Sabbath.
O Lord of Sabbath, that in the beginning after the finishing of the six days
works, in which by thy most mighty word, thou did create the heaven and the
earth, and produce all this wonderful variety of things which we perceive
every day most admirably to be made, not only in the sensible, but also in all
insensible living things: of all which works, thou have caused man, chiefly
to excel, having in him most curiously epitomized all the glory of this
earthly fabric, and for all this thy great goodness, thou have done unto him,
have only required of him, that he in the contemplation of these created
things, not only without, but within himself, might find out thee, a loving
Father and Creator; and do unto thee that high homage, that thou have
commanded on this day, not as slaves, and servants, but as sons filled with
all duty and obedience, which that we might do, thou have charged us, on the
seventh day to remember our Creator, not only by refraining our servile
labor, which in the six days thou have appointed us, but by leaving the
wicked works of darkness, unto which we are by nature, and wicked desires, so
much addicted. O Lord grant that I may sequester my self, this day unto thy
praise, not only in thy holy Congregation, but in the secret cogitations of my
heart. And grant that every word, or thing that I shall this day, hear with
my ears, or see with my eyes, may be so digested in my soul, as fit subjects,
out of which I may be occasioned to magnify thy praise and glory.

O heavenly Father, grant that all those Sabbath days which have passed in my
youth and manhood, while I knew thee not, may be now recalled, by double
diligence, in the devout hearing of thy Word, receiving of the Sacraments, and
calling upon thy name, which on this day thou have for ever commanded to be
done unto thee in thy Church and holy Congregation.

And, O Lord, let my heart depart, edified in thy most holy fear, not for the
present while I am hearing, but for ever while I shall live, and let some part
of thy holy Word, which I shall hear expounded this day, abide in me, that at
all times, when I shall have occasion, or be called thereunto, I may be fitted
and furnished, to give a full account, and reason, of the hope I have in thee.
O Lord, thy Apostles have called this day, not now the seventh day from the
Creation, but the first day, and the Lords day, putting us in mind of that high
and admirable benefit of our Redemption, as on this day accomplished by his
glorious resurrection, for the which we can never render too much thanks,
neither public nor private.

O Lord, make my heart like the good ground, mentioned in the Parable, that
when it had received good seed, it brought forth, thirty, sixty, and an
hundredth fold: so most sweet Savior grant, that I may have thy Word so
deeply rooted, by the power of thy holy spirit, this day sent down into my
heart, that I may bring it forth in an hundredth fold, thy power in my
salvation. And let it abide this day and ever in my soul, the most sweet
savor of life unto life: O Lord drive from me all impediments, arising from
the thoughts of the world, the flesh and the devil, by which Satan labors,
to frustrate in me, the saving hearing of thy Word: and make me to hear thy
precious Word with all reverence and humility, not as the word of man, but as
it is indeed the word of God.

And seeing thou have said, not the hearers of the law, but the doers of the
law are justified: O Lord make me a doer of the law. And as thou have again
said, Blessed are ye, if ye do these things. Wherefore Lord that I may be
capable of thy blessing, grant that this day, when I have heard, I may do the
things, and (as thy blessed Mother) pondered all thy sayings, and laid them up
in her heart, to remember them. O sweet Savior, help me this day and other
days and times, so often as I shall hear thy word, or read the same, that my
memory may be so quick and fresh, that I may retain and remember all, that
shall most especially concern me: and not to be filled with idle knowledge, but
with constant doing, that I may be accepted among those builders, that set
their house upon the rock, most blessed Lord let me not be so simple, as to
think my self blessed, by bare looking into thy law, by an outward
conformity, in coming to thy Church to hear, lest in so doing, I become as a
forgetful hearer, that offers to thee a sacrifice of fools, and so in
sanctifying this thy Sabbath so idely, thou cast me out among the hypocrites,
the chief profaners of the Sabbath in the burning lake, and unquenchable fire.

O Lord, let no wicked temptation of satan, or of my flesh, enter into my
mind in the hearing of thy Word, to make it unsavory, or bitter unto my
soul, but let it be this day and ever, more sweet unto my soul, then honey
unto my lips.

O Lord, let it be in some measure, my meat and drink to do thy will; and
grant that I may this day, learn so much thereof, that I may become wiser
then my Teachers, or those that regard not to keep thy law, grant all these
my requests, most loving Lord, both to me and all thine, this day and for
evermore.

Amen. Amen.
A Prayer for godly zeal.
O Lord, knowing that zeal does savor our knowledge, sweeten our
understanding, confirm our faith, and make acceptable all our sacrifices and
services unto thee; and being a most excellent and perfect gift that comes
from thee, the Father of gifts, and how all thy servants, Moses, Iosuah,
Phineas, Sampson, David, S. Paul, and Stephen, and all the rest of the Prophets
and holy Martyrs, both ancient and late have abounded herein. I do prostrate
and cast down my self, before thy most high Majesty: beseeching thee to give
me this coal from thine Altar, that I may delight my soul to be talking, and
singing thy continual praise, and inflame my spirit, (like the men that
travailed to Emmaus) to be astonished in admiration and contemplation of thy
exceeding love. O God my Savior, let not my zeal be headie, preposterous, or
ignorant zeal, that there with I may neither offend thee, disquiet thy Church,
or afflict my self, as the Scribes and Pharisees in Jerusalem, and the
Israelites in the absence of Moses, at mount Sinah: or as Saul in his
Pharisaicall devotion, give me not knowledge without zeal, nor zeal without
knowledge, and that all my understanding in thy Word, may evermore be mixed
with true zeal: O let not my zeal be above knowledge, lest while I think to
serve thee in the breath of charity, by the distemper thereof, I be enforced
to dishonor and blaspheme thee, as the blind Heathen, ignorant Papists, or
indiscreet Protestants at this day do. Grant this, O Lord, for the honor of
my Advocate and Mediator Jesus Christ.

Amen.
A fervent Prayer unto God, that the repentant may find favor in Christ.
ATtend unto my tears, O Lord,
regard my woeful moan:
And seek to save me by thy Word,
or I am overthrown.
For sin does so oppress my mind,
that I am damned to hell,
Unless by Christ I favor find,
whose wounds must make me well.
Cure thou my soul so sick with sin,
by merits of thy Son:
Mark not the estate that I live in,
but mark what he has done.
Most perfect he (though I be vilde)
to please when I offend:
He sits with thee, (though I exilde)
in glory to the end.
My nature is inclined to evil,
though his with good accord:
My senses seek to serve the devil,
his will to please the Lord.
Wherefore, O God, that art most just,
in him my debts to pay:
In his desert my soul does trust
thy wrath for to allay.
O Father, full of knowledge deep,
thou searchest secrets of each heart;
Beholdst desires we private keep,
with hidden silence in the dark:
But yet thou do thus much require,
thy children should know and confess:
Thee for to be their lightsome fire,
that iudgest their works in righteousness.
As thou have framed in man a heart.
wherewith his Maker to believe,
A tongue, and lips, and every part,
wherewith he glory may thee give.
And thou do challenge at his hands,
free sacrifice of prayers praise:
And honors due throughout all lands,
that all men can deiect and raise.
Thy Children must not in their mind
be dumb, nor in their tongues be mute,
When they should seek thy help to find,
and by petition show their suite.
Thy Son does bid me ask and have,
and find to seek, to knock to enter.
What they do want, that they may crave,
by faith in him they may adventure.
Thou still art ready to be found,
and help thine own in their distress,
That in their faith are constant found,
and patient in their heaviness.
Therefore, dear Father, I beset
with many miseries distressed:
Come unto thee thine aid to get,
and after trouble to find rest.
And have thy Grace without, within:
but I that am of sinners chief:
Because thou hat'st in me my sin,
they doubt thou will not give relief:
Alas poor wretch what shall I do?
to ask I am so far unfit,
Unapt, my God, to ask unto,
unworthy to have benefit.
Of what I crave, or do desire,
and yet to cry I will not linne:
Till thou do send refining fire
and purify me from my sin.
A Prayer for the obtaining of Faith, Hope, and Charity, and all Christian
virtues.
O Lord, and Father of lights, from whom proceeds every good and perfect
gift: I beseech thee to bless me with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
things in Christ. Increase the little grain of my weak and feeble Faith,
direct it to the true object, the merits of Christ Jesus, and let it not be
bare and bad, but effectually working by love. Make me strong therein, and
constant to give credit to thy Word without doubting, and protect me among the
diverse and manifold errors, sects, and heresies of this world that fight
against the foundation. Lord let me not be disappointed of my hope which I have
in thee: but make good thy promises unto me, and so work in my heart, that I
may have courage in conflict, patience in trouble, and comfort in all things.
Keep me from insolency and pride, and grant me true humility, and
lowliness of mind, that I be not puffed up to contemn my brethren, but give
me that due consideration of my own vileness, and infirmities, that as dust
and ashes I may tremble, and stand in awe of thy Judgments, and as a sinful
man, esteem better of others then my self. O dear Father, when Satan shall
accuse me, my own conscience bear witness against me, the whole world
forsake me, and all things set themselves against me for my sins; then
strengthen me in thy Faith, that I fall not from thee: inflame my cold heart
with the unfeigned affection of heavenly love, that I may love thee (O blessed
Trinity) withal that I have, above all, and my neighbor as my self.

Grant me a compassionate and a charitable mind, to help and succor others
to my ability, to forbear and forgive them though they be mine enemies.
Inflame me with love and charity toward all men, to forgive and forget, to do
good, to pray for them, that I may follow the steps of my Savior: open the
eyes of my understanding, and help me to examine my self, concerning my
knowledge, faith, and repentance: send me the hunger and thirst after
righteousness, and make me verily and fully partaker of all the benefits of
that bitter passion of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, To whom with thee and
thy most holy Spirit, be all honor and glory, this day and for evermore.

Amen. Amen.
The sighs and meditations of an afflicted conscience.
O Most merciful God, which by the sending of thy Son into the world, have
brought to pass, that where sin abounded, there grace abounded much more, I
forlorn wretch disquieted in mind and afflicted in conscience, for fear of
thy Judgments upon my sin, do with bended knees and tears unfeigned, a most
humble Suppliant, beg and crave of thee some succor and relief; open, open
the gates of thy mercies to the greatness of my miseries: my abject
countenance witnesses my distressed mind. My spirit is sorrowful, my heart
is heavy, my words are stopped with sighs, and my plants watered with tears:
to thee I hold up my hands, to thee I lift up my heart, to thee (...) pray,
requiring thee of mercy, O Lord, what shall I desire of ^hee, that deserve
nothing at thy ^ands? What can I hope for that ^m even heartlesse? Lord, if
thou ^ast said, Shall not my soul be ^uenged on such a one as this? remember
thy promise elsewhere; I will have mercy on him that could find no mercy, and
let it light upon me: if Satan prefume that GOD has forsaken him, think upon
the decree for the seed of the woman, and let the power of thy sons passion,
defeat all the devises of the devil against me.

O Lord hear me speedily: if thou do not, I shall be helpless and hopeless,
for my conscience accuses me, my memory gives evidence against me, and my
reason condemns me. My spirit is weary of this bondage, and I have bid my
life farewell. My conscience is clogged, when I behold the bloody wounds of my
soul the voice of joy and mirth (...) gone from me, I am deeply plu^ged in
discomfort, I have neithe^ worth to appease thy wrath, no patience to endure
thine indigna^tion. I pray thee therefore sen^ the comfort of thy holy Spirit
i^ to my heart, and strengthen my faith, that I be not swallowed up with over
much heaviness. O Lord, let thy majesty appear in thy mercy, forgive my
sins, the unhappy ground of all this woe, and I am recovered of all mine
infirmities. Try not the law with me, lest I come to Judgment, sanctify all
those good means unto me wherein I seek relief, as prayer, reading, and
hearing of thy holy Word: moderate and mittigate my vexation, increase faith,
establish hope, grant patience, and keep me from despair. Take away this Cup
from me if it be thy will, if not, suffer me not to be tempted above my
strength, I have an humbled and contri^e heart (O Lord) look upon me: I go
mourning all the day long, and am like to him that is at the point ^o dye. O
Lord comfort me, thou that wilt not break a bruised ^eed, spare me, thou that
deligh^est not in the death of a sinner, revive me, though my heart condemn
me, yet good Lord acquit me, relieve me, release me, say unto my soul, I
am thy salvation. Hearken Lord unto my Prayer, and grant my requests, for
Jesus Christ's sake.

Amen,
The distressed prays to be sanctified, and to enjoy the renewed graces of
regeneration.
O Lord, me thoroughly sanctify,
untie my tongue, open my lips:
I cannot silence keep, for why
my conscience every hour me whips.
My miseries grow more and more,
within my bones I find no rest:
Thy grace anew to me restore,
and let me speak what likes thee best.
Let thine ears ever be enclinde,
to my extreme and doleful cries:
Let me thy mercies ready find,
to take my tears from weeping eyes.
Thou evermore do hear the cries,
of all that fear thy holy name;
And com^ortst them with thy mercies,
that trust in thee, and beg the same.
Their souls thou do from death defend,
and cheeres their heart in time of need:
To me therefore thy comforts send,
and give thy help with loving speed:
Thy servants cannot hold their tongue,
though often they muse, and cannot see:
Why th^i^ afflictions last so long,
and they for mercy ^rie to thee.
Till at the length the fire of zeal,
does kindle, then it out must break:
Tongue cannot hold, but must reveal,
their groans, and gri^fes, and needs must speak,
To show their hope which like to fire,
none can suppress when they believe.
T will pearce the clouds, to thee aspire,
yet thou do seem no help to give.
At last thy goodness does appear,
and thou embracest him with ^y:
Time of del^uerance draws near,
and thou Lord freedst him from annoy:
Good God how comes this to pass,
that I so long have sought to thee:
And thou still seem to hide thy face,
and keep'st thy graces still from me.
How long have I unto thee prayed,
and thou seem not to give me ear:
This makes mine heart and thoughts afraid,
ready to faint with deep despair.
I ready was for to surcease,
the suite which I so long had sought,
Made unto thee, for to appease
thy wrath by Christ that has me bought.
O Lord my God thy promises,
and loving kindness only feed
And comfort me in heaviness,
with never dying hope in need,
I know expected time will come,
when thou for getting all my sin,
W^lt see my sorrows, all and some,
and free the bondage I am in.
A Prayer in affliction or adversity.
MOst merciful Redeemer, which art always full of compassion, thou art
always our preserver, whether thou sendest us adversity or prosperity, for
great is thy mercy and compassion, in that thou healest the inward man by
outward afflictions, as it were by bitter medicines, and preparest us to
everlasting joys, by temporal troubles. And forasmuch as thou thy self have
traced us out this true way to felicity by thine own footesteps: grant that I
may patiently and obediently drink this cup, which thou reachest unto me.

Grievous indeed are these things unto my nature, but yet thou have suffered
grienouser things for me: and I have deserved far grieuouser things then
these, for I have deserved hell fire. Notwithstanding, ^hou know the
frailty of man's estate; and therefore like the merciful Samaritane, thou
powrest wine into our wounds, which makes our vices to smart, but yet thou
alayest it with the oil of thy comfort. If thou think meet to increase our
griefs, increase thou also the gift of patience, and grant that these
afflictions may turn us to the amendment of our sinful deeds: or if thy
fatherly loving kindness think this thy gentle chastisement to be sufficient:
let this storme^p^sse, that although heaviness endure for a night, a moment,
joy may come in the morning; grant unto us in both respects a reverent
thankfulness, as well for amending and reforming thy unprofitable s^ruant by
gentleness; as also for that thou have removed the cup of affliction, or
allayed the bitterness of it, by the sweetness of thy mercy. To thee
therefore be thanks and praise for ever.

Amen. Amen.
Meditations upon the passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
What man is this, whom I behold all bloody, bowing down his head for
weakness toward his shoulders, his body all tormented with s^ourges, stripes,
and grieous wounds, crowned with a Garland of thorns, pricking and piercing to
the brain, and thus fastened to an ignominious Cross? What heavy or heinous
crime has he done, to deserve this intolerable and unspeakable torment?
What Judge could be so cruel to sentence him to it? or what remorcelesse or
merciless Executioners could be found to deal so outragiously with this
tender and peerless body. Notwithstanding the deformity of these bloody
wounds, yet is this matchless body fairer then the Sons of men. Surely it is
Jesus Christ the Son of the living God: Oh he is my Lord and Savior Jesus
that is thus crucified for my sin, and for my sake. Oh, art thou he that
excellest all men in beauty (...) in whose lips was never fou^ guile, and
from whom proceeded such gracious words as never man spoke? where then is that
beauty of thine? where is that grace of thy lips? Oh, I see it not, I find
it not, fleshly eyes conceive not so great a mystery: open thou the eyes of my
mind, bring thy divine light nearer unto me, and bring me powerfully and more
seriously to behold thee in this thine agony and passion.

I see it is Jesus the Son of God, the unspotted Lamb, without sin, without
fault, without offense, which took my wickedness upon him, to the intent that
I being set free from sin, might be brought again into Gods favor, rise
again from my fall: return home again from banishment, and attain the end
for which I was created: that which I deserved, he suffered, and that which I
could never attain unto, ^e gives.

O my Redeemer, deliverer, and Savior, draw me to thee, that being always
mindful of thy death, trusting always in thy goodness, and being always
thankful for thy unspeakable benefits, I may be made partaker of so great
reward, and not be separated from thee, through mine own unthankfulness: Oh
let not thy most humble inuestment of humanity be in vain in respect of me,
nor thy unspeakable (and by thee alone endured) torments be in-effectuall, but
valuable and all-sufficient for the eternal salvation of my soul and body:
whom thou have redeemed and sanctified with that thy most glorious and
inestimable blood, shed at the time of Passion upon the Cross.

2. Oh, I behold thee, crucified for my soul: Oh that thou would also
crucify me with thee, that I might utterly die in all carnal affections, and
so live to thee, or rather my sweet Savior thou in me, then should I rest
perfectly assured (as by faith in thee and thy promises I do) to live in thee,
and to arise by thee and with thee to life everlasting: thy flesh is crucified,
O Christ: crucify thou the power of sin that reigns in me: grant I may
put off the old man, and utterly abollish the whole body of sin, and be freed
from all wickedness, unbelief, hardness of heart, and dominion of all manner
sin and Satan. Let thy yoke become sweet, and thy burden lightsome to me,
through thy most grievous Passion.

3. O most high and mighty singular obedience, where-through thou did
submit thy self to innumerable torments, yea even to a most grievous, most
bitter and most reproachful death, because thy heavenly Father (for the
Redemption of mankind) had decreed it so. O splendor and brightness of thy
Fathers glory, O Sun of righteousness, always shining full of grace and
glory, show us where thou feedest in the heat of the day, and where thou
shrowdest thy Sheep from the cold, and thy little Lambs from the storms of
thy Fathers burning wrath and fearful indignation: Oh that we might be
transformed into that lively and sensible Image of thy Passion, that we might
always dwell in thee, and thou in our hearts by faith, rooted, and grounded in
charity, so as we might with all thy holy ones, comprehend the length, breadth,
height, and ^eepnes of thine agony and bitter passion.

4. I see a wonderful kind of love, thy highness boweth down the head, that
we might be certainly assured that thou will graciously hear us and help
us, thou offerest the kiss of reconciliation and atonement, yea and that of
thine own accord, being the party grieved and wronged, unto us that have done
the wrong. Thou reachest out thine arms to embrace us: thou stretchest out thy
bored hands to give us all things abundantly without holding any thing back:
thy side is open to thine heart to receive us in thither, if we will enter in
at the open door, thy feet are fast nailed to the intent, that we may know
thou will never depart from us, if we depart not from thee. O Father and Lord
of ours, thou see the hardness of our heart, and much rather the dullness of
it. It is not enough for us to be allured and called so gently, so sweetly,
and so lovingly; but thou must be faigne even to draw us, pull us, and
violently hale us unto thee: create new and obedient hearts in us, for this we
have is more ungentle then the cursed Jews, and more hard then the stones that
cloue in compassion of thine innocent and yet most cruel Passion.

5. O Lord Jesus Christ, the everlasting sweetness, and triumph of them that
love thee, exceeding all joy and all longing, thou sauer and lover of repentant
sinners, which do acknowledge thy delight to be among the children of men,
and therefore in the end of times becammest man for man's sake: Remember all the
sorrows which thou did endure, even from the instant of thy conception in
thy humane nature, and from thy cradle to thy cross. Remember the bitter
sorrow which thou did suffer and endure when thou saydest, My soul is heavy
even unto death. And at the institution of the commemoration of thy death, when
thou did wash thy Disciples feet, and comforting them sweetly, toldest them
of thy Passion that was at hand: Remember the sorrow, anguish, and grief,
which thou did suffer throughout thy whole tender body, before thy suffering
upon the Cross, at such time as after thrice praying, thou did sweat water
like to blood, was betrayed by one of thine own Disciples, apprehended by
thine own chosen people, accused by false witnesses, condemned wrongfully by
three Judges in thy chosen City, at the time of the Passover, in the
flourishing youth of thy body: and being utterly guiltless, was delivered to
the cruel Jews, bespetted, stripped out of thine own garment, clothed with
another bodies apparel, buffeted, blinde-folded, and smitten with sinful
fists, bound, scourged, and crowned with thorns.

6. O most sweet Jesus, I beseech thee make me mindful of these thy pains
and sufferings which thou have endured for my sins, that I might be
discharged, and set free from them, and my reconciliation and peace be made
with thy Father through thy chastisement, by whose sorrowful stripes we are
healed: make me to abhor all such hateful sin, and cursed disobedience,
which could not be put away, without thy so grievous punishments. Make me to be
heartily sorry, for my sinfulness, and to eschew mine offenses, which draw
thee to the suffering of so great torments: make me mindful of thy great love
to me, and to all mankind, and let the infiniteness thereof kindle an
unfeigned love in me toward thee and my neighbor. Let this thy unmeasurable
goodness breed in me a willing mind, and desire to abide all things
patiently for thy sake, and for the truth of thy Gospel: And let it engender
in me, a despising of all worldly and earthly things, and an earnestly
longing, and endeavor to attain to the heavenly inheritance for the
purchasing whereof unto me, and for the bringing of me thereunto, thou have
endured these, and al other thy most bitter, and intolerable torments, at the
time of thine agony and passion.

Wherefore I beseech thee grant me true repentance, amendment of life,
perseverance in all goodness, a steadfast faith, and a happy death through the
merits of thy sufferings, that I may a so be made partaker of thy blessed
Resurrection. Amen.

7. O Lord Jesus, the very freedom of the Angels, and the pleasure of
Paradise, remember the terror and grief which thou did endure at the time,
when as all thine enemies stood round about thee like a sort of roaring Lions,
vexing thee with buffetings, spettings, scratchings, and other intolerable
dealings, and martvring thee with reproachful words, grievous stripes, and
most grievous torments. I beseech thee, O Lord, for thine own sake, and for
thy exceeding great mercies sake, which caused thee to endure and suffer these
things, for our redemption; deliver me from all mine enemies, visible and
invisible, and grant that I may find protection in this life, and endless
felicity in the life to come. Amen. Amen.

O Lord, the Creator and framer of the world, whom no measure can comprehend
within bounds, and which hold the earth in thine hand; call to mind thy
most bitter pain which thou did endure, when they nailed thy most holy hands
to the Cross, and likewise pierced through thy most tender feet, making thy
wounds still more and more painful, and so drawing and stretching out thy body
to the length and breadth of the cross: I beseech thee grant that my
continual minding of this thy most holy and bitter pains upon the Cross, may
also cause me to stand in awe of thee, and also to love thee with an
unquenchable love.

8. O Jesus, the heavenly Physician, remember the anguish, pain, and grief,
which thou did suffer by the renting, crucifying, and tearing of all the
parts of thy body, when thou were lifted up, and nailed to the Cross: insomuch
as there was not any one of them whole and vnbruised, so that there was never
any pain found like unto thine: for there was not any place of thee left
whole, from the sole of the foot, to the crown of the head, and yet even then
(unmindful of all thy pains) thou prayedst earnestly and mildly for thine
enemies, saying: Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do, I
beseech thee by thy loving kindness and mercy, which caused thee to suffer
these pains for my sake, let thy passion be the full satisfaction, absolution,
and pardon for all my sins. Amen.

9. O Jesus, the mirror of eternal brightness, and fountain of
vnconsumeable goodness, which crucifying upon the Cross, did thirst for the
salvation of mankind. I beseech thee kindle in us the desire of all good
works, and quench in us the thirst and concupiscence of all fleshly lusts, and
both cool and kill in us the love of all worldly delight. O Princely Jesus,
the strength and triumph of our minds, which for our sakes did suffer such
anguish of heart, that the bitterness of thy death, and the exclamation of the
Jews, vpbraiding and reuiling thee, made thee to cry out with a loud voice: O
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? I beseech thee forsake me not in my
distress; but be at hand to comfort me, and deliver me, especially at the
time of death. O Jesus, the bottomless sea of all mercy, I beseech thee by the
deep wounds, which pierced through thy flesh, into the marrow of thy bones,
and into the very bowels of thee; pull me out of the gulf of my sins, and
hide me in the holes of thy wounds, from the sight of thy Fathers just wrath,
until his displeasure be ouer-past.

10. O Lord, the mirror of truth, the standard of unity, and the bond of
charity, remember thine innumerable wounds wherewith thou were torn from top to
toe by the wicked Jews, so that thou were all on a gore blood: which torment
thou did suffer in that most holy body of thine for our sakes: O most sweet
and mild Jesus, leaving nothing undone on thy behalf, that might be for our
benefit. I beseech thee write the memorial of these thy bloody wounds in my
heart, with thy most precious blood, that in them I may read thy great love
toward me: let the remembrance of them be laid up continually in the closet
of my heart, that the consideration of the pains and griefs which thou
sufferedst for my sake in thy passion, may make me to love thee more and more,
and never to give over, until I be come unto the treasure of all goodness and
joys, which I beseech thee to grant me for thine own sake, O most sweet
Jesus. Amen.

11. O Jesus, the only begotten Son of the heavenly Father, and the
brightness and Image of his substance, remember thy hearty commending of thy
spirit into thy Fathers hands, when having thy body all torn, and thy heart
full of anguish, and sorrow, and the curse of our bloody sins pressed thee
even to the death, and to the expiration of thy humane soul. I beseech thee
for this thy precious deaths sake, O King of Saints, give me strength to
withstand the devil, the world and the flesh, that being dead to the world, I
may live only unto thee: And whenever this wayfaring and banished poor
soul of mine, shall depart hence, I beseech thee receive it home into the
hands and protection of thy mercy, and grant it may be dear and precious in
thy sight, and live and remain with thee in glory for evermore. Amen.

12. O Jesus, the true and fruitful vine, remember the abundant flowing out,
and shedding of thy blood, which thou did send out of thy body most
plentifully, as out of Grapes, pressed at the wine press, at which time as
thou did tread the wine-fatte alone, and begannest to us of the cup of water
and wine, which streamed forth out of thy most glorious side. I beseech thee O
most sweet Jesus, by this most bitter death of thine, and by the shedding of
thy most precious blood: wound my heart with such repentance of my sins, and
^oy of thy love, as my tears may be my food, day and night. Turn ^hou me
wholly unto thee, that my heart may dwell with thee continually, and my
conversation be acceptable unto thee: And let my life be such, through thy
goodness, as I may praise thee ^or ever, with all thy Saints in the ^ife to
come. Amen.

O Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, who thirsting ^or the full
accomplishment of man's redemption, did taste of ^he vinegar and gall
despightfully offered unto thee, and did dy^ng upon the Cross, commend ^hy
spirit into the hands of thy heavenly Father: So do I betake my soul into thy
merciful hands, beseeching thee both to preserve it here from all sin, and
in the end to receive it in peace into the company of thy chosen that are
departed, that I may with them praise thee everlastingly, which live and
raignest with the Father and the holy Spirit, coequall and coeternall, one
glorious, wonderful, and immortal God, for ever and ever.

Amen Amen.
In the pangues of death, and in all tribulations, the Remedies to be learned
in the sufferings of Christ.
What Is death? a separation
of mortal body from our breath,
What Is that? but a cessation,
from cares, and from a living death.
What Is that cessation? Why, it is a sleep,
by which we wholly are refreshed:
Yea but in sleep, who shall us keep?
even he that guards his own redeemed.
But who made death? it was made by sin,
and what is sin? the laws transgression:
Of that how should I vantage win?
all sin is weakened by confession.
But by death's dint, it is overcome,
and whence came sin? from hell beneath?
When was it first bred? in Mothers womb:
when will it end? not till our death.
This seems strange, but this is true,
by nature sin is hatched in us,
Old Adams Rules, till God renew.
Why then I see the case stands thus.
As sin goes in, so life goes out:
as sin goes out, so life comes in:
So by the Lord it is brought about,
sin conquers life, life conquers sin.
Though life by sin be still annoyed.
and sin of death by strength and sting:
Yet viprous sin by death's destroyed,
life kills death, when death kills sin,
The death of body, or of nature,
is that where to all subject be:
Cause sin has taintod every creature,
according unto Gods decree.
When bodies life does ^ade away,
and we give up our dying ghost:
And the our corpse is clad in clay,
and unto God our soul^s does post:
It is ordained and decreed,
that all men by necessity,
Through that first Adams sinful deed,
are subject, made the death to dye.
To dye for sin, it is due for sin,
to aye in sin a heavy case,
To dye to sin is to begin,
to leave our sin and live to grace;
The death in sin without repenting,
in affect, effect, and aspecting
In thinking, doing, and frequenting,
and offered grace of God rejecting.
I wretched woeful execrable,
have plague of God, by sin, for sin,
Of miseries most miserable,
to them that live and dye therein:
But he that dies, before he dies,
when he is dead, he is not dead,
But old age dies, and he shall rise,
with glory from the grave his bed.
And he that is touched with conscience prick,
whose sense of sin is sharp and quick,
That man is sick ere he is sick,
and when he is sick, he is not sick.
I look poor wretch on mine estate,
and others monish by mine harms:
That was near death but now of late,
by sin enchanted by her charms.
Had I not dyed, sure I had did,
O happy Phaenix living death,
Still let my flesh be mortifide,
O let me breath a living breath.
Sweet Jesus thou did dye for me,
and in thy death with thee I did,
O live in me, and I in thee
shall live, and evermore abide.
And worms meat thou, dirt, clay and slime,
kill carnal lust thy soul to save:
Quail vild affections, whilst have time,
that life through death, by grace may have:
Shake hands with sins and all offenses,
and learn to dye, before thou dye.
When bidst adieu unto thy senses,
then shall thou live eternally.
The cause of death.
The cause of death is wicked sin,
for out of sin, our death did flow:
From thence did all our plagues begin
out of this tree, our ills did grow.
Hunger, fire, death, and all,
created were for punishment:
And laid on man for Adams fall,
and was the cause of our torment.
God said to Adam, Scripture says,
what hour soever thou shall eat,
Thou shall be sure to dye the death;
do thou not taste forbidden meat:
Through envious malice of the devil,
into the world came this estate:
Sins entered with all actions evil
by Adams fault, not by our Fate.
Two sorts of death, from death by sin,
proceeds as effects from their cause:
The death of nature, does begin,
and death of grace next by Gods laws.
By which we are made slaves for ever
in darkness, called death eternal:
From worm of conscience freed never,
deprived of all the joys supernall.
As by example evident,
two sorts of death approved well:
The glutton rich to hell was sent,
his body buried quick in hell.
And Lazarus poor beggar dead,
to Abraham's bosom carried is:
With Angels wings with glory spread,
where is true joy, and comforts bliss:
The one has heaven, the other hell,
the one has bliss, the other bale:
The one in heaven still must dwell,
and the other devils pull and hale.
He died with his conscience evil,
in death he saw his wickedness:
And his damnations with the devil,
as holy Scriptures do express,
This is the consolation great,
of them that in their deathbeds lie,
Their minds fly up to the mercy seat,
and there for mercy lowdly cry:
By Christ which death abollished,
and sin that is cleans'd by his blood:
Whose merits, pardon purchased
for all our sins, and death withstood.
To us his goodness is imputed,
to him the sins that we committed:
And we for righteous are reputed,
and all our sins they are remitted:
For he alone by death has bought us
from power and pain, of devil, of hell:
Beat Satan down with iron rod,
to place where damned spirits dwell.
Eternal death could not prevail,
against him, nor over him have power:
Christ strengthened those whom sin did quail;
his might; the mighty did devour.
Over death, over sin and hideous hell,
he gave us life and victory:
To all those that keep his precepts well,
and them enstalls in endless glory.
For as by Adam all men dyed,
for sin and by iniquity:
In Christ shall all men be revived,
to live with him eternally:
The godly and just people have
most comfort, though with pain and grief:
They suffer death, and lie in grave,
and seem forsaken save relief.
They are sheep which men ordain,
to death and slaughter to be put:
As silly guiltless Lambs are slain,
when Butchers knifes their threats do cut:
For we which live shall given be,
to death, for Jesus Christ his sake,
If they do not despair in thee,
no fear of death can cause them quake.
But rest assured they shall pass,
through death to life eternally:
Who ask for mercy and for grace,
and unto God for Faith do cry.
They suffer both his hand and rod,
and when he strikes, are patieut:
They put their hope, and trust in God,
who comforts them with hearts content.
Their death is good and of great price,
they also know through Christ his passion:
Death's overcome in wondrous wise,
and so receive they consolation.
If any touched in latest pains
of dire full death this faith holds fast,
In midst of death his li^t attaines,
and shall have lasting life at last:
The Christians surely do believe,
that when they seem to be most dead,
That then they most of all do live,
and so with joy lift up their head,
Christ calls the death of godly men
a sleep, his own a death, and why?
The soldiers spear was made a pen,
his blood the Ink to write thereby
Quietus est, for-Christians all,
and then the same to us was sealed:
A sleep he justly may it call,
cause by his stripes our wounds were healed.
His was a death, cause death was due,
in him di'd all, he died for all:
Gods Justice us to death does sue,
he paid it, and repaired the fall,
That we might sleep, he suffered pains,
that we might laugh he often did weep:
His was the loss, ours was the gains,
thus did he change death to a sleep.
To Christ did Stephen yield up his spirit,
for he is the way, the truth, the life:
He purchased life by death and merit:
the husband's he, the Church his wife:
He is that Noah, his Church the Dove,
that holds his hand for to receive us;
He bids us come to embrace his Love,
we fly to him when all deceiues us.
The heavens, the earth, the Lord commands,
to him all creatures run but we:
None can us take out of his hands,
in life and death to him we flee.
Pillar of faith: Basis of bliss,
of true Religion, true supporter,
The point of Resurrection is,
in death it is the chief Comforter,
If this do fall, all faith may fail,
what Article does us refresh:
When life, and health, and strength does quail,
the Resurrection of the flesh.
Our bones shall blossom as the grass,
we shall be raised out of dust:
The body that before time was,
by Christ his power arise it must:
The first fruits Christ the head is raised,
the members shall the same likewise:
The Lord God for the same be praised,
we know that we shall also rise.
If he ad above the water be,
how can the body then be drowned,
We shall arise, and Jesus see,
and with him shall be Kingly crowned.
Of life and death the true directour,
who in his life and in his dying,
Of our misdoing is Correctour,
and into all our actions prying.
Christ is afflicted for our sake,
left us example that we should
Follow his steps, and his way take,
thy cross to bear with courage bold.
Our Savior Jesus teaches thee,
how can that be (say thou) behold
Example, if thou punished be,
with sickness, hunger, thirst and cold:
With thy self reckon and account,
how it cannot compared be
With his thorns, his nails surmount,
the greatest pain that paineth thee.
Art thou restrained of thy desire,
and lusts that draw thou know not whither:
Think on Christ's Cross, his wrath and ire,
and put his tortures all together.
If pride puff up thy mind with motions,
look on Christ nayl'd on the Cross:
And think as bound by due devotions,
of our great gain, by his great loss.
If thou in filthy lust do burn,
or any other ill desire:
Think but how Christ his flesh was torn,
to save thy soul from flames of fire.
With stripes thrust through, and all to broken
his drink was Eysell mixed with gall,
With his last gasp, the earth was shaken,
who suffered for the sins of all.
If envy, hate, revenge thee grieve,
think with thy self how Christ did pray:
O Father, do them all forgive,
for them that took his life away.
God us commanded to forgive,
and says then we shall be forgiven:
Without offense no man can live,
and God his balance hangs even.
He that does not forgive his brother,
will then the Lord his faults remit:
No, as he de^h with another,
another shall repay, it is sit.
And when you kneel to God, and pray,
forgive, if you have any thing
Against any living man that day,
that Christ may you remission bring:
And when thy gift thou do present,
and on the Altar sacrifice:
First with thy brother make consent,
and him forgive in any wise,
When thou to Christ wast enemy,
and strengthened in great extremes:
Yet then did he give remedy,
and over thee spread his mercy beams:
He gave to thee his holy spirit,
to guide and lead thy soul aright:
And gave thee heaven there to inherit,
all joys and bliss aye in his sight.
When thou from him was gone astray,
be sought thee out, and did thee find,
And finding thee, brought thee away,
unto his fold he thee resignde:
Thank God therefore, and render praise,
exalt and laud his holy name:
Unto the heavens sing always:
All men on earth do ye the same.
Henceforth my soul walk in his path,
and err not from him any more:
Lest thou provoke his heavy wrath,
and then art worse then were before.
Let not Gods gifts be given thee,
to work thy condemnation:
With fear and trembling walk sincere,
confirming thy Salvation.
Shun thou all wicked Company,
with doers ill associate not:
Lest thou from faith should fall and (...),
and soul and body soil and spot.
But bless his name who called thee,
unto the state of righteousness,
And thy sins vengeance taken has he,
to give thee heavens happiness.
Bless thou his blessed Holiness,
his praise let heart and mind record:
And let thy tongue and voice confess,
the gracious goodness of the Lord,
Prostrate thy self down at his feet,
offer thy service with free heart:
O yield God all, for it is most meet,
since he made, saved, and blessed each part.
Who spared not his only Son,
but let him dye thy soul to save:
To pay and ransom thy faults done,
and to redeem thee from the grave:
So in the Prayer of our Lord,
we do forgive what is done against us:
As God forgiveness shall afford,
our Savior Christ does teach us thus.
A Prayer to bear patiently the Cross of Christ or any affliction: And if God
so please to call us to that trial, even to rejoice in Martyrdom.
O Almighty God, most merciful and loving Father, that have decrced, that
through manifold tribulations and afflictions in this world, we that trust in
thee, must enter into the Kingdom of heaven. And those that will follow thee
my Savior, and be thy Disciples, must take upon them by the constraint of the
world, as Simon of Cyrene to bear thy Cross, and to follow thee, and those
that live godly in thy Son, must suffer reproach and affliction. And that there
is never a Son whom thou love, but must like Peter drink of thy Cup, and
endure chastening. And in so doing, thou offerest thy self an assured loving
Father, and assurest us that we are thy sons: because it is given us, not
only to believe in thee, but also that we should suffer for his names sake. O
Lord, I am willing not only to live with thee, but also to dye with thee. My
Spirit is willing, though my flesh be weak. Wherefore if it be possible, let
this bitter Cup pass from me, or if thou please, and have appointed, that I by
death should glorify thee, and with my blood seal and confirm thy truth:
sweet Jesus give me strength, comfort, and patience, blessed be thy name, and
thy most holy will be done.

O Lord manifest thy power in my weakness, and strengthen me, that I may by
the same power, whereby thou raisest thy self from death to life, patiently
bear, and willingly suffer that for thy name sake, which otherwise for flesh
and blood seems fearful to be endured: O Lord, when I consider the hazards
that we run through, for the obtaining of these present profits, and
delights of this life, and with what unwearied pains we prosecute the winning
of this worlds vanities, that in the end are nothing worth, but to pamper the
body, and make it upon every slight occasion most willing to deny thee. O Lord,
when I consider the pleasure of this world, and the abundance of content I have
in this life, wanting nothing for my body. Oh what a Coward does it make me,
that with the young man, that was most ready to follow thee; yet when thou
biddest him sell all his worldly riches, and follow thee, (O simple man) he
never came at thee more: So me thinks I feel Satan to say unto me; What a
fool art thou to leave father, or m^ther, wife, and children, houses, lands,
and goo^s, a certainty for an uncertainty to follow thee. O Lord, how am I
tempted by the Papists, the Enemies of the Gospel, to think this way
foolishness, a Sect and heresy lately risen, and separated from the Church,
meaning themselves. Oh how they do tempt me by the examples of my
^ore-fathers, that for many gen^rations, time out of mind, have lived and died
in the Romish Religion, and why should I think my self wiser then they.

O heavenly Father, see and behold these subtle instruments of Satan, and
keep me that these crafty baytes of Satan arising from the flesh and the
world, prevail not over me, (that like Peter in the water) or the young man I
let go my true faith, not to believe in lies and errors, and so finally
forsake thee, who has so dearly loved me, and bought me. But O God my
Savior, strengthen my faith that I be not moved, to let go my first love,
with which I have been so much comforted in thee. O strengthen me, that neither
Satan by himself, nor by his Antichristian Instruments, which he rules at
his pleasure, prevail against me, either to doubt of my faith, much less to
deny thee my Lord and Savior, but as thou for my sake, did not contemn nor
despise the reproach of the wicked, nor yet the cursed death of the Cross: but
for the joy that was set before thee, and which thou had with the Father
before the world was, endured the same, and though thou were reviled, yet thou
reuilest not again, but with infinite patience committed thy cause to thy
Father: So, O Lord, grant that by my faith in thy power, I may be no less
assured of patience, in the greatest torment, that shall be inflicted upon my
body. For I know that although they kill my body, yet they cannot touch my
soul, but that it shall live with thee for ever. And in despite of their
malice, while they think to destroy my soul with death, they shall extract my
spirit into glorious life, with God the Father, and his Christ for evermore.
Sweet Savior, as Sampson in his death triumphed most gloriously over his
enemies: so grant to me that they seeing my patience, and beholding my
immovable hope, may be so ashamed, and in their conscience so affrighted (that
they may like Saul, at the death of Stephen) be converted, and after their
change of mind, magnify as most precious the death of thy Saints, and by
preaching the truth, strengthen the brethren, and stand fast in the Faith unto
the end. O Lord strengthen me, that I may not faint under the cross, because
thou have appointed us thereunto, that in thy cross, we should be more then
conquerours, and by his example, whose steps we should only follow, account
our selves most happy, that thou will call us, and grace us, to lay down our
lives for his name sake, as thou have laid down thy life for our sakes. O God,
if the righteous scarcely be saved, (as it seems unto the world, through
these bitter torments, with which we are to be scourged, and made clean
vessels to serve thee in thy Kingdom) where shall the wicked and sinners,
which regard not thy cross, appear? O Lord, being confident of thy mercy, in
the merits of thy Son, do I submit my self in soul and body, to do
service and sacrifice unto thee, as unto a faithful Creator, knowing that a
crown of glory remains for me. Father, into thy hands do I commend my
spirit, Lord Jesus after death receive my soul, as thou have all those brave
champions, that were slain with the sword, that wandered about in
Sheepe-skins, and Goat Skins, and thought it better to live with beasts in
woods and dens to enjoy thee, then to live among men, Gentiles, and
Antichristians, and deny thee, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented,
wandering in Deserts, mountains, and dens, and holes of the earth, to avoid
the beastly and cruel enemies of thy word.

O Lord, as thou have made thy wrath smoke against the Heathens, the Assirians,
the Egyptians, the Moabites, the Ammonites, that first trampled under foot the
blood of thy Saints, by laboring an utter consuming of them: So, O Lord,
either grant the conversion, or else let thine indignation appear in these
our days, against the Turks, Heretics, Athiests, and all Antichristian
enemies, that like Herod and Julian, obstinately persecute and scorn thy name.

And this, though a most unworthy Suppliant, I beseech thee to grant, and that
for the honor of thy great name, in which thy true Church does only trust.

Amen. Amen.
A thanksgiving for Gods temporal and spiritual blessings.
O Most bountiful and kind Creator, unto thee in Christ Jesus do I come,
and return most humble and hearty thanks, not only for the general
goodness, which thou have extended unto all mankind, but for that especial
part, which thou had divided unto me in more special manner. O Lord, I give
thee most humble thanks and praise, for that portion of thy blessings, set
forth unto me to my present use and comfort in this life: as for thy daily
preseruations of me, not only in the womb of my parents: but for my safety
in my birth, that I was not misshapen in breeding, nor in coming forth into
this world, and that after my birth, in the time of my swaddling bands,
infancy, childhood, and youth, no mishap, nor mishape befell me, to the
defacing of that perfect shape, in which at first thou broughtest me forth. O
Lord, how many children and youth, have been maimed at nurse, and through the
carelessness of those unto whom they have been committed unto trust, how many
have fallen into the fire, and been burned no^ only in some part, but in the
whole body unto death, and by other chances, whereof thi^ world is full, as
drowned, bruised broken in the body, arms, back legs, thighs, feet, in the
eyes nose, and face.

O Lord, how innumerable ar^ the perils and dangers of this life unto which
every man is subject and does continually run through in every state and degree
of thi^ present age and life, and yet re ceiue no damage. O Lord, for these
deliverances from dangers through which I have passed an^ received no hurt, and
for which I have never given thee thanks, (...) now return humble and hearty
thanks. O Lord, did thou no wonderfully in this life, protec^ us of thy
self, and with thy holy Angels, it were not possible, for any man to live one
day in health or life. O God, I thank thee for the continual blessings which
(...) have received every day and night of this present life, and for thy
liberality in giving me such plenty of food and raiment, not only for my
necessity, but for my plenteous and free living, not only in health, but in
sickness: And I thank thee that thou have given me such plenty, that I may be
able to lend, and do good unto others, and that thou have made my Cup to
ouerflowe, and have given me discretion to use them soberly, thankfully, and
honestly, and that thou have given me a heart, to take my part of them, and
kept me from prodigal, vain, and wastfull spending of them: so that my
family have not wanted in due season, that portion that has bin fit for them
to have, and me to give them. O Lord I thank thee, that since I came to man's
estate, thou have kept me from vain and idle courses of living, and that I
have not diminished thy blessings, but increased them; for it is thou, O Lord,
that give means and power, not only to keep the patrimony of our Fathers,
but to increase it. Yea, it is thou that give power unto our hands, to get
goods, thou make wise, thou make simple, thou make rich and poor, thou
make noble and ignoble, we live, move, and have our Being all in thee, and
from thee, and what soever we are in this life, we are at thy will and
pleasure, and thine especial appointment: for though we rise early, and go to
bed late, yet without thy blessing we labor in vain, and have but pain and
sorrow the reward of our desires. Wherefore (O Lord) I thank thee again and
again for thine unspeakable love which thou have manifested unto me, not
only in blessing me with an honest vocation and means, in this world to
live, and maintain my charge, at home and abroad, in honest profits and
recreations, whereby thou have made my life pleasant, and comfortable unto me:
but above all, I thank thee for thy mercy in Christ Jesus, wherewith thou
love me both before, and since my being, and that thou have so especially
cared for my soul, while I knew thee not, neither cared for to know thee; for
I was so dead and hardened in the custom of sinning, so that I could not, nor
did care to call upon thee, but followed the concupiscence of my own carnal
and fleshly desires, sauouring nothing, but that which did altogether offend
and displease thee, hating thy word not only in it self: but also the
Ministers thereof, and professors thereof, because of it whom otherwise I
should have loved: until it pleased thee, by the power thereof, to illuminate
my blind understanding, and made me to see the wretchedness wherein I lay,
for want of thy grace. O Lord, such was and is thy love, that when with the
sight of my wretchedness, I began to despair, thou did reveal thy Son
unto me, and promised me, that though my sins were as red as scarlet, yet if
I did believe in thy promises, confess my sins and forsake them, they should
be forgiven: which I did, and ever since through thy grace have done, and will
do: hereby have thou justified me, and sanctified me, and given me an assured
hope of my glorification. And thus of the member of Satan, have thou made me,
of thine own free adoption, a member of Christ.

Wherefore (most loving Creator) support me, by the assistance of thy holy
spirit, that I may stand fast, and persevere in these Graces and gifts of
grace, the seals of my adoption, unto my lives end: And may abound in all
fruits of righteousness, sanctification, and holiness, unto a perfect man in
Christ Jesus. This is that mercy of mercies, surpassing all others, which only
makes me happy, in whatsoever outward wants, or condition I shall be in this
life, and though thou gave me all my desire, which this world can afford,
yet without it I should still remain most miserable, though in never so great
an estate, or esteem of the men of this world.

Therefore for this blessing, whereby thou have pleased to save me by faith and
repentance, I do praise and thank thee, not with the tongue and lips only,
but with the whole man. Let all that is within me praise, praise thee; O Lord,
while I have breath, I will praise thee, for thou only art worthy to be
praised: yea, my soul praise thou the Lord: To thee most glorious Trinity, be
given all possible praise, might, and majesty, in heaven and in earth, by
thine elect Angels, and us men, in our bodies and spirits for evermore,

Amen. Amen.
This Meditation inciteth us to repair unto God, in Prayers, in silent sighs,
and in inward desires and groans.
O Father, full of knowledge deep,
thou searchest secrets of the heart,
Behold'st desires we private keep,
with hidden silence in the dark.
But yet thou do thus much require,
thy children should know and confess
Thee for to be their light some fire,
that iudg'st their works in righteousness.
As thou have framed in man a heart,
wherewith his Maker to believe:
A tongue, and lips, and every part,
wherewith he glory may thee give,
And thou do challenge at his hands,
free sacrifice of thanks and praise:
And honors due throughout all lands,
that all men can deiect and raise.
Thy children must not in their mind
be dumb, nor in their tongues be mute:
When they should seek thine help to find,
and by petition show their suite.
Thy Son does bid me ask and have,
and find to seek, to knock, to enter:
What they do want, that they may crave,
by faith in him they may adventure.
Thou still art ready to be found,
and help thine own in their distress:
That in their faith are constant found,
and patient in their heaviness.
Therefore, dear Father, I beset,
with many miseries distressed:
Come unto thee thine aid to get,
and after trouble to find rest,
And have thy grace without, within:
but I that am of sinners chief,
Because thou hat'st in me my sin,
may doubt thou will not give relief.
Alas poor wretch, what shall I do?
to ask I am so far unfit,
Unapt my God to seek unto,
unworthy to have benefit.
Of what I crave or do desire,
and yet to cry I will not linne:
Thy mercies great I will admire,
and crave to cure my woeful sin.
O let thy spirit me sanctify,
untie my tongue, open my lips:
I cannot silence keep, for why,
my conscience every hour me whips.
My miseries grow more and more,
within my bones I find no rest;
Thy grace anew to me restore,
and let me speak what likes thee best.
Let thine ears ever be enclinde,
to my extreme and doleful cries;
Let me thy mercies ready find,
to take my tears from weeping eyes.
Thou evermore do hear the cries,
of all that fear thy holy name.
And comfort'st them with thy mercies,
that trust in thee and beg the same.
Their souls thou do from death defend,
and chear'st their hearts in time of need:
To me therefore thy comforts send,
and give thy help with loving speed.
Thy servants cannot hold their tongue,
though often they muse and cannot see.
Why their afflictions last so long,
and they for mercy cry to thee:
Till at the length the fire of zeal,
does kindle then, it out must break:
Tongue cannot hold, but must reveal
their groans, and griefs, and needs must speak.
To show their hope which like to fire,
none can suppress when they believe.
'Twill pierce the clouds, to thee aspire,
yet thou do seem no help to give.
At last thy goodness does appear,
and thou embracest him with joy:
Time of deliverance draws near,
and thou Lord freedst us from annoy.
Good God, how comes this to pass,
that I so long have sought to thee,
And thou still seem'dst to hide thy face,
and keep'st thy graces still from me.
How long have I unto thee prayed,
and thou seem not to give me ear.
This makes mine heart and thoughts afrai'd,
ready to faint with deep despair
I ready was for to surcease,
the suit which I so long have sought:
Made unto thee for to appease
thy wrath by Christ that has me bought.
O Lord my God thy promises,
and loving kindness only feed:
And comfort'st me in heaviness,
with never dying hope in need.
I know expected time will come,
when thou for getting all my sin,
Wilt see my sorrows all and some,
and free the bondage I am in.
Thou art my God, thy help is at hand,
thou art a Father, thou know when
To give the State, do understand
of richest Kings, and poorest men.
The things most fit thou do be stowe,
and helpest when all help is missing.
Those could not creep thou make to go,
and powrest down on them thy blessing.
Therefore O God all sufficient,
repleate with merey, full of love,
I do not press to know the intent,
but pray thee do what mercy move.
To say come now, or then, do this,
for the time, where, when, what, and how:
What thou do aim, my mark may miss,
me to thy providence I bow.
Yet be not over long away,
for thou do know my feebleness:
Thou see my troubles day by day,
bowed down to extreme wretchedness.
Without hope of recovery
I fall: alas what shall I do!
There is no trust, but trust in thee,
for help and aid, and succor to.
I know by proof that thou art bent,
to hear poor sinful wretched men
When they are truly penitent,
and when they pray deliuer'st then.
From troubles, strife, and all debate:
from sickness, death, and deadly pain:
From envy, malice, sin, and hate,
the contrite heart thou wilt not disdain:
But who is righteous in thy sight,
or in thy Judgments clean are seen:
Angels before thee are not bright,
much less we wretches righteous been:
But all are sinners, all transgress,
our elder Fathers were impure:
All have offended more or less,
yet was thy promise firm and sure.
And did obtain mercy and grace,
relief, hope, strength, salvation:
They saw the brightness of thy face,
thou gave them consolation.
Our Fathers, Lord, were comforted,
strengthened, relieved, and blessed
Only by grace, and justified,
as righteous men in Jesus Christ.
Impute not sin unto my charge,
not for my merit and desert.
But for thy Son my soul enlarge,
and give to me a spotless heart.
Thou Lord, full of compassion,
and in thy mercies infinite,
Bear with my imperfections,
and let me in thy laws delight:
Cover my sins, as righteous take me,
and righteous shall I ever be:
That righteous am not, righteous make me,
in Christ, O Lord, consider me.
O Lord, what can it profit thee,
me to for sake or leave in thrall,
As though thou did disualue me,
my daily cries, and offerings all.
My troubles yet continue still,
I seek thee, and am yet denied:
Of earthly blessings do thy will,
thy name be always glorified.
Wretch that I am what end shall be
I still complain, I sigh, and cry;
I cry, and call, yet hear'st not me,
I still will seek thee till I die.
Thou may be found be as thou will,
into thy hands I me commend:
Thou full of mercy, I of guilt,
in faith and hope do still attend.
A Prayer for the worthy receiving of the Lords Supper.
OMost loving Savior, how great and wonderful is thy love to thy Church, that
before thou did leave this world in thy humanity, did not only send up
loud cries and tears unto thy Father (for them which did, and which after thy
departure, should believe in thee) but did also ordain a perpetual
commemoration of thy death and passion, through the institution of the
Sacramental signs of Bread and Wine, at the last Supper of the Passover, in
the same night thou wast betrayed, charging, in thy Apostles, thy whole Church
unto the worlds end, to do it in remembrance of thee, assuring us that as
often as we did eat that bread, and drink that wine, according to thy
appointment, that thereby we should show thy death until thou did come, and
so keep a perpetual remembrance of thee, not only in our hearts, but in our
eyes, as if we saw thee crucified upon the Cross.

O Lord, examining my self, of my faith, my repentance, and love, I find that
my faith is weak, my repentance slack and dull, and my love cold, or but
lukewarm; so that of my self (O most merciful Lord) I durst not presume to
come unto thy table: but O Lord, for this I judge my self, that I may not be
judged of thee, the worst and unworthiest of all those that come unto thy
table: For unto this present, through the multitude of my sins, with which I
am laden, I have (like Judas) done nothing but betrayed thee, and prick thy
head, and pierced thy side more cruelly, then the thorns or spear wherewith
thou wast crowned and pierced, and so in as much as in me lies, I am guilty
of the blood shedding, and death of my Lord.

But (most heavenly Father) as the Israelites stung with the fiery Serpents,
looked unto the Serpent, Moses set up: so, O Lord, smarting in soul with the
anguish of my sins, by which I am continually guilty of thy death, and so
again (like Judas) worthy of eternal death, much more violently to be
inflicted after the taking of the sop. Yet do I look unto thy Cross, on
which thou suffer for me, humbly beseeching thee, for that obedience by
which thou have satisfied Gods wrath and justice, to do away my sins (as
David's after his adultery and murder) that I may become a worthy partaker of
the body and blood of my Lord, and the Sacramental Bread and Wine, after which
I have so earnestly thirsted, may not (like the Israelites Quails, sticking in
their teeth) become neither my bodily nor spiritual death, nor (like the
unworthy Corinthians) for my careless and negligent receiving by the sudden
hand of sickness, be struck unto death, but as the faithful Jews in their
constant and conscionable celebration of their feast of Passover by them kept,
a perpetual remembrance of their Egyptian deliuerrnce from Pharaohs bondage,
were exceedingly edified, and confirmed in the promises of thy love, that thou
would be their God, and they should be thy people, which they saw fulfilled
in their Fathers, and still continued unto themselves, through the hope of the
Messiah, by whom they expected their greatest safety and deliverance. Grant
unto me, O heavenly Father, that as the Minister of thy Word and Sacraments,
sets a part the Bread and Wine, so I may remember the eternal love, by
which in the beginning thou did set a part thy Son, through faith in him
to be my salvation, promising that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life. And as I see the Wine powered out, and the
Bread broken: so I may remember thy patient enduring the breaking of thy body,
and shedding of thy blood, whereby thou have paid the price, and satisfied the
punishment that was due unto me, and as the Bread and Wine do presently
comfort and refresh my body: so most sweet Savior, let me feel my soul so
comforted and edified this day, and so often as I shall think of thee, and thy
mercies hereby promised and assured; yea, grant that being made one with thee
by spiritual union, I may live in thee, and thou in me, in the increase of a
godly life, to the honor of thee my Savior. To whom with the Father and the
holy Ghost, be given by me and all thine, both present and eternal praise.

Amen. Amen.
Another godly Meditation before the receiving of the holy Communion.
O Almighty God and merciful Father, I am a secret sinner, and my heart is a
bottomless pit of all corruptions: wilfully and foolishly; ignorantly and
obstinately have I sinned against thee, unto whose eye all the secrets of my
soul lie open, but now I come unto thee as the sick man unto the Physician, as
an unclean man unto the Well of mercy and grace, offered in the precious
bloodshedding of Jesus Christ, and represented to my soul in this blessed
Sacrament. Have mercy upon me (O Lord) have mercy upon me, and forgive me
all the evils that I am guilty of. Give me grace that I may discern the
Lords body, and so receive it in this Sacrament, with such chastity of body,
humbleness of mind, thankfulness of soul, hearty contrition, dread and
reverence, as is meet for such a mystery.

O Lord Jesus, it is truly said of thee, that thou did receive sinners, and
eat with them, and I verily believe that thou art the same still, full of
goodness and mercy: wherefore I beseech thee leave me not to my self, reject
me not from thy Table, come into my heart, and purge me from all filthiness of
the flesh and of the spirit. Enter into my soul, seal and sanctify me, both
within and without.

Inflame me with love and charity toward all men, to forgive and forget: to
do good, to pray for them, that I may follow the steps of my blessed Savior.
Open the eyes of my understanding, and help me to examine my self,
concerning my knowledge, faith, and repentance. Send me the hunger and thirst
after this righteousness: satisfy me with this heavenly food, make me
verily partaker of all the benefits of his Passion. Oh dear Lord Jesus, since
thou have suffered so many things for my sake, and have commanded me not to
despair, nor distrust thy goodness, grant me grace to eat of this bread,
and to drink of this Cup worthily, that I may continually remain in thy grace
and favor. O Lord God the Father, give me the full consolation of this
mystery and commemoration, that my faith may be increased, my hope confirmed,
my charity enflamed, my weak conscience comforted, all dangers repelled, and
my soul assured of her salvation in the blood of Christ, let no profaneness
enter into my heart, so long as I am about this holy action; but give me grace
to receive with purity of heart, and cleanenesse of soul, with love, dread,
and steadfast faith; have mercy upon me good Lord, that by unworthy receiving, I
be not guilty of his precious body and blood, who came down from heaven, lived
with men, and swamme through a red sea of blood in his agony and passion to be
my Redeemer. Have mercy upon the whole Church, and to this purpose, have mercy
upon this place, and this company, that they may serve and please thee in this
holy service, and all other actions of their life. O Lord, be not angry with
me a barren and dry tree, a creature with a face of brass, and heart of
flint: I have not so many tears as are sufficient to wash thy feet with Mary
Magdalen: but thou have shed as much of thine own blood, as surficeth to wash
away all the sins of me, and all the world: then be not angry with me, O
Lord: but let thy grace supply my wants: let thy mercy pardon my sins: let
thy holy spirit prepare my soul, thy merits enrich my poverty, and thy most
precious blood wash away all the spots of my life, that I may worthily receive
this heavenly Sacrament: so that I may be strengthened thereby, and thoroughly
filled with the heavenly food of thy body and blood: for the mortification of
the old man, the confirmation of my faith, and the final salvation of my
soul. O Lord hear my prayers, and grant my requests I beseech thee.

Amen.
Godly Meditations upon the love and mercy of God in bestowing (together with
his Son) these holy Mysteries upon us: the commemoration whereof may move us
to an awefull reverence in the participation of the same.
O Father of mercy, and God of all consolation, seeing all creatures do
confess thee to be their Governor and Lord, it becomes us the workmanship
of thine own hands, to reverence and magnify thy godly Majesty. First for
that thou have created us to thine own image and similitude: but chiefly
because thou ^ast delivered us from that everlasting death and damnation, into
which Satan drew mankind by the means of sin, from the ^ondage whereof,
neither man, nor Angel, was able to make us free. But thou, O Lord, rich in
mercy, and infinite in goodness, have provided our redemption to stand in
thine only and welbeleued Son, whom of very love thou did give to be made
man (perfect in all things, freely exempted and excepted from sin) that in
his body he might receive the punishment of our transgression, by his death to
make satisfaction to thy Justice, and by his resurrection, to destroy him that
was the Author of death, and so bring again life unto the world from which the
whole offspring of Adam was most justly exiled.

O Lord, we acknowledge that no creature was able to comprehend the length and
breadth, the deepenesse and height, of that thy most excellent love, which
moved thee to show mercy where none was deserved: to promise and give life,
where death had gotten victory: to receive us into thy grace when we could do
not hing but rebel against thy majesty. O Lord, the blind dullness of our
corrupt nature, will not suffer us sufficiently to weigh these thy most ample
benefits: Yet nevertheless, at the commandment of Jesus Christ our Lord, we
present our selves to this his Table, which he has left to be used in
remembrance of his death, until his coming again, to declare and witness
before the world, that by him alone we have received liberty and life: that by
him alone thou do acknowledge us to be thy children and heirs: that by him
alone we have entrance to the Throne of thy grace; that by him alone we are
possessed in our spiritual Kingdom, to eat and drink at his Table, with
whom we have our conversation presently in heaven, and by whom our bodies
shall be raised up ag^ine from the dust, and shall be placed with him in that
endless joy, which thou O Father of mercy have prepared for thine Elect,
before the foundation of the world was laid.

And these most inestimable benefits we acknowledge and confess to have
received of thy free mercy and grace, by thine only beloved Son Jesus
Christ: for the which we therefore thy congregation, moved by thy holy Spirit,
render unto thee all thanks, praise, and glory for ever.

What tongue, or what heart, can worthily give thee thanks, O Lord Jesus, for
thine vnspeake^ able love toward us? who to th^^ intent to redeem mankind
forl^rne, did vouchsafe to become man, and to take all the miseries of our
estates upon thee, insomuch that in the end, thou being a pure and unspotted
Lamb, wast contented to be made a sacrifice for us upon the Altar of the
Cross, and to abide the punishment due for our sins, that thou might
reconcile us to thy Father, yea and both in life and death thou did spend,
give, and bestow thy self wholly upon us, and for us. And thy gracious
goodness was not so contented, but also lest we might at any time perchance
forget so great a benefit, or at least our trust in thee might at any time
quail, even now reigning in heaven, thou refreshest our souls from time to
time with the food of thy body, and chearest them up with the holy Cup of thy
blood.

Wherefore I beseech thee, let thy spirit cleanse my heart, that I may not come
unworthily to that heavenly feast, and to the table, whereat even the very
Angels do tremble: but that by thy shedding thy self into my b^wels, I may
grow manly in thee, and become the liuelier by spiritual encreasements, so as
I may continue unto the end, in the blessed fellowship of thy mystical body,
whom it is thy will to have all one with thee, in such wise as thou art all one
with the Father, by the knitting of the holy Ghost, to whom be praise and
thanks for evermore. Amen.

I yield thee hearty thanks, O Lord Jesus Christ, for thine unutterable love,
in vouchsafing to redeem mankind by thine own death: And I beseech thee
suffer not thy most holy blood to have been shed in vain for me, but that I
growing up in thee by continual increase of heavenly strength, may become a
fit member of thy mystical body, which is the Church, and never swarne from
that most holy covenant, which thou made with thy chosen Disciples in thy
last Supper, by distributing the bread unto them, and by reaching them the Cup:
and by them to all those that by a lively faith apprehend the merits of thy
most precious death and passion.

My Lord Jesus Christ, what am I that thou should vouchsafe to come under my
roof? Can a sinful man deserve such grace? O Lord my God, I am certainly
altogether unworthy. Am I better then all my Fathers were, thou would not
show thy self to Moses one twinkling of an eye, and how happens it that thou
humblest thy self so much, as to come to a man that is both a Publican and a
sinner? And thou vouchsafest not only to eat with him, but also to give thy
self to be eaten of him.

Hail O bread of life, which cammest down from heaven, and which give life
to as many as receive thee worthily. Surely whosoever receives thee w^rthily,
although his soul be severed from his body by temporal death, yet shall he not
die for ever, because that the separation is not a death, but a passing from
death to life: by reason whereof, he that eats thee worthyly, begins to
live with thee for ever when he dies in this world: thou art the bread of the
Angels: the very sight of thee does solace and glorify the Angels: thou art
the food of the soul, the glory of heaven, the solace of all Angels and
Saints. (O most holy food) by the eating whereof by a lively faith, is set free
from all evil, is filled with all goodness, and is undoubtedly made
immortal, O sacred food of our pilgrimage, by the strength whereof we pass
out of this naughty world, to the glorious company in heaven. Go on therefore,
O believing and faithful soul, be merry, and rejoice in God thy Savior: take
thy fill of this feast wherein the body of thy Savior is set before thee to
feed on: man fell from God by eating the fruit of the forbidden tree, but by
this food he is redeemed again to endless glory.

These ^achrymae following, contain godly and de^out Prayers for constanc^e in
aff^ictions, and to bear malicious slanders pati^^tly.
O Lord how do my woes increase,
how many are my miseries:
My troubles rise and never cease,
men judge thou will not hear my cries:
They say thou will me quite forsake,
that there is no help for me in thee:
But (Lord) they are but such that make
their censure with a carnal eye.
And do not spiritually discern,
thy secret purpose and intents:
Correcting them whom thou would learn,
to know thy Law and Commandments.
Chastising them whom thou do love,
and scourging them often with thy rod:
That thou their hearts and minds may move,
to fear and serve thee mighty God.
The wicked outward means prefer,
and worldly helps at need they muster:
And not to God themselves refer,
nor comfort take from heavenly luster:
Who works by means his sacred will,
and without means brings to effect:
And against means can save or kill
for those him serve, his true Elect:
Therefore let not their malice move,
nor yet their taunts di^may my mind.
I will hold fast by God above,
whose promise just and true I find:
I strive thy statutes Lord to keep,
what thou command'st I will perform.
Direct me right to thee I creep,
O Lord do thou my life reform.
Defend me Lord from their despite.
that watch to catch me in their snare:
And to entrap me day and night,
with nets and ginnes ere I beware;
And scoff me basely with reproach,
with shameful scandalls and disgrace.
With thy protection Lord approach,
and let thy mercy me embrace.
Let not me come within the reach,
of their inventions and device,
Whose facts are foul, they fair in speech,
and by base flattery me entice.
Nor such as lie in wait for me,
obtain their wish: who do desire
Fit time and opportunity
to work the evil they conspire.
O let me tread in the right path,
and walk from faith to faith in love.
Observe thy laws, and shun thy wrath,
and forward to all virtue moan.
And let my conscience witness bear,
of my says and integrity:
Let all men see the Crystal clear,
of my poor hearts sincerity.
Though I good Father, cannot live
free from all sin, and all offense:
And some take cause, though I none give,
yet keep thou clear my conscience.
Shall I deserve still as I do
men's just reproves, through indiscretion:
And that against my meaning too,
and suffer carnal men's oppression:
That break forth into bitterness,
against me that am weak and lame:
And vomit out their filthiness.
What thou have done, they count my shame.
And take it as an argument,
that I am in deiection:
And think it is thy full intent,
to keep me from protection.
Indeed, O Lord, I must confess,
my sins deserve sharp punishment.
Worthy of more and not of l^sse,
then all the plagues on me have sent.
I more should taste then I can bear,
or able them for to endure.
Thy mercies yet they do me spare,
and make me clean that am impure.
But in my weakness of behavior,
I this have done which caused me fall,
But yet I trust in Christ my Savior,
his p^^tious blood has paid for all.
Depending on thy mighty power,
to save, keep, and deliver me,
Lest miseries do me devour,
and enemies my sorrows see.
And take o^casion to pursue,
pretending to my soul no good:
In^etered hatred they renew,
to eats my flesh, and spill my blood:
Therefore consider my great groans,
prevent the dangers coming nigh me.
My heart is rent with sighs and moanes,
J fly to thee, O Lord, stand by me.
Why stand thou a loose alas,
seem not my troubles to regard:
Why turn'st thou Lord away thy f^c^,
mine heart does hope for some reward.
Why hidest thou thy self me fro,
when troubles are so much abounding:
As though thou Lord d^dst me not know,
thy darts are always mine heart wounding.
There is no help for m^ in thee,
they say, thou nothing do^st respect me.
I nevertheless will come to thee,
for Christ his sake thou will not reject me.
The rather therefore me relieve,
that righteous men may well percei^^,
Thou ready art thine aid to give,
and their desires wilt not deceive,
And not to fa^nt when they are tried,
with like afflictions any ways.
But shall with patient mind abide
thy will, and give thy name the praise.
The dullest hearts thou do prepare
to call on thee, and thou again
Do hear their cries, and them do spare,
and easest them of grief and pain.
How long, O Lord, how long will thou
forget me, and how long shall I
Seek to be heard, and know not how,
to make thee listen to my cry.
How long shall I thy counsel seek,
yet ignorant what course to take:
I pray thee O Lord most meet,
with sighs and groans which never slake:
My heart with grief and heaviness,
powers forth complaints continually.
Before thee in my great dis^sse,
yet inward light obtain not I,
That lighten should my pensive soul,
and comfort mine afflicted heart:
Thy wrath with rigor does control
my forward hopes, and causes smart.
Thou threatn'st sorrows to increase,
to such as seek to other gods.
Why should not then my torments cease,
that child-like fear thy awful rods:
Since I in thee my faith repone,
why should I then true wisdom want.
It being sought from thee alone,
why do thou then refuse to grant?
Thou did create all men at first,
and do preserve, and all maintain:
Thy Sun does shine on best and worst,
the same to all thou do remain.
But since to thee alone I kneel,
and only unto thee do call:
O let me Lord thy mercies feel,
and let thy drops of mercy fall,
With thee there is redemption,
and thou deliuerest all that trust
In Christ for their salvation,
by whom the sinful are made just:
Thou keep'st them safe under thy wings
of favor, from the merciless.
Thy favor gives all good things,
to thine Elect in their distress:
O therefore be my rock where on
I may both safely build and rest,
Castle of refuge, Arc alone,
in which I am in safety blessed:
For thou have promised in thy love,
that they that put their trust in thee:
Like Syons mount which does not move,
shall safely stand eternally.
Break thou the chains which have me tide,
remove the sorrows from my heart:
Wherewith (Lord) all my veins are dried,
and I am parcht in every part.
That I walking at liberty,
with a free spir^^ may salve my sore,
My hope may live, and crosses die,
and I sing praise to thee therefore.
And let my ^oes no more prevail,
that Lyon-like do me destroy:
And like to Wolves they me ^ss^ile,
that spoil the Sheep, the Shepherds joy.
O carry me (Lord) in thine arms,
through out these miseries clean away,
And saf^ly ke^pe me from all harms,
that now stick fast in mire and clay.
Let no untimely sudd^ine Fate,
cut off my days ere fully spent:
Or raging floods sink mine estate,
nor swallow me incontinent.
But rather (Lord) return them back,
these swelling waves that rear and rage:
On every side to work me wra^ke,
their gusts and tempests Lord assuage,
Let me pass on my mortal course,
and finish these my days of life,
Of thy mere love and kind remorse,
in peace and love, from hate and strife.
A thanksgiving after the receiving of the Lords Supper.
O Heavenly Father, I thank thee that thou have made me this day to sit down
with thee, at thy heavenly Table, and have given me the bread of God, that came
down from heaven, not as* the Mannah, which being eaten, afterward did perish,
and the eaters too, and have made this Sacramental body and blood of thy
Son, to be meat indeed, and drink indeed, far surpassing the old
carnal Mannah, which extended but unto the body, but this spiritual food
which thou have given me with thi^e own hand, has in it a quickening life for
the present, and an assurance of an eternal life, in the life to come.
Wherefore having fed on thee this day, by faith in my heart, let the sweet
comfort thereof so cheer my soul, that I may more and more thirst after thee,
and by godly living express my dwelling in thee, and so be more and more
assured that thou art that Christ, and Son of the living God, my Savior and
Redeemer in life and death, and for evermore after death: for unto this end O
God the Father, thou have sealed thy Son, to be my Savior, in thee will I
for ever trust, in this life to be pardoned my sin, and through thee in the
life to come, eternally to be saved.

Amen. Amen.
Another Prayer after the receiving of the holy Communion.
O Jesus, the Son of God, my Lord and Savior, with all humble and hearty
thanks I praise thee, for suffering death upon the Cross for my sins, and
admitting me a miserable sinner, to the participation of this blessed
Sacrament, the memorial of my Redemption. Let me, O Lord, find and feel in
my heart, the invisible power of thy heavenly grace, effectually working the
transformation of me into thee, the wonderful union of me with thee, and the
spiritual habitation and aboade in me. Apply all thy merits and good things
unto my soul, let me never doubt the forgiveness of my sins: but ever open
the door of this Sanctuary unto me, that I may run thither in my greatest
need, and apprehend thy gracious pardon, ratified by this scale of thy
covenant. Quicken me, O Lord, in this life, r^^^ue and renew me, that I may
disclaim my old conversation, and become a new man: keep me that I slip
not cut of this building, nor become as a branch cut off, and good for nothing,
but as thou have severed me from the wicked, in calling me to the knowledge
of thee, so keep me from all their corruptions: give me a perfect love
toward thee, that I may not delight in any thing but in thee, nor seek any
other honor but thine. O Lord Jesus, I meekely beseech thee, let thy holy
Spirit strengthen me against my frailty, thy power and strength defend me
against worldly troubles and adversities, thy merits purchase my needful
pardon, and thy blood be the medicine for all my sores, even for thy truth, and
for thy names sake. Amen.

O Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God, which have so loved mankind, that thou have
been contented, not on ly to become one with him, but also mea^e unto him, and
to dye for him upon the Cr^sse; grant I bese^ch thee, that this my receiving
of this Sacrament, may be a true testimony unto my conscience that I hau^,
through faith in thee received full remission of all that is past, and am
become (as it were) a new creature in thy sight.

O sweet Jesus, which have vouchsafed me such favor and honor, as to come to
thy Table and feed upon thee, grant me grace I humbly entre^te thee, so to
perform, and fulfill my duty as this honor which thou have done me
requires: Link me unto thee, and give me power and strength to believe thy
promises without distrust, and to show my religion, by my good life and
conversation. Ass^st me with thy grace, that I may walk worthy this blessed
Sacrament, to love thee and thy children vnfai^^dly, and utterly to forsake all
va^ity, idolatry, carnal desires, and all the works of the devil.

O Lord God, so moderate and ord^r all my affections, that I may be joined with
the brethren together in holy love, which is the bend of peace, and truly
fastened unto thee my Head for ever. Stir up my mind, that I may always
consider the bitterness of thy death, the greatness of thy love, and never
forget to be thankful unto thee. O blessed Lord, preserve and maintain this
ordinance amongst us, that it may be always a note and a badge of our public
profession: and give us all one heart, and one mind in the unity of the
Spirit, for the reverent and worthy receiving of the same, whenever we shall
come to thy holy Table again.

Amen.
A Prayer for the Catholic Church, and all the estates thereof.
O Most glorious, ever living, and ever loving Lord God, the just Master of the
Vineyard, and loving Head of the Church send thy holy Spirit into the hearts of
all them that teach o^ profess thy most holy truth, al^ men, religious or
secular: Yea* men and women, Princes and subjects, rich and poor, even all the
people believing in thy name, and depending upon thy grace and mercy. Give unto
them all, O Lord, one law, one baptism, one hope, one spirit, that there may
be but one voice among all that profess the Catholic faith: Keep back the
famine of thy word, and send such laborers into thy harvest, as be sound in
doctrine, faithful in their work, and godly in their conversation, that they
may be in number many, and in power wonderful. Open, we beseech thee, the
hearts and ears of the people, for the receiving of thy Word, that it may
dwell in them plentifully in all wisdom, and bring forth fruit against all
the cares, crosses, and courses of this wr^tched world.

O Lord, thou have found iniquity in thy Saints, and the heavens are not clear
in thy sight: Oh then correct us in thy judgment, not in thy fury, lest we
should be consumed, and brought to nothing. Purge the garden of the Church, and
let no weeds ouergrowe the flowers: suffer neither sin nor superstition, to
choke the good growth of faith or manners in thy people, bu^ keep them from
all heresies phanaticall opinions, se ^ucing spirits, and deadly contentions.
Keep^ our necks from the grieuou^ yoke of Antichristian bondage^ whose
Religion is rebelli^n^ whose faith is faction, and whos^ practice is the
murdering o^ souls and bodies: good Lord re* press the fur^ousnesse of all
Tyrants, which labor nothing bu^ the spoil of the Church, and the abolishment
of true doctrine prayer, and true Religion. O Lord Jesus, amend all that is
amiss, an^ grant us thy grace all the daye^ of our life, even for thy truth,
an^ for thy names sake.

Amen.
A Prayer for the Kings Majesty.
O Almighty God, King of all Kings, the fountain, rule, and stay of all
sovereignty: we most humbly thank thee, that ^hou have not left us unto our
^elues, to do what seems best unto us in our own eyes: but ^ast set over us
a noble, wise, and ^racious-King thy servant Charles, ^ame head next under
^hee. Lord make all thy good to ^oe before him day and night, ^phold his
Crown, maintain ^is estate, give him continual ^eace, long life, and much
happi^esse. Endue him with such wis^ome and understanding, to do ^ch things
both in the Church ^d C^mmon-wealth, as may be ^ceptable in thy sight,
profitable (...) his Subjects, and hurtful to ^one that love thy truth:
merci^ly hear him in all his petitions, and effectually work for him in all
dangers in the day of battle in his greatest consultations: in the time of his
recreations, from all plots of Treason, and in phe hour of death. Make us
thankful for all thy preseruations of him, both ^t home and abroad in this
Kingdom and elsewhere: Bless, preserve, and keep his Royal Consort Queen
Mary^ Frederick, the Prince Elector Pa^atine, the Lady Elizabeth his wife, with
all their Prin^ Let our noble King still embrace the truth, and manfully
maintain it, against all treacherous plot^ and (...) persuasions, distasti^^
as he has always done, both alteration of true Religion, and to* leration of
any other. Let thy po* were always go forth with hi^ Armies, and give them
gloriou^ victories: banish from his Cou^ all privy foes, forraigue and do*
mesticall; grant that he man with uprightness and true since rity, both with
heart and mind observe and keep thy laws, and that his Highness and all his
subordinate Magistrates may indifferently and faithfully minister judgment and
justice to all his people.

We bese^ch thee (O Lord) preserve his body in health, his mind in
quietness, and both, in ^ll sincerity and godliness: that ^y his good
example, he may both stop the mouths of his ad^ersaries, and win the hearts
^f all those that believe. Make his ^ayes, O Lord, as the days of ^eauen, that
he may reign many ^cares over us, and we his Sub^ts may long live a peaceable
and qui^t life, in all godliness and ^onesty under his happy gouern^^nt.
Grant unto him wife, and ^^ithfull Coun^ellours, loving and ^bedient Subjects,
dutiful and ^ue servants. Deliver him, O lord, from all conspiraci^s, trea^s,
and other dangers, and grant him always a glorious victory over all his
enemies: pardon and forgive him all his sins: make him walk all the days of
his life in the way of thy commandments, that he may live in thy fear, and
dye in thy favor, and that in the resurrection of all flesh he may receive a
crown of righteousness, through the merits and mercy of Jesus Christ our
only Lord and Savior.

Amen. Amen.
LACHRIM. 2.
Herein the distressed expresses his hope and confidence to be in God alone,
and not in man, nor in any other external means.

I Cannot Lord excuse my sin,
most infinite before mine eyes.
And many more are me within,
I have forget, which secret lies,
(...) of life, am weakened in belief:
Our Fathers prayed with trust in thee
in dangers, out of troubles all
Being delivered and set free,
and were raised up when they did fall:
Thou hear them when they thee sought,
and did them lend thy ayding hands:
When they almost to death were brought,
and them delivered out of bands.
Great was thy favor, Lord, to all
them that took hold on thee by faith:
But what am I that am so small,
a worm, no man, as David says.
Yet I believe, help unbelief;
Lord I am covered with shame.
Be thou my glory, ease my grief,
that I may magnify thy name.
The wicked worldlings me contemn,
because thou hid'st thy face from me
Deriding grace, and me condemn
because of imbecility.
My neighbors that should me assist
disdain me: my familiars all
That should me comfort, do desist
their help to raise me from my fall.
They say of me my hopes are vain,
my kinsfolks who should yield me aid,
In my necessities refrain,
to come to me they are afraid:
And tauntingly they scoff and say,
deservedly he thus does suffer:
Is just, he wrought his own decay,
none other kindness they me offer:
I know it is thou that sitt'st on hie,
do send and suffer maladies:
And therefore I on thee rely,
to remedy my miseries.
My woes, O Lord, by such increase,
as should in friendly wise relieve me:
They that should seek to make my peace,
they are the men that most do gritue me.
But I that taste the Cup, will say
it is thou have don't, and I will bear it:
When it is thy will, who can say nay:
it is out of love, why should I fear it:
Relieve my soul with timely dew,
and comfort me restore.
Restore my soul unto those joys,
the which I felt to fore.
Now after storms Lord send a calm,
and grant me peace yet now at last.
And I will praise thee with a Psalm,
with thanks for all thy favor past.
I Will magnify thy name for aye,
that bring'st such wondrous things to pass:
That worldlings neither think nor say
nor know why it is, or how it was.
The just shall hear, and Saints be glad,
when wicked men shall faint and quail,
To see what favor I have had,
and all their hope does quench and quail:
Whom they so long have scorned and deemed,
even through afflictions cast away
For thy name sake, Lord me esteemed,
their night is past, they have their day.
Respect my meditation,
help me in time convenient:
Lord grant my supplication,
thou know and tri'st my hearts intent.
Let not the righteous be dismaide,
nor wicked triumph in my fall:
Nor yet let sinners be afraid,
in time of need to thee to call.
And let me put my confidence,
direct my faith, erect my hope
Unto thy gracious providence,
this of my prayers is the scope.
A Prayer for the calling of the Jews, and the continual increase of Christ's
Kingdom among all Nations.
ALmighty and everliving God, who after the flood, did preserve Noah, and our
Fathers, Sem, Iapheth, Terah, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, from the perishing
waters, and from the continued deluge of sin, which remained in the families
of Ham and Canan, his wicked posterity: and of thy abundant mercies, pitied
the blind ignorance, in which they had plunged themselves through Idolatrous
superstition, and did separate our Father Abraham, and made of him a peculiar
people, a royal Nation, and chosen generation, that for evermore should serve
thee. And that they might never forget thy great goodness, it pleased thee to
bring them into Egypt, that after the favor of Pharaoh was expired, they
should suffer hard and cruel bondage the space of four hundred years, and
then in the power of God, with a mighty hand and outstretched arm, in the
sight of King Pharaoh, thou would bring them to their Fathers promised
inheritance, through the red Sea, and waste Wilderness, to the mount Syon, the
hill of God, where thou did appear unto them in a glorious manner, to
renew and continue the covenant made unto their Father Abraham, that thou
would be their God, and the God of their seed for evermore. Wherefore thou
did out of the midst of the flames of fire so speak unto them, that they
might live, and know that thou louedst them, as thou had done their Fathers,
that first came into Egypt, that thou were the same Lord, and that there was no
other God besides thee, in heaven or in earth. Yet for all this great love, of
which the like was never heard, thou did only require them to keep thy
statutes, thy laws, and thy commandments, promising it should go well with
them for evermore: but they started aside like a broken bow, and cast thy
promises, and law behind their backs, and forsook thee the guide of their
youth, and in their old age, even when they were grown fat, and full fed,
with the abundance of thy blessings, they still spurned and kicked against
thee, and though thou did early and late (in the time of the Judges and Kings
which they so much desired) send them Prophets: yet they cast thee off, and
forgot the Lord that made them, and served other gods of the Heathen, whom
their Fathers never knew. Yet at last when they had killed thy Prophets and
stoned thy servants, thou in infinite love, sent thy Son, saying, that they
would honor him. But O Lord, how much more cruelly did they behave themselves
toward thee, calling thee a sinner, and friend of Publicans and sinners, and
the Prince of the devils, and would have thrown thee the Lord of life (as
Satan did the Heard of Swine) from the Rock into the Sea. And at last, when
nothing took effect, according to their malicious minds, they came out against
thee, as against a malefactor with clubbs, and staves, and took thee, and
carried their expected Messiah, before Herod and Pontius Pilate, and brought
false witness against thee, and preferred a murderer before thee, and though
indeed thou were their King, yet in mockage they put upon thee a purple roabe,
and in thy hand a Scepter of reed, and on thy head a crown of thorns, then
buffetted they thee, and spet upon thy face, contemning both thy princely,
priestly, and prophetical offices, in which thou wast their perfect Savior.
Then disroabed they thee, and carried thee without the gates of the City, and
after an ignominious manner, with two thieves, unto Golgotha the place of
common execution, and nailed thee to a wooden Cross in the midst of them.
And after they had wounded thee in sundry places, yet again in their malicious
and cowardly fury, they pierced thy side with a spear, even when thou
sighedst, groanedst, prayedst unto thy Father to forgive them their sins, and
to accept thy sacrifice. Yea, all this while they mocked thee, and bid thee
come down from the Cross, to save thy life as thou sauest others: and wrote a
title over thy head unto all Nations in contempt of thee; and when in the
pangues of thy passion thou did thirst for their pardon, then they ran and
flapped in thy mouth (not to comfort thee, but to prolong thy sorrows) an
hysope sponge dipped in vinegar: and after thy death (to make them sport) they
cast lots for thy garments. O sweet Savior, being thus abused by thy once
peculiar people, thou have most righteously, according to their wish, brought
upon them and their children, the reward of thy innocent blood, and done justly
in forsaking the house of thine honor, and put it into the possession of the
Gentiles, to be battered down, that there might not be left one stone upon
another, and to scatter them into perpetual captivity, as at this day we do
behold.

But O heavenly Father, thou have made known unto us Gentiles, that believe in
thee according to thy Word, that they did no more, then what they hand and
counsel had determined long before to be done. And had they known that they
had crucified thy Son, the Lord of glory, no doubt they would not have done
it, for in ignorance (as did their Fathers, they have done it) wherefore, O God,
for the respect thou bear to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and for thy servant
David's sake, as thou have promised (that a remnant should be saved) even as
many as thou will call, and the first fruits being holy, the branches
descending thereof should be holy, have respect unto them, that with the
fullness of us Gentiles, they may come again into the fold of Christ. O Lord
our Savior, open their eyes, that they may believe the Scriptures, and so come
again, and be grafted into their own Olive stock, for thou, O God, art able
to graffe them in again, for thy gifts and calling are without repentance.
Wherefore take from them their unbelief, that we both Jews and Gentiles may
be saved through thy mercy. O sweet Savior, have mercy on them, and call them
home again, that we and they may make one sheepe-fold, and like good sheep,
know thy voice, and follow thee our loving Shepherd, in the sincere obedience
of thy Gospel. Heavenly Father, bless thy Church universal, that it may
stand fast in the obedience and faith of Christ: give thy Gospel a free
passage in it, and among all people, that yet know not thee.

O thou which art the Lord of the harvest, send forth diligent and painful
laborers into thy harvest. Bless all the reformed Churches in these western
parts, but especially this church of England, that it be an ensample of sound
doctrine, and godly life, unto all other Churches. And grant that the Kings,
Nobles, and Senators, may remain, and succeed nursing Fathers in it for
evermore. O Lord, let not the wild Boares of the Forest, the Turk, nor
Antichrist, supplant the faith established among us, nor root up the vine,
that thine own right hand has planted, but continue the light among us which
now live, or hereafter shall live, even as long as the Sun or the Moon shall
endure.

O God, as thou have promised for thy Elect sake, finish these days of sin,
and hasten thy coming unto glory. And as by all thy works in general, so by
us men in special, yea by me with the residue of thy holy Church be especially
given, both now, and for evermore, all honor and glory world without end.

Amen. Amen.
A Prayer for the discovery and desolation of Antichrist.
O God of Hoasts, the omnipotent, invisible, and incomprehensible, the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost, the eternal Creator, and most mighty vpholder of
all things in heaven, and in earth, and by whom Kings ruie, and Princes reign,
hear me a poor sinful subject of thy great dominions, grieved and distressed
in soul, to behold how the enemies of thy truth do bandy themselves against
thee, and thy Christ, the Anointed of the Lord, and the only King of Kings,
the wonderful Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince
of peace. Look down, and discover the haters of thy Word, those that have
cast thy laws behind their backs, and scorn to be ruled by the sincere
truth of the same: yet shame not to take thy laws in their mouths, though
they hate to be reformed thereby. O God we have heard with our ears, and our
Fathers have told us, that in the last days shall be perilous times, in
which men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, proud, boasters,
blasphemers, disobedient unto superiors, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of
those that are good; traitors, heady, high minded, lovers of pleasure more
then of thee, having a form of godliness (a great show of righteousness)
wanting the power thereof, being in truth, nothing but scoffers, and walkers
after their lust: forbidding meats, drinks, and marriages, which with
thanksgiving thou have made holy and honorable, being indeed given to
adultery, fornication, lasciniousnesse, Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
variance, emulations, strifes, wrath, seditions, heresies, murders,
drunkenness, reuilings, and infinite the like, whereby it is come to pass,
that there is none righteous no not one, none that understands, none that
seeks after GOD aright, but have stumbled at noonday, even against that
rock of life, and thereby have used their tongues to deceit, and opened their
mouths full of cursing and bitterness, and have run as Caine with their
feet to shed innocent blood, yea most watchful to shed the blood of the
righteous: destruction and misery are in their ways, and the way of peace they
do not know. For the fear of God is not before their eyes, every one deuiseth
to work mischief, putting far away the evil day, professing themselves
wise, till they became fools. O Lord, thou have justly done to the men of this
world, in these our days, as unto the ancient Philosophers, who mightily
boasted themselves of their wisdom and general knowledge, and yet were
ignorant of thee, even as the Antichristian enemies do at this day boast
themselves to be the only true Church. Yet because they knew thee in word and
not in deed; therefore thou gave them up, unto their own hearts lusts, to
worship and serve the creature in steed of the Creator, adoring the bread in
the Sacrament for Christ himself, and honoring the Pope a mere man, as God
himself, saying he is God, even as the heathen Gentiles unto their wooden
Gods sometime said: thus, O Lord, because the Antichristian enemies have agreed
with the heathen to contemn thy Word; thou have justly done to give them up
unto a reprobate mind, to work all manuer of unrighteousness, as at this day
we see, the Romish Bishop, Prelates, Clergy, and Professors to be, the man
and men of sin that should sit in the Temple of God, and in doctrine speak
blasphemies and wicked untruths. O God, in thy Word thou have evidently marked
him out, showing that he should pretend chastity in heart and body, but
indeed have nothing less: to claim all spiritual power, to open and shut
the gates of thy Kingdom at his own will and pleasure, and against whom he
lust, to be universal Bishop through the whole world, and supreme head of
the Church, and Kings and Princes to be his vassalls, and at his making and
deposing. O Lord, he thrusts out of the Church as heretics all that speak
against his blasphemies, denouncing damnation to all that will not believe his
exposition of thy Word, saying, that he has always the holy Ghost in his
breast, and that he cannot err. He has forbidden the public reading of thy
Word, as heretical and dangerous, especially for simple people, and ordained
thy service in an unknown tongue, that the people might offer unto thee the
Sacrifice of fools: and in stead of the Sacrament, which we should often
receive, he has brought into the Church a superstitious sacrifice of the
Mass, in which they pretend to offer thee (O Christ) again for the sins of
the people, and the Priests eating is sufficient for all the rest of the
Church, be they never so many; or if they receive it in one kind, it is enough
for them, saying, that the body is no^ without the blood, quite gain, saying
thy commandments, drink ye all of this. He teaches for sound Doctrine, that
we must be cleansed in Purgatory, in which he can give indulgence to release
whom he will, and that we are saved by our good works; that we may keep
perfectly all the commandments, and so deserve our saluations by our own
merits, and that in Prayer we should call on the virgin Mary, as Queen of
heaven, to command her Son to hear us: teaching us, that she is our
Advocate, that pleads for us. He teaches Pilgrimages, worshipping Images,
keeping Relics, and that every man has ^is peculiar Saint in heaven, to whom
he likes best to commend his suits by: saying, that it is presumption to
approach to thee on^y in thy Son, though thou have ^id, There is no name in
heaven, ^r in earth, whereby we should ^e saved but only by the name of
jesus, to whom thou have ordai^ed every knee to bow, and only ^or to come.

By these, and infinite of Romish forgeries and blasphemies ^ath this strumpet
of Babylon, ^de drunk the Kings and Prin^s of the earth, by those abomi^ble
and lying wonders, and mi^cles, has he blinded the eyes (...) Christian
Kingdoms and Na^ons, that they do not know ^w to serve thee the Lord.

Wherefore (O Christ and most ^ly Lamb of GOD) against ^m he has so long time
war^d, as it were drunk with the blood of the Saints. Yea (O Lord with the
brightness of thy coming, let the violls of thy wrat^ be powered out upon her,
to he^ utter desolation: that the soule^ of just and righteous men, tog^ there
with the Angels, in the vnit^ of the spirit, may sing a song (...) Halleluiah;
saying, salvation, gl^ ry, honor, and power, be to the Lord our God, to the
Lamb, a^ holy Spirit for evermore, Ame^ Come Lord Jesus, come quickl^

Amen.
LACHRIM. 3.
Wherein the distressed prays for faith zeal, and strength, in undergoing
Gods corrections.

O Lord, I lift, my heart to thee,
my soul in thee does ever trust:
O let me not confounded be,
but make me righteous with the just:
Let men not have their wills' against me,
but power on me thy comforts sweet.
Thy saving health Lord let me see,
who prostrate beg it at thy feet.
Let thy right hand and providence,
be stretched out to hold me up.
And give me grace and patience,
in lowliness to taste thy cup:
So shall I sit on surest rock,
and strength and power to me get,
And stoutly shield mine enemies stroke,
though round about they me beset.
For why, my comfort is in thee,
and on thy providence I depend,
O keep me safe in liberty,
till all my troubles come to end:
From perils six have me delivered,
I know therefore thou will from seven,
From earthly thoughts let me be seuer'd,
and conversation have in heaven.
I know that love a multitude
of shameful sins does closely cover:
Within the gates I me include,
thou art my souls true spouse and lover.
The faithful thereby may take hold,
of hope to have a prosperous end:
Of their desires this makes me bold,
for aid and comfort to attend.
And with all patience to persevere,
I know thy word it is most sure:
Poor penitent by faith, I le ever
stand firm, and to the end endure.
Alas, dear God, I nothing crane,
to have of thee by mine own right:
But in Christ's name I Will ask and have,
for he is most gracious in thy sight.
Yea for his merits thou do love me,
in him I know thou art well pleased.
And hear sinners when they move thee:
for give their sin, and they are eased.
Amongst whom, Lord, I am the chief,
and of good things am ignorant:
Yet on the Cross did save the Thief,
for Christ his sake me mercy grant,
In this world vanities most vilde,
I live and have no taste of truth:
I knew not I was in exile,
but did in folly spend my youth.
Of thee alone I knowledge have,
(for of my self I am but weak)
Thou art my God that strength me gave,
to work, to rest, to live, to speak.
For of my self is misery,
and of my self is all that is ill:
But from thee Lord comes all mercy,
and perfect power to work thy will
Within, to consolation,
of my sad soul and wounded heart
Without, to preservation
of my weak body in each part.
Therefore teach me the truth, O Lord,
(O sacred truth) teach me thy ways
That I should walk, led by thy Word,
and to thy glory spend my days:
Lord keep from wicked thoughts mine heart,
mine hands that they commit none ill:
Mine eyes, my tongue, and every part,
Lord grant they may perform thy will:
My feet from falling still preserve,
as of my self regard me not.
Deal not with me as I deserve,
as are my sins reward me not.
Behold not my deformities,
but look on me in Christ by love,
My sins and all enormities,
as mists and clouds from me remove.
Thou righteous art and gracious,
reformest sinners, sins forgiu'st:
O be to me propitious,
to live in thee that ever live.
Keep thou my soul, let me not perish,
nor utterly to be confounded
That trust in thee, but my soul cherish:
and joy mine heart which thou have wounded.
Thou art my strength and sure defense,
in time of dangers imminent,
Though all help fail, experience
has taught me, thou art permanent.
I go unto thine Oracle,
and from thy word I counsel take,
And find a wondrous miracle,
thou never do thine own forsake.
Thy servants that in thee do trust,
thy Tabernacle shall them shield:
In secret thou do hide the just,
that are not with foul sin defilde.
Hearken, O Lord, hearken and hear,
unto my voice that call and cry:
O let thy love toward me appear,
with streams and floods of thy mercy.
Thou say, O Lord, seek ye my face,
what is it? but in my distress,
To cry for help, and crave thy grace,
and aid in time of heaviness:
My soul by the pure privilege
of thy free spirit which teaches truth,
My heart prepared with knowledge
and faith, and hope unto thee sueth.
My tongue does speak, mine heart does mutter,
and every member in his place,
Does strive to speak, and these words utter,
help me oppressed: hide not thy face.
Though father that did me beget,
my mother that from womb me bare,
And all my friends forsake me yet,
thou Lord of me take charge and care.
O Lord thou will me not forsake,
for so have promised in thy Word:
In all distress no fear I Will take,
but forthwith fly to thee O Lord,
Thou give not like our earthly Sires,
nor wants suppliest like carnal friends.
That would but cannot our desires,
perform in deeds as heart pretends.
Hopeless I should down faint, and fall,
did I not in thee surely trust:
That holds no respect at all,
but unto those whom Christ makes just.
And thou acceptest not vain glory
as worldlings do, nor things external:
Thou look not to things transitory,
but to the things that are internal.
A lowly and obedient heart,
a trembling spirit thou do elect:
Of poor oppressed thou tookst the part,
and proud men down thou do deiect:
Frame thou therefore my inward zeal,
that outward business me deceive not
Of comforts which thou do reveal
to thine, and me of joys bereave not.
When at thy mercy gate I knock,
do not as rich men use the poor,
That against them faest the gates do lock,
but quickly Lord set open the door:
Let not my miseries deprive
my heart of joy, or souls comfort:
Let not vain things ill men devise,
draw me to be of their consort.
Make strong my faith, and hope Lord give me,
and I Will take hold of thy protection.
Be my defense and Pa^oplie,
and guide me safe to thy election.
Thou have, O Lord, my troubles scene,
have known my soul in bitterness.
Thou have mine help and succor been,
O help me now in my distress.
In mercies thou have mightily.
saved me from perils infinite:
My life consumes, my heart does die,
my years do waste, my day is night:
The day tells day, the night the morrow,
the base reproach of my disaster:
Yea friends and foes add grief to sorrow,
and each base mate does me o're-master.
I am now at the point to pine,
O let it be thy blessed pleasure:
To ease my grief for I am thine,
my pains assuage Lord in some measure;
For thou my pains have measured,
and all that is good for those that fear,
Lord thou in store have treasured,
to me Lord, let the same appear.
In sight of those that are my foes,
that think there is no period:
Of all my tortures, pain, and woes,
grant this for Christ his sake, O God.
A Prayer of an afflicted mind.
O Lamb of GOD which take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon me,
a most vile and wretched sinner, wounded even unto death eternal; if thou Lord
in whom all fullness of mercy and compassion does dwell, do not relieve and
comfort me. O Lord how am I assaulted by the crafty and subtle temptations of
Satan, that cunning serpent, that sees all my weaknesses, both of soul and
body, and never cease night nor day, sleeping, waking, eating, drinking,
hearing, and reading, mourning and laughing, but always follows and doggeth
me, with fearful temptations, telling me that I am but an hypocrite, and
that all my repentance has been but in words, and not in heart, in outward
show, but not in truth: and that my sins are greater then God can or will
forgive, that I am none of his Elect, that I have no true faith, saying, That
those that truly believe, never doubt, that I do not understand Gods word
aright, and that it does nothing appertain unto me, no more than unto Judas
(who for all he was an Apostle) yet was reprobated and cast away; and how
know thou, but that thy faith is presumption, seeing never any man but St.
Paul, had such assurance of faith. Yea, thou do not delight in Gods word,
nor so love his Ministers as thou should, thou do not abound in good
works, all thy righteousness is pharisaicall, thou art a lover of the world
more then of God: do thou not see how thou art continually punished,
plagued, and smitten of God, never without one cross or other, on thy self,
thy wife, children, and servants: on thy cattle, goods, and adventures, at
home and abroad, and in other businesses: Yea, in every thing thou put
thine hand unto, thou see how God is against thee, and cannot abide thee:
yea, even in thy Prayers thou may feel how the spirit of God has left
thee: therefore deceive not thy self, thou art none of his; if it were
otherwise, thou should not be so afflicted in every thing as thou art.
Deceive not thy self, God does not love thee, if he did, he would never have
suffered thee to commit so many sins, as thou have done, by lying, by
swearing, by drunkenness, by whoring, by fornication, by adultery, by
murder, and the like, and to have lived so long in them as thou have done:
Yea, what a prophaner of the Sabbath day have thou been? what filthy and
unclean thoughts, what scurrilous Songs, and unsavory speeches have issued
out of thy heart and mouth, and how have thou been swallowed up in pleasure
and pride, all the days of thy youth. And how many of Gods good creatures have
thou profaned in thy belly, on thy back, on thy neck, to pranke thy Iezabels
face, thinking nothing good enough, and fine enough to pamper thy earthly
carcass: And do thou think that God will now in thine old age, accept thy
blind service. Thy repentance comes too late, God will not regard thy
sacrifice, but as thou regardest not him, when he called in thy youth; so now
he will not regard thee in thine old age, though thou make many cries unto
him; yea, there is no sacrifice can cleanse thee from thy sins, thou have
cast Gods law behind thy back, and committed the sin against the holy
Ghost, so that it is in vain for thee to hope for mercy, thou can not be
forgiven, though with Esau thou sh^d never so many tears. Thou art a reprobate
by Gods decree, and what know thou, but that thou art in hell already, so
that do what thou will, thou can not be saved. And therefore drown, or hang
thy self, or cut thy throat: O Coward, kill thy self, and so shall thou rid
thy self out of this present pain.

O heavenly Father, look down upon this my wounded spirit: and (O Lord) drive
away Satan, that he prevail not in these temptations against my soul. O
Lord, so strong and violent are his temptations, that I know not how to resist
them, but by the strength of thy holy Spirit, which I beseech thee, O Lord, may
powerfully and comfortably aid and assist me now and for evermore. Lord for
thy Christ his sake, in whom I only trust to obtain thy mercy, do away my
sins, and speak peace unto my soul, against this lying serpent, that thou
art and wilt be my salvation: O Lord. create in me a clean heart, and renew in
me a right spirit, that I may learn to fear thee according to thy word: deal
bountifully with me thy servant, that I may escape these temptations, and in
spite of Satan, live to keep thy word: let not such contempt and reproach
come upon me, but save me out of the jaws of hell, and from the power of
Satan, for thy names sake, and for thy mercy sake, and for thy Son his sake,
O Lord I beseech thee. And though my soul through these temptations, cleave
unto the dust, yet quicken thou me according to thy word, and though the
sorrows of death hereby compass me in on every side, and the terrors of
hell have now caught hold on me, yet O Lord I beseech thee to deliver my
soul. And though Satan has compassed me with the multitude of his
temptations, yet in thy Name, O Lord, I am confident, that I shall overcome
them. And though thou have suffered Satan for a time to buffet me; yet I
beseech thee as thy Son Jesus my Savior has taught me, in this last
petition of his holy Prayer; let me be neither further led, nor come into
temptation, but as in the wilderness, after Satan's threefold temptation of
thee, thou by faith in the Word of thy Father, did resist him, that in the
end he left thee, so that thy Angels ministered comfort to thee: so most sweet
Savior help me, so by the same skill of thy holy Word, that I may resist
Satan, and after the battle be comforted and confirmed in obedience, by the
most sweet comfort of thy holy spirit.

O Lord my Savior, how did he tempt thee, to make away thy self, but could
not prevail? So (O Lord) strengthen me by the same power of thy Godhead, and
a true lively faith, by which I am ingrafted into thee, that I may never by
Satan's power, be forced against, nor with my will, to commit the wickednesses
wherewith he tempts me. O Lord, he could not enter into the Heard of
Swine, until thou gave him leave: wherefore by thy unlimited power, curb
and restrain him, that he enter not into me, much less work his will of
me, as he did of them. He feign would have killed thy servant Job, as he had
done his children, servants, and cattle, but thou would not give him leave:
So (O Lord) he has striuen to do with me, but thou have kept me, and
resisted, and rebuked him in my behalf: he strives like a roaring Lion, to
make me his prey, and beats hard to enter into my heart, which thou have
swept and garnished, to be a receptacle for thy self; wherefore (O Lord) let
that stronger man, even thy holy Spirit, keep sure my soul unto thee, that I
be not overcome with his furious assaults, and temptations, to let go my hope
in thy mercies: thou delightest not in the death of a sinner, but rather to
show mercy, that he may be saved: Lord for thy mercy sake, save me, and help
me, for thy Sons sake keep me, from the rage and fury of this my great
oppressor. O God, he would fame play the lying spirit unto my soul, that he
might plunge me in thy great displeasure: but (O Jesus I beseech thee) save
me, and drive Satan away from me, that he never come at me more. O God, he
continually strives with me for my soul, as he did with thine Angel, for
the body of Moses, but as then thou did defend it, and thine Angel, and in
the end rebuked Satan; So (O Lord) defend me, and rebuke Satan, that he
prevail not against me, neither in health, in sickness, nor yet at the point
of death; but send thine Elect Angel of the covenant (Christ Jesus) my
anointed Savior, and his innumerable heavenly Soldiers, here to keep me,
and at my end to conduct my soul, to that place of rest, where this champion
of hell, shall not once dare to defy it, or cast forth any wicked accusation
against me: and that for the merits of thy dearest Son, and sprinkling of his
blood, under which I expect my safety and salvation, both here in the Church
militant, and for ever in thy Church triumphant, therefore to thee most holy
Trinity, and Lord God of Sabbaths, be given by me, and all thine, both present,
and eternal praise.

Amen.
LACHRIM. 4.
Wherein the distressed prays GOD to keep him from despair, howsoever men
go about to ruin him or his estate: not regarding (so God in his mercy and
protection be with him) who or how many rise up against him.

IN thee, O Lord, I put my trust,
and yet there are which daily say,
There is no help for me unjust,
but Lord thy word cannot decay:
Thou art my God, how can they then,
prove that thou will none help me send:
I am brought low in sight of men,
there is none will help or comfort bend:
My basket and my store is spent,
they say it was by thee accursed:
Thou did at take that h^dst it sent,
but they take all things at the worst:
At me they gape, at me they wonder,
as at a monster seldom seen:
On all their works and words I ponder,
what I now am, what I have been.
I faint at naught, thou know my smart,
thou art my Father, and do me foster:
What words or works, can daunt my heart,
I am in thee become a boaster.
These men thy might and power disable,
or else thy love to man diminish:
Or else they think thou art unstable,
and do begin, and wilt not finish:
Or that the poor wilt not support,
nor help the needy in distress:
But as thou know what they report,
so make them feel their wickedness.
But I do know thou failest never,
them that in thee their trust repose.
If they be constant and persevere,
all things are for the best to those.
Thou art indeed a jealous God,
and first thy children thou do monish:
Thou bear with love, and beat'st with rod,
if they mend not, wilt further punish:
Yet call'st thy chosen children back,
by gentle strokes, from running riot,
And suffer them to suffer lack,
and do prescribe to them their diet:
We may condignely then deride,
the judgment of such foolish men,
That unto thee Lord will prescribe,
the measure what, and the time when.
Such fleshly men by wealth and woe,
censure thy love, or thy displeasure:
As Natures friend, or Graces foe,
by humane reason all things measure.
They think thou love whom thou feed'st fat,
with plenty, pleasures, worldly riches:
And that all others thou do hate,
these world, flesh, and devil bewitches:
And great is this temptation,
unless our natures thou assist:
Infeebled with affliction,
whose help does rest in Jesus Christ.
When thou therefore do me correct,
with one hold, hold me with the other:
Let fasth in thee make thee accept
me for thy Son, by Christ my brother:
Lay not upon me greater load,
then I poor wretch can well endure.
If I do sink, stay my aboade,
and if I fall, then keep me sure.
Thou know Lord whereof I am made,
I am a silly simple man:
A worm, a flea, a puff, a shade,
that no good do, nor no good can.
Try by the Cross, true to the Crown,
that we may prove by want and losses:
But to despair, pull me not down,
but unto comforts, turn my crosses:
I am not able to bear thy yoke,
unless Christ thy Son do with me draw:
I am not able to fend thy stroke,
unless he (O Lord) does ward the blow.
Lord with thy mercies compass me,
protection draw out of despair:
O let me thy salvation see,
and all things fit obtain by Prayer.
Thou show mercy to the meek,
that trust in thee in all men's sight:
There children shall find what they seek,
thou shall to Sunshine turn their night.
A place whence worldlings are excluded,
and all the hellish rabble out.
Though here on earth they have intruded,
to root Gods faithful children out:
And such as have with hate pursued,
and trusted in the arm of flesh:
And have their hands in blood imbrued,
shall say in judgment they were rash.
God's on my side, who can overthrow me?
Christ pleades my cause, can God refuse me,
As just in Christ: the Lord does know me,
he does acquit, who can accuse me.
We thought that this man's life was madness,
then shall the wicked worldlings say:
But see his words are turned to gladness,
whom we have deemed a castaway.
His hand has wrought what he would have,
yea I my self shall say I erred:
That thought thou would me not save,
because my joys were then deferred:
I thought my cries thou would not hear,
when I thee sought, thy self did hide:
When I complained, thou came not near,
as though thou could me not abide:
But now I knowledge and confess,
thy wisdom great in humbling me:
Thy love sustained me in distress,
thy providence releeuing me.
This passed all judgment and conceit,
of learned, grauest, wisest men:
Therefore, dear Father, I will wait,
take thine own time, how, where, and when
I will not with thy will indent:
nor thee direct the manner how.
Thou should me help, it is mine intent,
unto thy will to bend and bow.
Hereafter I will hold my peace,
though men shall say yet still of me:
And though their tongues will never cease,
(there is for me, no help from thee.)
(...) Prayer for a Merchant, that God would bless his Sea adventures.
O Almighty God, the Creator of heaven and earth, and that ^ath made the round
world, and (...) that is therein, that stretches ^t the North over the empty
^aces, and hangs the earth vp^ nothing, that has set the Sea ^s bounds,
until night and day ^me to an end; that divides ^e Sea, and binds the
floods ^om ouerflowing: that looks (...) the ends of the earth, and sees ^e
whole fabric of heaven, and ^e earth, and all things therein: ^t makes the
weight for the winds, and knows the measures of the waters, that has since
the days of Noah, shut up the Sea, with bars and doors, saying, hitherto
shall thou come, and no further, and here shall thy proud waves be stayed; yet
for the families of Jacob, at their departure from Egypt and Pharaoh Court;
thou did once again interrupt the bounds of the Seas and made them to stand
on heaps that Israel might escape from their cruel and bloody pursuer^ The
waters saw thee (O God) the waters saw thee, and were afraid a^ the presence of
the Lord God A^ mighty: unto thee most might Jehouah do I come, beseechin^
thee to prosper my adventures a^ the Sea: thou art the same Lord that did
prosper the ancient a^ uentures that thy servant Salomo made to Opher in the
land of Hau^ lah toward the East. O Lord, beseech thee, that when the wi^ shall
arise, the Seas roar, t^ floods raise them up into heaven, and cast them down
again into the bottom of the deep, threatening nothing but death and
destruction: keep them that they perish not in the proud waves thereof, by
falling into sands, nor by running against the hard rock: Keep them safe in
their persons and goods, as thou did Salomons Mariners, and the rich
treasures (...) their vessels. O Lord, let no ^obbers, nor Pirates at Sea,
attach their persons or goods, but pro^ect them safe out of their hands, that I
and they being made well (...) live, may return thanks, and ^^sse thee all
our days, both pri^ately and publicly in thy holy ^ongregation; for they
that go ^to the deep, see the wonders (...) the Lord, and thereby are taught
^w to praise thee.

Sweet Savior, as thy Disci^s with thee in the Ship, in ^eir extreamities
called upon ^ee to help them, that they might not perish: So, O Lord, I^ cail
upon thee, beseeching thee to hear me for them, and them for, themselves, and
say unto the Seas peace, and be still: for they are at thy command to obey
thee, and therefore subject at thy rebuke to be still. O Lord, as thou did
reach forth thy hand unto thy Disciples, and to Peter at midnight, when they
were in distress, in the raging waves, and by calling unto thee were
comforted: So, O Lord, put into their hearts such a reverend fear of thee,
that in any danger or extremity by sea or land, they may call upon thee and be
comforted O Lord, though they be compassed about with death on every side, yet
there is assured safety in thee; wherefore keep firm^ their tacklings, that
they deceiu^ them not in the raging winds nor mountain billows that bea^
against their sides, that their Ship in which they are, be not broken O Lord,
if thou force them to cast out their goods for safety, yet will it not avail,
unless therewith they cast forth by unfeigned repentance their loades of
sins, through which bodies and goods are made to sink. And let them be in
safety, as the Mariners that were travailing from Ioppa to Tarsus, when they
had cast forth rebellious Jonas.

O Lord of hoasts, and God of heaven, send thy Angels with them, to guide them
forth, and conduct them safe in their return, and be with them in their
greatest necessities, as thou wast with thine Apostle S. Paul, in his dangerous
voyage to Rome. This temporal blessing, and all others that are needful, and
that thou know better to give, then I to ask; (though a chief of sinners,
and therefore most unworthy) yet I beg and ask it, if it be thy good
pleasure, for thy Son Jesus sake, my only Lord and Savior.

Amen.
A Prayer for the fruits of the earth, and other nourishments of this mortal
life.
O Eternal God, which feedest with thy blessing every living thing: and
satisfiest the desires of thy servants, with thy bountiful goodness, we
wretched sinners, unworthy of the least of thy blessings and benefits, do most
humbly beseech thee to be pleased, to bless all the fruits of the earth, that
we and all thy servants may be partakers of thy comforts therein, for the
nourishment of this life. Give us, O Lord, this day our daily bread, prepare
our ground, and prosper our corn. Bless the seed time with the first and
latter rain, and meet temperature of air. Keep our fruits while they be in
the earth, from hail and thunder, from excessive droughts, and immoderate
raines, from mildewes, and all noisome worms. Send us a joyful Harvest, and
give a blessing to that which we shall reap, that for our unthankfulness it
waste not away without our relief. Increase our cattle, with all other our
provision, which we shall carefully labor for. Replenish our basket, and
bless our store, that we may have wherewith, as to furnish our selves, so to
give some relief unto others. Protect our servants and workefolkes, that they
may be strong to labor, wise to forecast, and faithful in their business.
Keep our Garners, Barnes, and Storehouses, from fire, and boisterous winds,
Thieves, and sudden inundations. Prosper our works and travels, whether by
sea or land, and bless and prosper all them that any way labor for any of
those things that we shall have occasion to use.

Send remedy, O Lord, for all hardness and misery, turn our dearth into
cheapenesse, and our scarcity into plenty. Open the hearts of rich men, to whom
thou have given much, that they may have a charitable respect of the poor at
all times. Help us (O Lord) and give us such things as we stand in need of,
and make us to desire such things only as may be pleasing unto thee, to
search them wisely, and to find them easily. Oppress us not with too much
poverty, neither puff us up with too much plenty; but give us a competent
store of things necessary for this life, and grace to use them soberly to thy
glory, and our comfort, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A thanksgiving for our Benefactours.
O Lord, which have said, that he that gives unto the poor, lends unto the
Lord, and look what he lays out, it shall be paid him again: we beseech
thee to be gracious and merciful to all those, for whom we are bound to pray
by nature, by desert, or any other duty whatsoever. Of thy especial favor
remember all our Benefactours and friends alive, even all those our Parents,
kinsfolks, and others, which have brought us up, taught, promoted, or any way
relieved us. Bless them with all blessings, that have done good, either to our
bodies with temporal benefits, or our souls with profitable instructions.
Bless their estates, that in their godly dispositions they may have always
wherewith to relieve and comfort others in their discretion: give them the
consolation of the holy Ghost, to the keeping of faith and a good conscience:
And as they have showed mercy unto us, and comforted us: so Lord, help and
comfort them in their greatest needs, that both they and their families may
both have comfort in their estate and condition here, and find mercy with thy
Son our Savior Jesus at the latter day. Lord let all their almes-deedes, and
prayers, be always in thy sight, as those of Cornelius; that as they have been
unto us an odor that smells sweet, whereby we have received plenty, and
been filled, so they may be as sacrifices acceptable and pleasant unto thee.
Vouchsafe us this grace, O Lord, that we be not guilty of any ingratitude
toward them, but rather ready according to our abilities, to recompense them,
if need require.

Let not that which they have bestowed upon us be cast away, but make it
fruitful and us worthy of it. Grant this, O thou God, which do good both
to the just and unjust, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only Lord and Savior.

Amen.
LACHRIM. 5.
Wherein the distressed shows his desire to hold more fast the promises of
God.

O Lord, thou art my hope and strength,
thou help'st in trouble, do not hide
Thy self for ever, but at length
for men distressed do thou provide,
For I by thee will hold most fast,
I Will trust in thee while I do live:
And till those storms be ouer-past,
I Will neither faint, nor fear, nor grieve.
Tremble thou earth: rage sea and land,
wind, tempest, storms, and all about:
I see thee (Lord) hold out thy hand,
for my defense, I Will never doubt.
What though hills quake, and staggering stumble,
and fall into the midst of seas.
Though waters roar, rage, and tumble,
thou can this change, and all appease,
Should I then faint at troubles small,
which like small darts thou throw'st at me
In love, but not to kill at all,
but make me leave my vanity.
Forsake my follies every deal,
reclayming errors to the truth:
It Is thou did hurt, and thou can heal:
thou have preserved me from mine youth.
I must confess I merited,
the death of death, with pains of hell:
And to be disinherited
of heavens high, where just do dwell.
But Lord do mittigate thine anger,
and turn thy heavy wrath to love:
Deliver me from all this danger,
let thy compassion mercy move.
And with true comforts Christ all fountain,
my dry and thirsty soul refresh:
And power on me from holy mountain,
sweet dewes to glad my soul and flesh.
Thy darts in me, O Lord, stick fast,
O pull them out, cast them away,
And cure my wounds, to help make have;
bind up my sores, souls sorrows stay.
Cleanse the corrupt affections,
of my defiled wicked heart:
Prosper and bless mine actions,
lighten my knowledge gross and dark.
O Wash me from impi^ti^,
exhilerate my sick souls sadness^.
In darkness let me light epsy,
in midst of sorrow grant me gladness,
On fruitful ground Lord do me plan^*
and build me up on surest r^cke.
Annoyes to joys, to wealth turn w^
from future ills me keep and lock,
As trees that grow by waters side,
whose leaves and blossoms freshly flourish;
For ever let my state abide,
thy love revive, thy grace me nourish,
Let thy spirit daily spring and bud,
with faiths pure branches from my heart:
Let dewes and drops of Christ's dear blood,
feed veins of hope from sinners dar^*
My store is decayed, thou can renew it:
my basket's empty, thou can fill it:
Refresh my heart, again revive it:
revive it Lord, for thou did kill it.
Thou help'st the simple, poor, and needy,
thou see my state, thou can all m^nd:
I know thou know when to be speedy,
and know thy time when to defend.
Help, help, O Lord, else down I fall,
hold me fast by thy strong hand,
And lift me up against them all,
that by opposing me withstand.
Thy promise (Lord) thou^o st perform;
thy words are deeds, thou (...) and do,
A happy end thou do return,
and grant to those that on thee trust:
My safety (Lord) thou have ordained,
by faith my hope does mount and ^lie,
And by that hope I am sustained,
if that were lost my soul would die.
My faith has fixed an object right,
my will does far my power exceed:
But (Lord) I know that in thy sight,
the will is taken for the deed.
Then (Lord) for deed my will do take,
and I secured shall be then.
O grant me this for Christ his sake,
to whom be praise for aye.
Amen.
A convenient Prayer for all times, either for a private person, or a whole
family.
MOst mighty God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, most loving Savior and
Redeemer, and most blessed Spirit, proceeding from the Father and the Son,
the eternal, most glorious Trinity, which in the beginning did create the
heaven and the earth, with all the hoasts of them, and from time to time, unto
this present moment of their being, vpheld and preserved them, and all
creatures, that thou did then make, have ever sithence obayed thy first
institution, man only (for whom thou made all things) excepted, which when
we do consider (O Lord) we cannot, but be much dejected in our selves, to
think that we whom thou have adorned with thine own Image, should be fallen
back in our obedience, and become worse then the worst of thy creatures: thou
gave us disposition to obey thee, but we have despised thee, and cast away
from us the yoke of obedience, yet so great is thy mercy, that though we have
rejected thee, yet thou have not rejected us, but have continued all thy
covenants in full force unto us, as in the beginning unto our forefathers.

O Lord, from the womb of our Parents are we risen a rebellious seed, and
like the prodigal son, have in the vain imaginations of our hearts wandered
from thee, so that thou can take no pleasure nor delight in us, or in any
thing we do: but (O Lord) we cast down our selves in thy sight, and
presence, earnestly be^eeching thee (as on the poor Publican) to have mercy
upon us, and pardon all our sins which we from time to time have done
against thee. O Lord pardon our sins of ignorance, of omission and
commission, in the duties commanded and forbidden, which we have neglected and
not done. O Lord pardon our sins of knowledge, by which we have often grieved
thy good spirit, that would have hindered and detained us from them, if we out
of the love to them, had not too much delighted in them, and stopped our ears
against his holy motions and directions. O Lord, pardon our sins of
presumption, by which we have most mightily offended thee: and so hardened our
hearts, as we could take no delight in the exercise of thy worship or service,
as by the contempt of thy most holy Word and Sacraments, in our own
conscience, and in the sight of thy holy Church, unto whom we are known, is
most mani^est: yet (O our most good God) do away all our transgressions, at
what time or place so ever they have been committed or done. (O Lord) separate
them as far from thee, as the East is from the West, bind them in a bundle,
and drown them from thy sight, as thou did the sins of the old world: O
Lord drown them in the huge sea of thy mercy, so as they may be clean
forgotten, for we confess, that if thou should call us to a reckoning and
account for them, there is not the least of them, but like millstones tied
about our necks, in the midst of the sea, would drown us in eternal death,
and condemnation of body and soul for evermore.

But (O Lord) we beseech thee to nail our sins unto the Cross of thy dear
Son Jesus our Savior, and Redeemer, and for his sake, we only entreat thee
to be at peace with us, and thy whole Church, throughout the world. Wash our
sins away in his most holy blood which he shed for his Churches sake, in his
agony on the mount before, and in his death on the Cross, for he is the Lord
our righteousness, who in thy secret counsel was slain, from the beginning
of the world, that we which trust in him, by his stripes and wounds, might of
our sins be healed. O Lord, I beseech thee, hear these our petitions; which
much like forlorn beggars, we put up unto thee in thy Sons name, being
imboldened, and encouraged this to dee, from that promise of thine, which in
thy holy Gospel, thou have given us, saying: Ask and ye shall have, seek
and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you. Yea, thou have
encouraged us here unto, saying; Can you that are evil, give good gifts to
your children, when they ask; and shall not I give the holy Ghost to my
children when they ask of me? And thou have said, that having given thy Son
unto us, that thou will with him give us all things else, and for his sake deny
unto us nothing: in conscience of the truth of this thy holy word, we pray
thee to hear us, and to settle our hearts and minds in the knowledge, love,
and obedience of thy word and commandments to the end, and in the end of this
our frail and weak life. O Lord, considering our weakness, and how unable
we are to stand in temptation: and considering how many and how great our
temptations are, both in things spiritual, and things temporal; and how the
devil as a wandering and raging Lion, reigns throughout the world, and in the
Church especially: seeking whom he may devour, and considering how subtly
he uses, and offers this world unto us, (as he did unto thee in the
beginning of thy Ministry, which thy Father had appointed thee in his Church)
even so by the profits and pleasures which he profereth us, would he cunningly
steal our hearts from thee, and thy worship unto himself, which we abhor as
most wicked and ungodly: And considering how he stirs our unclean hearts,
and wicked corruptions, as a stinking puddle to breath forth many noisome and
loathsome cogitations, and evil actions, whereby he would brand our
consciences, not only to doubt of our redemption by Christ, but also of thy
mercy, which is so exceeding comfortable. For all these considerations we
entreat thee to hear us, help us, and strengthen us, in all these several
temptations; and as in these, so in all other, of what nature or kind so ever
they are, or shall be in this world: and that not only in prosperity, but in
adversity, and in the strength of Satan's temptations, especially when thou
shall have cast us upon the bed of sickness, and bring us unto the point of
death, when we are most weak, and Satan in his greatest insolency.
Wherefore, O Lord, give us grace, that in the time of this life, we may not be
negligent, but most careful in the use of all good means, whereby we may
finish our salvation in fear and trembling, for of our selves we cannot move
one foot forward unto thy Kingdom, without thy help to stir us, inwardly by
the motions of thy spirit, and outwardly by the hearing and reading of thy
word, with conference, meditation, and prayer. Let not thy grace be absent at
such times, but go on with us in blessing, helping, and guiding us, till we
have obtained full assurance, even the testimony of thy holy Spirit, in our
hearts witnessing unto us, and with us, that thou art our God, and we thine
adopted sons and children (in Christ Jesus our Lord) and so may be enabled
to stand fast in love and charity, as to all men in general, so especially to
thy Church, which are only the household of faith: O make me merciful to the
fatherless, to widows indeed, to captives, bondslaues, and all sorts that
suffer adversity in soul or body. Having prayed for our selves, and such
things as concern this present life, as feeling members of the mystical body
of thy Church militant dispersed, and scattered throughout the whole world, we
entreat thee to have mercy upon it, and bless it by strengthening those that
thou have called, that we may stand fast in the profession of thy Name, and not
be ashamed of that inseparable yokefellow, thy cross, under which thou have
caused us as spiritual soldiers always to war. And grant that by no
temptations inward or outward, we be forced to faint; but enable us, that
fighting against our most subtle adversaries, flesh or spirit, our corrupt
nature, men, or the devil, being Lords of the whole world, that i^ wicked,
carnal, and unregenerate men, that are wholly led of Satan, and the power of
darknesse^ Heavenly Father, I beseech thee* more particularly to look down
upon the reformed Churches* and among them more especially upon the Churches of
England* Scotland, and Ireland, and all other our own and neighboring
Nations, that we may enjoy the promises of the Gospel, as long as the Sun
and Moon endure^ And grant that out of those Churches may be spread far and
wide among the Jews and Heathen that are called, the amiabi^ tidings of the
Gospel, that thereby the Kingdom of thy Son may be more and more enlarged To
this end, bless all Christian Kings, Princes, and Potentates* but especially
thy servant Charle^ our King, that by thine appointment, at this present does
rule and govern us; increase in him* and them, religious, zealous, and ^incere
hearts: so as he and they ^ay go before all other Kings and Princes, in m^st
holy, wise, and Christian life, ministering judgment, and justice, without
respect ^f persons. O Lord make our King, and all other Kings strong
^aintainers and defenders of thy ^ue, ancient, Catholic, and Christian faith,
now established (...) these his Dominions; that no ^olicie of man, nor subtilty
of Sa^han, may prevail against it, but that his Majesty by the tempo^all
sword, and the Ministers of ^e Word by the spiritual sword, ^e preaching of
the Word, (as ^ttle David) may prevail against ^l the enemies thereof, secret
or ^pen, abroad or at home, within ^ese his own Dominions. Hea^enly Father,
send him we be^ech thee, (if it be thy will) No^e and Royal issue, that after
him (...) every Age, they may sit upon ^e Throne of this Kingdom, r^le, and
gou^rne it unto the coming of thy dear Son our Savior unto judgment. O
Lord settle about him and them, i^ every age and generation, a god* ly,
learned, religious, truly noble and wise Counsel: And graun^ that both he and
they may truly love and advance, unto, and in gouenrnment, a learned and
religious Ministry, and Magistrac^ within thy Church of great Britain
especially. And most might ty God, I pray thee perpetually to look down upon
all men, bu^ especially upon our own Country men, that are in any adversity by
sea, or land, and in their several trialls and crosses of this life^ give them
patience to bear, (...) deliverance, in, or out of them, (...) may be best
unto thy godly wise dome, as may make most to the glory, and their comforts.
(...) these and all other blessings spiritual and temporal, beyond the we
are able to ask and think we pray thee to hear^ us, (...) (...) only and
alone, (...) (...) Son^e our Saviors sa^e (...) whom with thee, and thy ^t
holy Spirit, be (...) ho^ and glory, from this (...) (...) and for evermore.

Amen.
LACHRIM. 6.
In which the distressed craves pardon for his sins, the cause of all his
miseries.

O Had I wings like to a Dove,
then should I from these troubles fly:
To wilderness I would remove,
to spend my life and there to die.
Among bushes thick, and branches tall,
of mighty Cedars huge and hie:
With savages and wild beasts all,
for to avoid my misery.
But why thus wish I, Lord* alas,
that am vain man of flesh and blood:
Thou God that bring'st all things to pass,
do know, this sorts not for my good.
For were ^in vaste wilderness:
in furthest part of earth or air:
I could no whit my case redress,
as being in thy power there.
Were I in bowels of the earth,
were I in sea, in clouds or sky:
With sorrow, grief, with joy or mirth,
there Lord thou art with powerful eye,
There can thou also find me out,
and visit there my foul effence:
Thou art my paths and bed about,
it is vain to hide or feel defense.
Then let me at thy footestoole fall,
and there acknowledge mine amiss:
For pardon beg, and mercy call,
and pray for grief and heavenly bliss:
And that thou bridle my desires,
cleanse mine affections with thy spirit.
Inflame me with thy holy fire,
in naught but thee let me delight.
Lord can the fierceness of my heart,
r^forme my words, my mouth, my speech:
Thou fountain of all wisdom art,
therefore true wisdom do me teach.
In understanding truth instruct me,
vouchsafe me perfect patienc^:
And to freedom Lord conduct me,
where is no loss nor pain of sense.
And from these dangers Lord me free,
which most I fear, and soon'st possess:
The comforts most desired by me,
and so enjoy true happiness.
O make not Lord thy absence long,
but hasten my deliverance.
Against my foes Lord make me strong,
which do themselves against me advance.
That ready are with onset new,
for to assault my silly soul:
Wearied with storms that do accrewe,
and plunged with waves which over me roll.
Wherefore have thou left unto us,
by thy word a commandment,
To cast our care on thee which thus
with weighty burdens us torment.
With promise to us help and ease,
thou see and know Lord our desire:
Our secret hearts, and all our ways.
all is plain to thee as light, as fire.
If therefore I should justify
my self, I should condemned be:
Thou find'st me out, and do me try,
my righteousness is naught to thee,
Disclayming my integrity,
I cast me down Lord at thy feet:
And pray for pure sincerity,
that I do all in all that is meet.
Wherefore thou art most merciful,
when wants and weakness we confess:
Yea, then thy gifts are plentiful,
us to relieve in our distress.
On thee my burden Lord I lay,
for well I know thou c^r'st for all
That thee believe: love, fear, obey,
and for thy grace and mercy call.
My faith and hope is all in thee,
I am of imperfections full,
I ask why thou do visit me?
should I that blockish am a^ dull,
Defiled within, and eke without,
plead duties done, ^r else be mute:
It is in vain to go about,
with thee, O Lord, for to dispute.
Who evil am in my best way,
in purest thoughts yea most impure:
Pardon my weakness Lord I pray.
and give me zeal and truth to endure:
With humbleness and perfect love,
which Lord thou do of me require:
Instruct me God, with wisdom move,
me guide and lead to thy desire.
Show me the way that tends to bliss,
after this my long straying h^^re,
And bring me home where all peac^ ^s,
let thy free favor Lord appear.
Wherein is life and liberty,
comfort, joy, and society.
With rest, peace, and tranquillity,
for them that live in piety.
O happy he whom thou protectest,
most happy he whom thou do love:
He is happy and sure whom thou respectest,
he is fed and clad from thee above.
In all good things he is rich indeed,
when he does call, thou do him hear:
What he does ask, thou give at need,
he seeks and finds them every where.
When he is sick thou do him ^ure:
when poor, thou do his wants supply:
When he is sad he shall be sure,
thy saving help and health is ni^,
When he is troubled do defend him,
in danger do securenesse give him:
When men him hate, thy love wilt send him,
when almost dead, life does revive him.
And give him then such joys for ever,
as no man's wit can apprehend:
Me favor grant, Lord bring me thither,
to these thy blessings without end.
This favor Lord unto me show,
and bless my contemplation,
Only in heaven and he, I know
is perfect contentation.
My sorrows shall be turned to joy,
my wants unto sufficiency:
My tears to gladness, from annoy,
mourning to mirth and melody.
My soul keep safe from death and hell:
my feet from sliding and from falling:
Let m^ uprightly walk and dwell:
and on thee still O Lord be calling.
Who do perform thy promises,
and let'st none empty part away:
That with their hearts seek thy mercies,
or do for help or comfort pray.
Send help therefore and save me,
from them that would me quite de^o^re:
And daily grieve me, and deprave me,
my soul's with Lions every hour.
I wads as through the raging sea,
I dwell amongst them set on fire:
Whose teeth are spears, whose tongue bears sway,
like two-edged sword with wrath and ire.
Thy mercy therefore and thy truth,
let be my bucklen and strong s^ld:
Have been mine hope even from my youth,
let troubles cease, new joys me yield.
Set me upon thy rock for (...),
of perfect love and true relief:
Let rest and refuge fail me n^uer,
and thy protection save from griese,
Bring thou to pass what is fit for me,
what thou do know expedient:
That righteous men the and may see,
and how my hope ob^^in'd con^^nt.
That they may of thy glory talk,
and speak of thy eternal praise*
All men shall say that see me walk;
doubtless God will the righteo^s raise.
There is a God th^^'s gracious go^d*
to them that be of perfect heart:
When he has all their foes with stood,
heavens joys to them he will impart.
A Prayer in the time of plague, or other extraordinary sickness.
O Lord our GOD, in whose name stands our help, and who (amongst other
evils) have promised us to deliver thy people from the (...) of the Hunter,
and the noisome Pestilence, we beseech thee take this thy Plague away from us:
And as the stench of our sins has ascended up into thy nosthrills, to
provoke thy wrath against us: so let our humble supplications come before thee,
to procure our happy and speedy release from it.

Lord call back thine Angel, and cause him to sheath the sword again. We are
thy children, the work of thy hand, we are sorry for our sins, which are
the cause of all this: and we purpose amendment: we are but men, dust and
ashes, not able to bear long; therefore Lord have mercy upon us, and that
soon, send us comfort, and suffer us not to perish after so miserable a sort.
We thank thee, O Lord, that thou have not left us altogether comfortless,
without hope, but have somewhat withdrawn thine hand, and spared many hundred
of us, in comparison of those whom thou slewest before: and now we rejoice at
this abatement, yet stand in awe, we presume upon this thy favor, but with
fear and trembling: we trust it shall be every day better, yet we are
careful to win it by pleasing thee. Wherefore, O Lord, we beseech thee
bless us, and all those that depend upon us; set thy saving mark upon our
houses, as thou did for the Israelites, and give or er to the destroyer that
he hurt us not. Put thy strength to our medicines: guard our regard which we
have of our selves: let thy good blessings make the preservatives of the
Physicians, and our shifting places for more security, profitable unto us, and
let us not trust too much to outward means, but chiesely in thy mercy, and
blessing upon them. Keep us downe-lying and vp-rising, and protect us walking
in our vocations: have pity upon our distressed brethren, comfort the
desolate widows, provide for all fatherless children. Gather us together
again, that by these means are dispersed, and continue thy merciful work in
deminishing our dead numbers, till we may justly say in confidence and thanks
with the Prophet, we shall not die but live, and declare the works of the Lord.

The ancient Prayer, called, O bountiful Jesus.
O Bountiful Jesus, O sweet Jesus* O Jesus the Son of the Virgin Mary, which
art full of mercy and truth: O sweet Jesus have pity upon me, according to
thy great mercy. O benign Jesus, by the same precious blood which thou wast
contented to shed upon the Altar of the Cross for us miserable sinners: I
beseech thee vouchsafe to cast all mine iniquities out of thy sight, and
despise not me that thus humbly beg of thee, crying and calling* upon thy
holy name JESUS: This name JESUS is a sweet name, this name JESUS is a name of
salvation, for what is JESUS but a Savior.

O good JESUS, which have created me, and redeemed me with thine own blood,
suffer not me whom thou have made of naught to be damned; O good JESUS, let
not my wickedness have power to destroy me whom thine Almighty goodness has
made. O good JESUS, reknowledge that which is thine in me, and that which is
not of thee, take that away from me, O good JESUS, even now while the time of
mercy is, have mercy upon me, and let me not be con^ounded at the day of thy
fearful judgment.

O good JESUS, although I vile sinner, by thy strait justice, have deserved to
be punished everlastingly, for my most grievous sins, yet having sure
confidence in the truth of thy righteousness, I appeal to thine unspeakable
mercy: I am sure thou will have mercy upon me like a loving Father, and a
merciful Lord.

O good JESUS, what profit is there in my blood, if I descend into the pit of
eternal corruption? for surely they that be dead, shall not magnify thee, or
any that go down into the place of silence. O most merciful JESUS, have
mercy upon me, O most sweet JESUS deliver m^ O most holy JESUS be merciful to
me a sinner. O JESUS accept me wretched sinner, among the number of them whom
thou have elected to salvation. O JESUS the health of all that hope in thee,
the life of all that believe in thee, have mercy upon me. O sweet JESUS, the
remission of all my sins. O JESUS, the Son of the virgin Mary, power thy
grace into my heart, endue me with wisdom, charity, chastity, and humility,
and in all mine adversity, grant me holy, inviolable, and steadfast patience,
that I may perfectly love thee, and have my only delight and a^^iance in thee,
world without end,

Amen.
The Sicke-mans Prayer.
O Loving Lord, and most holy Father, I poor wretch thy servant, feeling in
this sickness which thou have laid upon me, the punishment of that corruption
and transgression that is in me, and all flesh, do most willingly submit my
self to thine holy ordinance, to bear this cross, and taste of this bitter
cup which I have deserved, and much more, so that I may follow thee whither
thou art gone. Therefore, O Lord, since thou have not yet called me to the
bar of death, but sent thy Heralds to summon me to a trial: I beseech thee
look on me with thine eye of merciful pity, and help me in this day of
visitation: power out thine oil of grace into my wounded conscience, purge my
defiled soul, forgive me all my sins, and give me competent comfort and
consolation in this distress: let me not dye ere I begin to live; give me
time to repent, and occasion to amend: but if thou will needs put any more of
thy wine of correction into my festered sores; lay no more (O Lord) lay no more
upon me, then I shall be able to bear: Make good unto me that goodness,
which thou have granted me under the great seal of thy promise: Supply my
want, pardon my sins, and aid me against all temptations, and I am recovered
of all mine infirmities: I offer here unto thee (O Lord) a penitent heart for
the time past, and promise through thy grace amendment, if it shall please thee
to draw out the thread of my life any longer: yet I neither desire the
continuance of this mortality, nor a more speedy deliverance, otherwise then as
thou will: Lord look not upon my merits, for they are either none or not good;
nor upon my life, for it has been naught; but look upon Christ thy dear
Son, who from the Altar of the cross, cried unto thee on my behalf, and
accept his satisfaction for my sins.

Arm me with patience to take up my cross and follow thee, even to bear my
visitation willingly; and give me strength by faith, to resist the Adversary
in the brunt of temptations.

With my sorrow and pain increase thy grace, that when I am in greatest agony,
I may find comfort, believing and saying with the holy Prophet, My flesh
fails, and my heart also, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion
for ever. O Lord, if thy decree be gone forth, as it was to H^z^kiah, that I
shall dye and not live, give me grace to put in order my things of this world,
that I may depart in more peace; and when the pangues of death have shut up the
eyes of my body, and taken away the use of my tongue, I beseech thee let the
eyes of my soul still behold and look upon thee, so that when I shall leave
my earth to earth, and my body to the grave, thine Angels may carry up my soul
unto thee, and be par^aker of a joyful resurrection, through Ies^^ Christ our
Lord.

Amen. Amen.
A Prayer for the sick.
O God most high, mighty, and i^uisible; I thy unworthy servant, not worthy for
my self to be heard in any request unto thee, for I am a sinner. Yet Lord
being confident of the pardon of my sins in Christ, in whose power is only
to forgive sins, I am bold to come unto thee, to beg the pardon of my sins,
and as of my sins, so of the sins of this thy weak and sick servant, that
lies pained and diseased, not only in the outward members, but in the inward
parts of the body: And though thou have deprived him of experience in natural
Physic, whereby his skill to do himself good: yet good Lord be thou his
Physician, and let thy help and assistance never fail in this his weakness
to do him good, and strengthen him. And if it be thy will, O Lord, restore him
again unto that health, which her^tofore to the comfort of himself, and many
others, he has enjoyed: O Lord, thou art able not only with means* (as unto
Hezekia^) but without means as unto Malchus ear, and blind Bartimaeus, but
even against means, as unto the widows son going unto his Grave, and the
Sunamites son, at the Prayer of Elisha. O Lord, thou did beyond all hope,
and expectation, raise Lazarus stinking in the grave, and Peter's wives mother
of a burning beauer, and the woman of her bloody issue, and the man that was
irrecouerable of the dead Palsy, only by thy virtue and power. O Lord, now
when all means seem to fail, that we know not whither to go but unto thee,
I beseech thee if it be thy will, let thy secret and hidden power, in which
there is more ver^ue, then in all mineralls and plants, be extended forth to
his comfort and relief, that he again may come into thy house, and magnify
thy mercy for his renewed strength.

O Lord, as he has abounded with charity, and compassion unto others, in
their extreamities of sickness: so likewise (as thou have promised) let this
thy merciful servant, in his languishing pains, obtain mercy from thee, that
art most merciful, and as he has heard the lamenting cries of others: so
Lord do thou hear his mournful and lamenting sighs unto thee, for thou art
very pitiful, and of tender mercy. O Lord, he humbles himself in thy sight,
wherefore I beseech thee to raise him up again, if any man be sick, thou have
willed us that be well, to pray one for another, assuring us that the Prayer of
the righteous, if it be seruent, avails much; In confidence and full
assurance, that thou will make good thy word: O Lord, I earnestly beseech thee,
to restore my sick and weak friend (N) unto his perfect health (if it may be
thy good pleasure) and this I ask as one not without hope, for I believe, that
as Jesus died and rose again, even so by his power shall this my sick friend
do at the last day. Yet, O Lord, for the perfecting of that which is wanting
in his faith, repentance, and good works; I earnestly beseech thee to add some
more unto the number of his days, have mercy upon him, and restore him again
to strength, and his former health.

But most merciful Father, if thou please through this his sickness, to
finish his days: grant that he may in quiet mind, and steadfast faith,
commend to thee, the care of all his worldly charge, because thou have promised
to be a Father unto the widdowe, and the fatherless. And it is thy will, that
we should cast our care on thee, not only in life, but in death especially. O
Lord, when death that cruel tyrant, sin, the grave, the devil, and all the
fries of darkness, shall assault his body, and affright his soul with
distrust in thee, and of his part in the glorious resurrection; then strengthen
him, by the power of thy Son my Savior, that he may no less triumph over
all the terrors and fears of the grave, of hell, and death, as all the Saints
in like case have done, and then I my self may do, in the same hour of my
departure; which I beseech thee to grant, through him that has loved us, even
Jesus Christ my most absolute and perfect Savior.

Amen. Amen.
LACHRIM. 7.
Wherein the distressed detesteth the world and wouldly things, and desires
heaven and heavenly things.

MY soul does long, and shall depend
on God for ever, everliving:
God shall begin and make an end,
that has given all, yet ever giving.
I sigh and groan for to appear,
before his gracious mercy seat:
As thirsts the Heart for water clear,
so long I for thy m^rcy great:
I am quite tired with my groans,
I faint under mine heavy load:
Of miseries, breaking all my bones,
laid on me justly, by my God.
O God the rock of my whole strength,
Lord of mercy, behold mine anguish:
O grant me help and ease at length,
I faint, I fall, I figh, I languish.
Why do I daily weep, and mourn,
and have no comfort, help, nor ease:
Why do not hear, but from me turn,
why do my woes, and foes increase?
Since I do seek thee unfeignedly,
defend me, Oh defend me in
This dangerous time of misery,
laid justly on me for my sin.
Preserve me from men merciless,
hard hearted, bloody minded, cruel:
Bless me with thine hid blessedness,
give me thy favor my souls i^well:
The man of earth lays load on load,
as on an Anuile stroke on stroke,
Within, without, at home, abroad,
mine head to the heel bows with the yoke.
I am reproach to neighbors all,
I am ashamed men should see me,
They scorn and laugh to see my fall,
but this mine hope does comfort me:
That thou from them wilt set me free.
And thee triumphant shall behold.
In shining Throne of Majesty,
where is neither hunger, thirst, nor cold.
No want, nor sin, nor ignomie,
nor sickness, death, nor deadly pain:
But fullness, mirth, joy, victory,
with thee in glory I shall reign:
And if it be thy will, O Lord,
now after all this sturdy storm:
To my most troubled soul afford
thy peace, and pity me poor worm.
Free me from death that is mors Gehennae,
give peace, joy, rest, not transitory:
I take it as an earnest penny,
of perfect bliss and endless glory.
And I Will here praise thee: men among
that they may see, mark and consider:
It Is thou can only right our wrong,
and from all troubles us deliver:
Thou can and wilt us save and keep,
though much we suffer in this life,
Thou art our Shepherd, we thy Sheep,
save me from hate, envy, and strife:
So shall I also give thee praise,
my mouth continually thee laud:
My soul and inward part always,
thy wondrous works shall still applaude.
I will be glad and joy in thee,
rejoice yea, and again rejoice.
Abject though I, yet comfort me,
I Will praise thee with mind, heart, and voice:
Awake therefore, in time awake,
preserve me that I perish not:
I am if thou do me forsake,
but as a dead man clean forgot.
And censured a castaway,
among such as see me deprived:
Of present help, for these men say,
my soul can never be revived:
One sorrow does increase another,
all hope on earth turns to distrust,
Of aid from neighbor, friend, or brother,
hide not thy face my God most just.
Forget not mine extreamities,
Lord free me from in fernall hells
Of torments, and of miseries,
which comes from thee, and from none else,
My soul is beaten to pits brimme,
my heart does faint, my hands grow week:
My knees do fail, mine eyes grow dim,
my tongue is dumb, and cannot speak.
And each part of my body vexed,
I daily moan my miseries.
Look on me Lord, I am perplexed:
O ease my grief, and hear my cries:
Though thou by Justice made the wound,
and by correction grieved mine heart:
If thou will cure, salve soon is found,
with spiritual comfort ease my smart.
Do not withhold such things are good,
which for thy children are ordained:
Turn thou thy face with Christ's blood,
cleanse all the spots my sins has stained.
Rise up, O Lord, rise up I say,
with thee does Love and Bounty reign:
I am thrown down, I thee obey,
therefore rise up, raise me again.
Although my sins like swords do cut,
me from thy favor and thy grace:
Let righteousness of Christ be put,
to hide my sins before thy face.
Unite me unto thee again,
in such sort Lord, make me so fast:
That I with thee may still remain,
and joy in joys, that aye shall last.
The young man's Prayer for a virtuous wife.
O God the everliving, and only wise, the Author, and giver of every good and
perfect gift, look down upon me, a^ thou did upon Abimelech Abraham's
servant, when he prayed unto thee, to guide and prosper him, in the great
trust, that was committed unto him, in the choice of his Masters sons wife:
as thou wast pleased to hear him, for his Masters son (O Lord I beseech
thee) to hear me for my self. Thou have taught in thy Word, that he that
cannot abstain, let him marry, and that he that marries sins not, that it
is better to marry then to burn (in unchaste and unbridled lust) and for
avoiding of fornication, let every man have his own wife, yea and that it is
not good for man to be alone; and woe to him that is alone. In the beginning
thou made both male and female, and didstordaine, that for this cause man and
woman should leave father and mother, and become one flesh: and that he that
has not the gift to abstain, should have a care, that he be not unequally
yoked: but that he marry in the Lord, and thus to live is a bed undefiled, and
most honorable unto all. Wherefore, O Lord, I beseech thee, to guide me unto a
wife, and a virtuous woman, for thou have said, that a virtuous woman is a
crown unto her husband; And though she be comely and beautiful, and
therefore of many much desired: yet (O Lord) guide mine eyes, that I may not
thus only look upon a woman; for thou have said, if she have not discretion,
she is but like a jewel in a swines snout, not to be regarded. But a wise
woman builds her husbands house, not only with children, but with her
provident care and discretion, in the right gaining, and a right using of the
things of this world. Unto such a family (O Lord) direct my footsteps, and
keep me from the strange woman, a contentious and angry woman, the woman of
brawling lips, with whom there is no comfort, nor content in this life to
dwell, neither for civil nor religious respects. Heavenly Father, if it be thy
will (for thou know what is better for me then I do my self) grant that
the woman that I shall choose, and by thy providence think fit to take to wife,
may be chaste not only of body, but of spirit, and adorned with the hidden man
of the heart, a meek and quiet spirit, and one who trusts in God, and
delights in thee, well reported of for good works, and loves children, one
who in her wisdom affects modesty in all things; as in her apparel, and
behavior, and is in her countenance sober and shamefast, and one who
delights in her home, and loves the affairs of her house; and with
watchful eyes will be careful for her children and servants. This (O Lord)
though no way worthy, I beseech thee to grant unto me: houses, lands, or other
portions of thy blessings, thou have appointed our parents to bestow on us,
but (this blessing) a wise, chaste, sober, and religious woman, thou have kept,
as a most special gift, from thy self unto us, and not in our parents or
friends, but thou bestowest it on him whom thou love, as a choice and most
special favor. O Lord, this is she that Solomon among many women, could
hardly find; yet grant that I may find her, and being united in holy band,
may love her both in sickness and in health. O Lord grant that I may walk
with her, as a man of knowledge, ready in all things to teach and instruct her
in thy commandments, as being heirs together of the grace of life, and make
me as truly to love her, as thou do thy Church: this great gift and chief
blessing of this life, I beseech thee (if it be thy will) for the honor of
thy Son to bestow upon me.

Amen. Amen.
The Uirgine or the Widows Prayer for a godly Husband.
ALmighty GOD the eternal Creator of heaven and earth, the giver and disposer
of all things, that are done here on earth: Look down on me thy sinful
Handmayd, not worthy of any favor spiritual, or blessing temporal: Yet (O
Lord) I beseech thee, to give unto me thy servant, such wisdom, that in all
things I may be advised by them whom thou have appointed to have care of my
welfare, and in nothing to be so headstrong and adverse, as to follow my own
foolish and sinful appetite: and above all, make me most dutiful, in
referring my self unto the loving and careful choice, that my parents or
guardians shall make, in giving me to an husband.

Heavenly Father, grant that they may not like of any without me, nor that I
may choose any without them. Direct them that they may choose one in the Lord,
and that I may like him that is so chosen of them: Let not my mind be so
wanton, as only to like or dislike for want of beauty or comeliness of
person: but if the fear of the Lord, the beginning of wisdom, appear unto
me, grant that I may persuade my self, that he is the man, that thou have
appointed me. O Lord, I have neither wit nor skill how to discern, or make an
assured godly choice. And thou know how cunning and subtle men are, to
entice and abuse my simple heart, and how easily we are overcome, with their
vain complements, and flattering words, in which they promise much comfort and
contentment: but when their unchaste desires are satisfied, how do they cast
off, and scornfully and sinfully reject those whom they have abused and allured
to folly, so they leave them to perish, not only in worldly misery through
outward necessities, but for want of teaching and instruction in the Lord,
Satan falls upon them, and through their weakness makes them a prey unto
wickedness. But (O Lord) though their foul hearts are so deceiptfull, that
both I and my friends may be deceived; yet thou, O Lord, can not be deceived,
for thou art the searcher of the hearts, and thou know what is in man;
therefore in this weighty work, in which consists my worldly weal or we, I
do only (O Lord) cast my self on thee: beseeching thee as thou gave Euah
unto Adam, a man then of innocence and righteousness: so thou will give me an
honest hearted man, and one that truly loves and fears thee: O Lord, if thou
have appointed, as is my desire, that I shall marry, then I beseech thee send
unto me a man of good behavior, of good report, no extortioner, no covetous
person, no chollericke, no quarelsome person, no drunkard, not covetous of
filthy and dishonest gain, no prodigal or vain person, no proud man, no
adulterer, fornicatour, whoremaster, no swearer or blaspheamer, no kind of
inordinate liver, no Papist nor Infidel, no Heretic, Schismaticke, no
traitor unto his Prince or Country, no lover of the pleasures of this world,
either above or more than thee; no hypocrite, unnatural, falsehearted person
unto me, his parents, or friend: heavenly Father, for my Saviors sake, hear
me in these my requests, and grant that if I shall marry, and bear children,
that my husband may be wise, grave, and sober, and one that knows how to
govern, and rule his household, children, and servants, in faith and good
conscience.

O Lord, let him be one that is steadfast in the faith of Christ, following
righteousness, love, faith, patience, and meekness, and one delighted in
good works and hospitality, courteous unto all men: O Lord, make him a lover
of good men, and make him just, holy, and in all things temperate, ever walking
in grace, and abounding in the fruits of the Spirit: O good God send me such a
yokefellow, that knows how to love me, not only by the guide of carnal
affection, as for beauty, comeliness of person, money and goods which thou
have given me, or for that I have good friends and kindred, whereby he hops
of this worlds preferment and ability; for if all these fail, for the which he
only loves, then will his pretended love be gone, and I shall be exposed to
the necessity of this world, and for want of means be tempted to dishonest
courses: but most sweet Father, as thou have promised to be a Father unto the
fatherless, unto the Widows and Orphans: So be a Father unto me, thy silly
Handmayd, whose trust is always in thee. And send me such an one, as knows
how to love me in thee, and for conscience sake: yea, that will strive to love
me as Christ has, does, and ever will do his Church, to love me as his own
body, This fie^h, yea, as himself. And keep me that I may do nothing to
hinder this his love, or to make him bitter unto me; but that I may obey him,
^care him, and love him in all things, that are comely in the Lord, and
according as thou have commanded me in thy holy word, and that for Christ
Jesus sake, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be given by me all praise
and glory, both now and for evermore.

Amen. Amen.
The Prayer of a Woman with child, that defireth safe deliverance.
O Almighty God, that after the flood, did command Noah, and his posterity,
living in chaste matrimony, to replenish and fill the earth; I thy poor and
most weak servant, have as thou did ordain, by the will of my parents,
embraced the holy and honorable estate of married life, and now by thy
blessing, am made a mother of the living, through that hopeful ^ruit, which
after much sorrow and pain in breeding, thou have caused to spring in my
womb, by which I am assured it is a living soul, for which work of thine, I
give thee most hearty thanks, still beseeching thee, that as thou have begun
this good work in me, that thou will go on and finish it, unto a perfect
birth, in all right shape and comeliness, not only in the outward feature of
the body, but in the inward parts of the mind, that it may grow on unto such
a perfect man, as may occasion, honor and praise unto thy great name, so long
as it shall please thee, to give it life and being. And seeing (O Lord) thou
have for our first sin in Paradise, so woefully afflicted us with many
sorrows in conception, and with far greater in bringing forth of our
posterity in this life: I beseech thee for Christ his sake to pardon my sins,
and to assuage those violent and raging pains, that they neither deface,
deforme, destroy me, nor yet that which is in my womb. O Lord, let the power
of the most high, even thy holy Spirit enter into me, to strengthen and to
uphold me, that I faint not in my pains, nor in my faith, but that if I dye in
this my childbearing, yet thy goodness supporting me in faith, charity, and
sobriety, I may as thou have promised be assured of my salvation. O Lord, if
thou please to spare the tree, and take the fruit, which I believe by faith in
Christ that thou have made holy: yet I will give thee thanks, because by
reason of my sins, thou might most justly curse me, and my fruit (as thou
did the fig tree) to perpetual death.

But most high and heavenly Father, I thank thee that thou have made thy
promise so stable, that not only we of ripe years, that do believe, but even
our children, as they are our seed, are included in the covenant of grace;
that if they dye, yet being borne of holy parents, who are ingraffed through
faith into the body of Christ, they are saved, not only as being a part of us
in Christ, but as true and real members of Christ, unto who^ through faith,
into which they are baptized with us, and made one with Christ, that with his
coming, they may be raised at the last day. Yet (O Lord) notwithstanding this
assurance, I entreat thee to grant me joy and comfort of them, that trayning
them up, in their youth in thy fear, they may be as a staff in old age, in
this life to comfort me, an^ their Father, as the children of Noah and Jacob
did; yea (Lord) if it be thy will, I desire to live, to be a fruitful vine,
on thy house side (thy Church, to breed, to bear, and bring forth children,
to multiply and accomplish thy glorious Kingdom, visible and invisible, in
earth and in heaven for evermore.

O Lord, having taken away from me, the reproach of a barren womb, so much
lamented by holy women: grant that after my dissolution, my children may
continue like olive plants, and flourish a seed mighty on earth, not as the
Giants in the old world, strong in sin, but valiant and bold in the
profession, and confession, and practice of righteousness, and good
conversation, yea, let them be a generation of upright men and women, and such
as may remain an heritage of the Lord, as (Isaac to Rebecka) a blessed fruit
of my womb. O Lord, thou art my God, hear the voice of thine handmayd, in
thee is my trust, hear my supplications, and let not my soul fail of these
her desires, and that for Jesus Christ's sake, which was borne of the virgin
Mary for my salvation.

Amen. Amen.
LACHRIM. 8.
The penitent acknowledges man's vildnesse, and Gods mercies; by faith and
example of Gods providence, relieth on his goodness.

O Lord, thy name's most excellent,
in all the world thy glory is spread;
Through heavens and the firmament,
and by all creatures uttered.
In universal harmony,
extolled in heaven and in earth:
Expressed in song and melody,
with all alacrity and mirth.
What thou bestowest, what man can number
upon us slaves, and sons of men:
Who by our sins are put asunder
from thy dear love, by acts unclean,
Forgetful, and so capeable
of sin as powder is of fire.
In all our works and words unstable,
and know not what we should desire.
Above all creatures we forget,
thy grace are prove to disobay:
And if thy mercy did not let,
all Adams brood thou should destroy.
And I for my part me confess,
guilty of all sins, and all evils.
And that I have deserved no less,
then to be damned amongst the devils.
The world for disobedience
did punish, and thou moughtest subvert.
But chiefly me for negligence,
may plague with all plagues, it is desert.
I am not worthy to breathe in air,
nor have the use of any creature:
Much less to thee to make my prayer,
cause against my God I am a traitor.
Thou worthily me do afflict,
at me thou take just offense:
All punishments thou do inflict,
because thy wrath I did incense.
My trespasses do more offend,
then I can please with my best zeal:
The worthiness I best intend,
I not perform, my soul Lord heal.
I shame at mine unworthiness,
yet feign would be at one with thee:
Thou art a joy in heaviness,
a succor in necessity,
To them that do their lives reform,
and rightly frame their penitence:
Sincerely follow and perform,
thy will without all negligence.
All this to do I do desire,
and what thou say I do believe:
Thy pardon grant me I require,
release and pardon Lord me give.
O be with them that do thee seek,
and yield them help that hold by thee:
Instructing humble men and meek,
that wisdom seek by thy mercy.
Since I so long to thee have cried,
so long thee sought, yet hope I will:
Though my sad soul in silence bide,
in constant Patience I wait still.
Thou rightly hear'st my inward groans,
my sorrows, fighes, wants and desire:
And do respect the outward moanes,
of men distressed that fear the fire.
Though in their lips they mute do seem,
and do speak nothing with their tongues.
What they conspire, thou do it deem,
and present art to right my wrongs.
But lo the time is not expired,
of mine ordained punishment:
Nor of that freedom I desired,
I Will wait by hope in languishment.
My help, my comfort and my life,
salvation mine depends on thee:
Within my conscience stint the stri^e,
and give me grace and liberty.
My life, my comfort, help, and all
salvation, on Christ depends:
It Is he does raise me when I fall,
he all begins, and he all ends.
I will not murmr, neither grudge,
nor sear, nor faint; but always wait:
He is my Savior, and my Judge,
his grace decreed, who can retrait.
Is there not an appointed time,
for all things that by God be wrought?
Job was brought low, at last did clime,
to wealth and honor he was brought.
And Joseph was afflicted long,
by brethren, and by false accuse:
He was shut up in prison strong,
did all his cause and wrongs peruse.
At length brought him to honor great:
and David was at first cast down,
And then inthroan'd in Princely seat,
and long enjoyed the royal Crown.
Poor widdowe of Sarepta she,
and hers were ready for to pine:
Her barrel and her Cruse by thee
were blessed, and that Prophet thine,
Her meal and oil did never fail,
thou send'st that Saint even to that end,
That they in dearth should never quail,
so did from famine her defend.
Wherefore a little while I Will wait,
I know the appointed time will come:
I shall be freed from sins de^eite,
wilt mercies send in miseries room.
Thou art my portion and my strength,
my defense, and salvation:
Thou see my troubles, and at length
wilt give me consolation.
Thou sena'st them not as ignorant,
of them, thou know thou did me make:
Therefore what is needful God me grant,
good Lord d^^ never me forsake.
I am brought to the very pit,
of all confusion men suppose:
Thou have decreed the time most sit,
of my delivery from my foes.
To me unknown that being seen,
I may attribute to thee then,
The praise who praised ere have been,
without the aid of mortal men.
Which I have sought so long in vain,
yea while I called thee upon:
Let me acknowledge help again,
to come from thee or else from none.
And all that the world can afford,
be but the effects of thy dear Love:
Thy power, thy providence, thy word,
do send me comfort from above.
O blessed man whom thou do choose,
and call by crosses unto thee,
Whom thou by death seem to refuse,
by secret sweetness lives by thee.
With inward consolation,
fed with the Manna of thy love:
Who dwells in thy protection,
with lively hope, can never move.
He faints not at mightiest frown,
so I (O Lord) assured rest:
Thou art my portion and my crown,
to dignifie those love thee best.
Thou tendrest me as a dear son,
though thou me visit with thy rod:
Yet suff^rest not me for to run
with sinners, and to fall from God.
Although I seem of hope depri^'d,
and that my wented comforts past:
Yet I (O Lord) shall be revived
by thee, and by thy grace at last,
For all my long and instant cries
I will not shrink; though knowing this
Thy wondrous power and great mercies,
most infinite thy mercy is.
If thou made the rock a water spring,
thy thirsty people to refresh:
From mine hard hearted foes can wring
some comfort, for my woes re^resse.
If thou rain'dst Manna from above,
and Raven sent thy Saint to feed:
Thousands of men did feed with love,
when there was little show of bread.
If to thy people thou sendest Quails,
in desert where all food was scant:
And since thy goodness never fails,
should I suppose that I should want.
Confirm my faith for evermore,
that I most constantly believe,
Thou can and wilt increase my store,
and all good things thou will me give.
All power belongs unto thee,
who can imagine or will say:
Thou can not in my need help me,
or that thy love is taken away.
Since thou have done such mighty things,
so freely for men in distress:
Should not I fly with swiftest wings,
to thee in time of heaviness.
But lo, O Lord, all things are thine.
the heavens are thine, the earth also:
The cattle, fowls, the shrubs, the vines,
all things in heaven and earth below.
All things above, all things beneath
is thine, who truly then can say?
Thou can not give, or them bequeath,
to whom thou will, who can say nay?
Thou make the corn to spring and grow,
and waterst the earth with thy sweet showers:
Thou causest beasts with thanks to low,
with dewes thou water'st fr^grant flowers.
Since then thou art the Lord of all,
since thou command'st, and do forbid.
The rich and poor make, proud men fall,
that down can throw and raise at need.
Since that thou try'st and wilt reward,
since thou do what shall please thy will:
And in what manner wilt regard,
and whom thou will can save or spill.
No living man commands thee,
not all the world can thee control:
O Lord I still will pray to thee,
for health of body and of soul.
Let it be thus, O Father dear,
for Christ his sake, thy dearest Son,
That died, and rose my soul to clear:
in all things (Lord) thy will be done.
All glory to the Trinity,
to Father, Son, and holy Ghost:
Combined in holy unity,
of power, and might, and glory most.
A Prayer for love and charity.
O Almighty God, the Author and giver of all things, of grace especially, unto
thee, a most vile and wretched sinner, and chief of sinners, do I prostrate
my self, and confess, that my heart is so hardened in evil custom of sin,
that when it comes upon me, by the motion of thy spirit to desire to do
good, I find no means in my self, to do any thing that is good, neither for
the virtue it self, nor as it is thy commandment; so that thou might most
worthily cast me off, as thou did that unmerciful servant, into bonds of
death, and imprisonment of hell for evermore. But, O Lord, it is thy property
always to have mercy. Wherefore I beseech thee to bestow this gift of love on
me, that through thy acceptance, it may cover in me the multitude of my
sins, for unto whom thou forgiuest much, much is returned to thee again:
wherefore (O Lord) let this gift of love, be mighty and strong in me, that I
may love thee again, as thou have loved me, and express my love, by being
ready to forgive all wrongs and offenses of my brother and neighbor, and not
unto seven times, but unto seauenty times seven. O let me love thee and my
neighbor out of a sincere faith, and love unfeigned, and at all times as thou
have forgiven me, my debts, offenses, and trespasses: So (O Lord) make me
joyful and willing to forgive, as I desire of thee to be forgiven. And seeing
it is the end of thy Commandments, and the fulfilling of the law (O heavenly
Father) let this gift of love, through the operation of thy spirit, be never
wanting, or absent in this life, nor in the life to come. O Lord grant that
this mark of Adoption, and stamp of Regeneration, may increase in me, not
only to my friends in affinity, and consanguinity, and acquaintance, but unto
all men in general, as my own flesh, and thy image, by which bonds thou have
commanded me to do good, unto all of all sorts, that shall stand in need of
my help, saying, Be you merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful, who
does good unto all, in outward things of this world, causing his rain to
rain, and his Sun to shine upon the unjust as upon the just. And in the
endeavor of doing this general good, (O Lord) let me not forget, to do most
good unto the Saints, (...) and dye in love to all men in thee, and for thee:
and that through the love of thee, and my only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
and the holy Ghost for evermore.

Amen. Amen.
LACHRIM. 9.
The poor and distressed soul being laden with the burden of his sins,
^eruently prays unto God for his remission thereof.

O Lord come pity my distress,
see how I sigh and groan:
With tears and floods of heaviness,
my heart is overthrown.
No hope I find, no help I feel,
no cure nor salve I see.
None can my sins corruptions heal,
sweet Jesus comfort me.
My wounding sorrows never cease,
my griefs grow more and more:
What I should kill, does still increase,
Lord save my soul therefore.
I living dye, yet dying live:
in life, yet daily dye.
I sigh and groan, yet cannot grieve,
sin makes this mystery.
Lord let me live, yet hourly dye,
in love, yet daily hate:
Let me embrace, yet still defy,
let peace breed all debate.
O let me live, yet never live,
alive, yet ever dead.
O let me grieve, yet never grieve,
fed with thy living bread.
Let passions pass, let groans be gone:
let m^anes be turned to mirth:
I live and dye to Christ alone.
Let sorrows sink to earth.
An exhortation to praise God, and to acknowledge our Thanksgiving to him
without ceasing.
WE praise thee God, we acknowledge thee,
our only Lord and Christ to be:
The earth and world do worship thee
eternal Father, heavenly King,
To whom aloud bright Angels sing:
the Thrones and powers thee magnify.
The Cherubins and Seraphin,
to cry to thee do never linne:
Holy, holy, most holy Lord
of Sabbath, God of majesty.
Heavens full of thy glory:
all Nations laud thy name and word.
The glorious 'postles company:
the goodly Prophets unity:
The holy Martyrs noble Army:
the holy Church, the world throughout,
Does spread the Gospel all about,
the Father of true piety.
Thy sacred, true, and only Son,
the holy Ghost us comfort won.
Thou art of glory King, O Christ:
thou art the everlasting Son
Of God, whose blessed will was done,
by thee all people to deliver.
Thou did not the (...) the virgins womb
abhor, nor loath that sacred To^be
Till thou wast borne: from God sent hither.
when thou the serpents head had broken:
The Heavens Kingdoms gate set open,
for true believers to come thither.
Thou si^s^ on Gods right holy hand,
thy Fathers will do understand:
Whence thou shall come our Judge to be:
we therefore thy poor servants pray,
Thy succor, help, and aid that day,
whose precious blood redeemed us free.
Let them with Saints be numbered,
in endless glory comforted.
Thy people Lord keep, save, and stay,
bless, save thine own inheritage.
Lift up their hearts from age to age,
we magnify thee day by day.
We worship thee world without end.
This day from sin Lord us defend.
Have mercy, mercy on us Lord.
Lord let thy mercy on us light:
Our trust is on thee day and night.
We trust in thee with one accord:
O Lord I put my trust in thee:
Let never me confounded be.
All glory to the Trinity,
to God the Father and the Son,
And holy Ghost all praise be done,
for ever and ever eternally.
FINIS.

