THE CONVICTION OF NOVELTIE, AND DEfense of antiquity.

OR DEMONSTRATIVE ARGVMENTS of the falsitie of the new Religion of England:
And truth of the Catholic Roman faith.

DELIVERED IN TWELVE PRINCIPAL Sylogismes, and directed to the more
scholasticall wits of the Realm of great Britanie, especially to the ingenious
students of the two most renowned universities of Oxford and Cambrige.

AVTHOR R. B. Roman Catholic, and one of the English, Clergy, and Mission.

-- GRATIAS AGO (...) MEO PERIESVM CHRIstum pro omnibus (...) vestra
annuntiatur in vniuersa (...). Romans 1.6. QVISQVIS ES ASSERTOR NOVORVM Dogmatum
quaeso te vt parcas Romany auribus, parcas fidei quae ab Apostolico ore
laudata est. S. Hier. op ad ^amachium and Oceanum.

CATVAPOLI, Apud viduam MARCI WYONIS. Anno M.DC.XXXII.

THE PREFACE AND DEDICATION of the work.
ONe and none of the smalest differences betwixt truth and falsitie is, that
truth is able to defend it self only by truth, neither does it ever appear
so decent either in public or private as in it own natural habit: whereas on
the contrary falsitie as being of an imperfect and base quality can not
possible subsiste and maintain it self except it be apparelled with the
furtiue robes of truth. And therefore our divine Savior knowing and preuiding
how easily his servants might be deceived by taking the one for the other,
that is false doctrine for true, as a most prudent, circumspect, and loving
master he gives us a special warning to beware of those who come unto us in
the garments of sheep, insinuating herby that it is the common practice of
teachers and preachers of false doctrine to use false colors, Attendite a
falsis Prophetis qui (...) ad ^^s in ve s^ementis ^uium, intriniecus autem sant
lup^ rapaces Matthew. 7.15.
and to carry the badge of truth though they have no truth in them, or at the
least none but such as is mingled with much falsitie and deceit: and for the
same cause he adds of such false Prophets, that inwardly they are ravenous
wolves, that is what soever out ward show they make, and how soever they
color the matter, they are not true Pastors, Perdere volebant mactare and
oc^idere. Videamus illos si for^e ipsi intrant per ostium in ouile qui ipsius
Christi nomine gloriantur. Innumerabiles enim sunt qui se videntes non solum,
iactant, sed a Christo illuminator videri volu^t. Sunt aute haretici. tract.
45. in Ioa^.
they come not truly to feed the flock of Christ's, but as S. Augustine says of
the gentilicall Philosophers and heretics they come to kill, and destroy.

Just in this manner does it pass with the teachers and establishers of the
new Religion in England. They vest themselves with sheeps skins in that they
make profession of reformers of the Church, but under the specious and pleasant
color of reformation, they deforme all true Religion, and faith, and virtue.
King Henry the 8. although he was not of this Religion which is at this present
professed and practiced in England, yet was he the first that opened the way
unto it, and this under the color of reformation: an yet what monster was ever
more deformed then he? he was vniformiter deformiter deformis, deformed I
mean both with in and without, both in body and soul. What a ravenous wolf
was he? How many religious conuents, and monsteries did he deforme deface
and destroy. What a number of religious persons did he turn to the wide world
to lead an irreligious life, exposing them to the breach of their solemn vows
to God.

Finally what a general liberty did he introduce, both in faith and manners,
in all sorts of people, he him self being the master of misrule and
ringleader to all licentiousnes.

And according to this beginning, his son and successor did continue, who
although his tender years and weakness of body did not permit him to imitate the
vices of his Father, yet had he tutors and protectors that were not far
behind their old master, neither in corruption of faith nor manners. Who
seeking for new Evangelists in foreign countries, found Bucer, Martyr, and
others whoes fingers tickled to be working in the new harvest, who coming in
to the country and finding the people generally inclined to liberty easily
made their entrance into change of Religion, and so in a short time under the
plausible title of reforming abuses in the Church, they introduced a form of
Religion never heard of in England as neither in the rest of the Christian
world in all particulars: and thus promissing Christian liberty they intruded
an unchristian corruption both in doctrine and life, making by that means of
an ill beginning in the Father a worse continuation in the son. Which ill
beginning and continuatio^ (excepting that religious interruption of Queen
Mary's time) had a yet more unchristian progress in the Reign of Queen
Elisabeth, who not content with the proceedings eithers of her Father or
brother in that nature, but adding evil to evil for politic ends, as not
houlding her self and Crown safe except she did first extinguish the ancient
Religion of the Realm, by reason of the known flawe of her title, she inacted
those severe laws against both Catholic Clergy and laytie which have been
still executed by her successors; iltho' throu' the natural clemency of our
present sovereign, not in that sanguinarie manner that then they were put in
practice and execution.

And thus I have signified in brief the origin, continuation and progress of
the new professed faith in England, which notobstanding it carries with it
never so glorious a resemblance of reformation, yet is it but a new fashion
framed mierly for the profit and conueniencie of the inuentors, and to please
fantastical, and curious itching wits, and minds inclined to liberty: And
so daily altering as new fashions in apparel use to alter, by divine
providence it will at leingth vanish away and turn to the old fashion again,
I mean to the ancient Religion most universally ever professed both there and
in the rest of the Christian world, For the furtherance and adnauncement of
which, that which here I intend to prove is that the Religion whose beginning
and success I have now compendiously declared as publicly and commonly
professed at this day in England, is no true Religion but a false and erroneous
doctrine, and practice, deceitfully masked and disquised with the apparel of
truth: and on the contrary that the present Roman faith is the only true
Religion, as with Gods assistance by my arguments against the one and in favor
of the other it will appear to the learned lovers of truth, to whom cheefely
I consecrate these my labors as to the most ingenious and ingenuous minds.

A brief prelocution to the readers.
Peradventure at the first sight of this treatise you will expect an other
Campian coming to challenge you to disputation.

It is true I profess I am a Campion in Religion, but not a Champion to
provoke you, neither do I intend to persuade you in a Rhetorical manner, but
only to propose unto your ingenuous minds and mature judgments pure truth,
and pure falsitie in their own several and native habits and colors as good
an evil, to the end that by your free election you may stretch your hands to
the one and leave the other according as you shall find your selves moved by
diuineinspiration and force of reason. Yet not so remissely but that if any
one should require further satisfaction, let him but obtain me a safe conduct
granted by competent authority, and I will not refuse to decipher the
Gyrogliffe of my name as ever most ready according to Apostolical advise, to
render reason of the faith I profess.

And althou' perhaps it will be judged more suitable to my manner of proceeding
and delivery of my doctrine to have put it in the latin tongue, yet because I
considered there are in our country many pregnant and active wits which
nevertheless have small knowledge in that language; I resolved rather to
publish it in the vulgar tongue to the end that all those who ar studious of
truth may be free from impediments in their search of reason. Neither is it
intended for every pedanticall bibleist, but for such as in some sort are
instructed in scholastical discipline: qui potest caperecapiat.

And if by the grace and assistance of God my arguments shall but make so much
impression in the readers as only to reduce some passionate and partial
minds in matters of Religion to such a point of temper as they shall come to
judge it a thing repugnant to reason and conscience that those who have so much
reason and so forcible arguments for their cause should be esteemed worthy of
contumely and persecution for their profession and defense of the same, I
shall never accounte my pains and time ill employed. And thus I commit and
commend you to the grace and protection of Christ our Savior.

THE FIRST PART OF THE CONVICTION CONTAINING THE IMPVGNATIVE ARGVMENTS.
THE FIRST PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT.
AND for confutation of the English Religion which I assume for the first
part of my disputation beginning with the name Catholic, I argue in this
manner.

All Religions which are not Catholic, are false Religions.

But the Religion now publicly professed in England is not Catholic.

Ergo the religion now publicly professed in England is a false Religion.

In the Mayor, and conclusion of this Sylogisme there is no difficulty,
neither can the aduersa^ies deny them. The minor only is in controversy,
and it I prove with another Sylogisme in the manner following.

All Religions which are not universal, ge^erall, or common, are not Catholic.

But the Religion now professed in England is not universal, general, or
common.

Ergo the Religion now professed in England is not Catholic.

That the Religion is not Catholic which ^s not universal, general, or
common is clea^elie demonstrated by the signification of the word Catholic
which imports vniuersallitie or generallitie, according to the use which even
our adversaries themselves make of it: Who in their Bibles for the Latin words
^pistola Catholica, translate and put in English, the general epistle of
James, Jude etc. Not to stand upon the ancient authority of saint Augustine
and other Fathers, and Councels, who when they speak of the true Church, or
faith, ^se the name Catholic in that same sense, as after shall appear. And
by this the mayor propo^ition of the second Sylogisme is sufficiently ^roued
to be true. Now touching the minor ^o wit that the Religion publicly professed
in England is not general, universal, or common, (...) likewise prove by
distinguishing all the diverse kinds of vniuersallitie which according either
to Philosophy, or moral doctrine can be imagined, and by conuincing that none
of them agree to the Religion of England; which I prosecute in this manner.

All vniuersallitie in Religion is either in the matter or material object of
faith, or in the time, place, and persons that profess it: or else in the rule
or reason which directs them in the faith, and profession of it. For proof and
declaration of all which particulars, and that none of them be found in the
Religion of England, it is to be supposed as certain that the word universal
signifies not only generallitie but also unity, so that the thing which is
universal must be one in itself as well as common to others: that which not
only the usual acception of the word does show which by Aristotle and the
rest of the Philosophers both ancient and modern is commonly taken for vnum in
multis, that is one thing in many, or one common to many: but also the very
etymology and sound of the same word does plainly declare. Yea and the
ancient Fathers also affirm the same in those places where speaking of the
vniuersallitie of the Church in place, they say the Church is one, and yet
dispersed over the whole world. Lib. 2. c 2.
As does S^ Augustine against the epistle of Gaudentius. Where using the
testimony of saint Cyprian among ^other words of his he relates these. Vnum
ca^ut est, and origo vna, vnamater foecundis successibus copiosa. She (meaning
the Church) ^s one head, one origin, Maieres n^stri Catholicam nominarnus vt ex
ipso nomine ^stenderent quia per t^tum est. De unit. Eccl. cap. 2.
one mother replemished with fruitful successes. And in the second chapter of
his book of the unity of the Church; he says, that our ancetors called (the
Church) Catholic to the end they might show by the name it self that she is
in whole. In like manner Vincentius Lyrinensis in the third chapter of his book,
to the vniuersallity of the Church joins consent, or union. And Venerable Bede upon the 6. chap. of the Canticles affirms that the Church is called
Catholic, quia per omnes mundi parts in vnapace, in vno Domini timore
aedificatur. That is, because it is planted or built in all parts of the world
in one peace, and one fear of God. And thus it plainly appears that the
word Catholic, or universal, whatsoever else it includes, yet it must of
necessity have unity in that generallitie which it signifies.

This being supposed as a truth which even our adversaries cannot resist. I
prove against them first that there is no vniuersallitie in the matter or
object of their Religion, with this argumentation following.

All religions which are not one, and the same in matter or object which
Christ, and his Apostles preached, wa^te vniuersallity in object, or matter.

But the Religion professed in England at this present, is not one, and the
same in object or matter which Christ and his Apostles preached.

Ergo the Religion professed in England at this present wantes universality in
object or matter.

The mayor of this Sylogisme is iucluded in the supposition before declared at
the least in part: and granted even by our adversaries as I suppose, it being
nothing else in sense, but only that the particular objects or matters which
a Catholic or universal believer imbraceth by faith; are one, and the same
doctrine in every point, which God has reueiled, and the most universal
Church proposes to be believed by all persons in the universal orb. And this
appears most true especially if we consider that the doctrine or object or
any Religion cannot be conceived to be universal except it be taken in this
form and manner, in regard that in this sort, and not otherwise, it
attracteth or draws unity from the founder, and so has the property of
being one, without which unity it cannot possible be one and the same in
many, in which nevertheless the total nature or essence of universality
consists.

Now touching the minor or second proposition of the same Sylogisme, I prove it
in this manner; first, because the Religion which our Saulour, and his Apostles
preached was vniformerlie, and indistinctlie one and the same both in matter
and form, I mean both in object or matter of faith, and in the assent of
faith itself, and therefore the Apostle Ephesians. 4. as he affirms there is one
only Lord or God, so does he in the same tenor affirm there is one faith.
Vnus Dominus, vnafides: meaning that faith is one as well object as in act.
And yet this is otherwise according to the doctrine of the English Church,
whose professors distinguish the object of their faith, in to fundamentals, and
not fundamentals; which division of theirs cannot possible stand with unity,
as both natural reason and common sense most plainly teach: And consequently
the matter or obtect of the English faith cannot be one, and the same with the
object or matter of that religion which Christ and his Apostles delivered to
the universal world, in which true Religion there is no part nor partial which
is not truly and propethe fundamental, and to be uniformly, and
universally believed upon for feture of eternal Salvation, according to that
formidable commination of the supreme Judge himself who without any division
or distinction pronounces sentence of condemnation against all such who
obstinately err in their assent of faith to any matter by him, Qui vere non
^rediderit condemnabitur. Marc. V^^. (...) ^^ntes (...) omni^ qua^unque mandaui
vobis. Math. 28.
and his Apostles reueiled to his Church, and by here for such proposed to the
people, how small soever it may seem to be in it own nature or condition,
and how necessary, or vncessarie it is in it self to salvation, in regard
that it being once delivered for true by God who cannot lie or deceive, it is
reallie invested with the same formal reason and motive of credibilitie, which
the most noble and sublime object or matter either humane, or divine can have,
that is with the infallibility of the prime reueiling verity, to which all
faith and credit is due, and necessarily to be truly and entirely adhibited
under pain of eternal punishment.

Secondly I prove the same Minor proposition; because the object or matter of
the Religion published by our Savior, and his Apostles has annexed unto it a
certain relation or reference of universality to all those particular persons
to which it is to be preached, that is to all people which were, are, or will
be in the world till the consummation, or day of judgment, which relation is
grounded in the ordinance and command of Christ himself to his Apostles
sayeing: Marc. vlt.
Euntes in mundum vniuersum praedicate Euangelium omni creaturae. Where by the
words all creatures is understood all nations or people, as saint Matthew
more plainly declares in the same passage of his Gospel where thus he relates
our Saviors speech. Euntes docere omnes gentes. And likewise S. Gregory
commenting the same text gives an ingenious exposition of it to the same
purpose teaching that by those words: omni creaturae: is meant all men; for
says he, Sed omnis creaturae nomine signatur homo. And in the same place he
adds an other explication of the same words yet more plain and clear for
this our purpose saying, that by the name of every creature, all nations also
may be signified. Potest etiam creaturae nomine, omnis natio gentium designari.
So that it is void of controversy that the Religion which Christ and his
Apostles preached has this relative, or respective universality of object, or
matter: of which contrarily, the English Religion is quite destitute in regard
that, at the least, for the space of 9. centenarie of years together partly
by some of the pretended reformers, and partly by evidence of fact, it is
convinced not to have been preached in any part or partial of the universal
world in all points as it is now professed in our English nation. A matter so
clear and manifest by the testimony of all histories both of those former
times and ours; that I never heard of anic of the professors of it, who either
in writing, or private discourses, or public sermons, has absolutely auerred
it to have been preached without interruption ever since the time of Christ, and
his Apostles.

And thence it proceeds that for the avoiding the force of this or the like
probation, I conceive not what other refuge they can have then to say, that
notobstanding the object or matter of their Religion neither is at this
present, nor has been in all precedent ages taught or preached: yet that in
respect their Religion is the same which was preached by the Apostles, and
their successors in the first five hundredth years after the law of Christ, it
may be termed universal in object or matter even at this present, especially
supposing it is not the multitude of believers which makes the object or matter
of Religion universal, but the totalitie, or latitude of the doctrine it self,
as being in all points the same which Christ deleuered to his Apostles to be
preached to all nations.

But to this I replye, it is no solution but a miere cuasion of the former
argument. Yet I confess that if it were true and solid, the pretended
reformers had reason to applaude it as a most compendious and easy course for
the maintaining of their new Religion. But the truth is that this can not
stand in unity with the doctrine, and faith which our Savior delivered to his
Apostles, and they to the rest of the world, which was not to continue only
for some d^i^, months, or years, but until the very and or consumation of
the world. And therefore Christ our Savior to those words of the text of
saint Mathewe: Euntes docete om^es geutes, going teach ye all nationes,
presently for conclusion of his speech he added, and ^^centes eos seruare
omnia quaeeumque mandaui ^obis and ecce ego vobiscum sum omnibus die^us vsque
ad consummationem seculi, teaching them to observe althings which I have
commanded you, and behold, I am with you all days to the consumation of the
world. In which words is included not only universality of ^atter, but also
perpetual continuation of time, supposing it was unnecessary for Christ to
have promised his contiuual assistance to his Apostles except the Religion
which he delivered unto them had been necessarily to be perpetually preached in
all times without interruption even till the day of Judgment, in which respect
it implies that relation of vni^ersalitie which my former argument con^udes,

And to this I join Secondly: that the other ^rte of the maintainers of the
English faith ^ho enterprise the defense of the visibilitie of there Religion
in all ages, are yet farther out ^f square then the other. In regard by this
^^eanes they enter in to a task which (as the ^ustration of their trial in
that particular ^ath already given experience) they will never be able to
perform. By all which it is evidently appears that the English Religion has
no such relation or respect unto all future times intrinsecallie included in it
object, or matter: or if any reference it had, it was of such temporary, and
small continuance that it quite lost it by the way in all that vaste space of
time which passed between the Popedom of saint Gregory, and the Apostacy
of Martin Luther.

Thirdly I yet farther add, that the defenders of the English faith assume
false and abuse their hearers when they so commonly affirm that their Religion
is the same which was taught and preached by Christ and his Apostles, which I
prove because it does not indeed agree in all particulars with the object and
matter of the faith and doctrine which Christ and his Apostles published to the
world as manifestly appears by comparing some several points of them both and
conferring the one with the other. For where can the nouelistis find either in
the scripture, Fathers, or authentical history that Christ and his Apostles
taught that those only books of scripture ar Canonical which the Church of
England holds for such? or that Christians ar justified by that faith only by
which they believe their sins are remitted and the justice of Christ applied
unto them by the faith same, and that every one in particular is bound so to
believe, and that this faith only is necessary and sufficient to salvation?
or where do they find that Christ and his Apostles preached that the only
written word is necessary and sufficient to salvation? where do they read
in scripture or Fathers that the visible Church planted by Christ increased by
the preaching of the Apostles, and continuated by a disinterrupted succession
of Pastors can err in faith? that there is no Purgatory, nor place of
satisfaction either in this world or the next for lesser sins, or the pain
due to greater? or that in the Sacrament of Eucharist the body and blood of
Christ at not contained and received other wise then figuratively and by faith
a lone? I know they can show us none of these several propositions either in
scriptures, or doctors of the Church, or by any authentical history or
relation that the same have been taught by Christ or his Apostles. I am assured
that all they can perform in this case, is to produce certain textes of
scripture which to the ignorant sort of people may seem to have resemblance
with those their positions, but none so plain that without detortion of
either sense or words or both, or without their own fallatious illations and
consequences, can possible contain any such doctrine. For example for their
solifidian justification or their justification by faith only, they allege
diverse passages out of the epistles of S. Paul, as that man is not justified
by the works of the law but by faith, and that faith is reputed to justice,
and yet none of those show that faith only iustifies and much less do they
mention or insinuate that peculiar faith of remission of their sins by which
the professors of the English Religion believe they are justified: that which is
evidently convinced by the tenor of the texts then selves in which neither of
the parts of the former position is contained but added by the expesitions and
glosses of those who violently draw the scripturs to their perverse purpose.
And the like practice of the Nouellists may easily be discovered to be used in
the rest of the several propositions above rehearsed, in Bellarmin and other
Catholic Controuertists, who professedly confute the new doctrine of the
sectaries of this present age to whom I remit the reader for more exact
discussion of the same, supposing this place is incapable of more large
proceeding.

And hence it appears that the professors of the English faith must needs
confess that according to the premises here breefely declared and confirmed
the matter and object of their Religion does not agree with that doctrine which
Christ and his Apostles planted and published, which is the Minor proposition
of my second silogisme above propunded, and the very same I here intend to
convince. And now to the confirmation of the instance, I responde: I grant the
multitude of believers does not cause and formally constitute vniuersallitie in
theobiect of Religion: nevertheless if comparing one Religion wit an other it
is discovered to be apparently certain that the one has ever had a greater
multitude of professors in all times and places since the first fondation of
the true faith, then the other, yea and that the one has had a greater number
of faithful persons for many ages together, when as the one had none at all:
In this case I say it is manifest that the multitude of believers does
evidently argue the Religion so believed and professed to be no other but that
same Religion which was first founded by Christ our Savior with his promise of
perpetual visibilitie and cantinuation; and with multiplicitie of faithful
people, and consequently that it only has vniuersallitie in matter and
object: and that on the contrary the other Religion which can show no such
multitude of professors, but is notoriously defective in this particular, has
not any vniuersallitie at all in the several points of doctrine which it
teaches them to believe. And now this may suffice to demonstrate that there is
no vniuersallitie to be found in the object or matter of the English Religion.

The second kind of vniuersallitie of Religion is in time, which I prove not
to be had in the English Religion in the form following.

That Religion wantes true vniuersallitie of time which has not ben visibly
extant in all times since the true Religion was first founded.

But the Religion of England has not ben visibly extant in all times since the
first foundation of true Religion.

Therefore the Religion of England wantes true vniuersallitie of time.

The mayor is most certain and maintained by many of the professors of the
English faith if not by all. Yet because they are not wholely united in this
point as far as I can perceive by their doctrine, and because of those who
maintain the visibilitie of the Church, few or none of them grant that the
Church has been always since the times of Christ so visible as the Romanists
hold it to have been, that is with visible Pastors and teachers and a visible
flock or congregation of people assignable in all ages and times: therefore I
will prove it first by plain texts of Scripture, then by authority of ancient
Fathers, and first that the true Church is absolutely visible, then that it is
perpetually visible.

The absolute visibilitie of the Church is ^aught in all those places of
Scripture which speak of the Church as of a known congregation or company of
people, as S. Math. Die Ecclesi^ co^firma fratr^t tues. Pasce oues meas.
Pascite qui in vobis est grege^ Dei.
the ^8. tell the Church. S. Luc. 22. confirm thy brothers. ^ohn. 20. feed my
sheep. 1. Pet. 5. feed the flock (...) God which is among you. S. Paul 1.
Cor. 15. Affir^nes that he himself did persecute the Church. And most commonly
his Epistles are directed ^o the Churches as to the Church of Rome, Corinth,
Ephesus. And finally there is scarce ^nie mention of the Church in the whole
Bible where the visibilitie of the same is not plainly signified, and therefore
it is compared to a city upon a mountain Math. 5. In illo mo^te est qui
impleuit orbe^ terrarum. -- nunquid sic ostend. mus Ecclesia^ fratres? no^ne
aperta est^ nonn^ manifesta? etc. Aug. trac. 1. in r. ep. loan.
according to the exposition of that place made by S. Augustine in his book of
the unity of the Church the ^4. and 20. Chapter. Of which inuisibilitie there
are likewise plain texts in the second chapter of Isaias, and the fourth of
Micheas: where conformable to the cited words of S. Math. the ^ woe Prophets
affirm, that there will be in the latter Days a mount aine prepared, the house
of God. Which words Saint Augustine most perspicuously interprets of the
Church of Christ.

Also there is a very pregnant place to this putpose the 61. of Isai. where
speaking of the people of God the Prophet says, all that shall see them shall
know them to be the seed which God has blessed. Euangelizare pauperibus mi sit
me, etc. Luc. 18.
Which words Christ himself in the fourth of S. Luke does plainly insinuate
to be meant of his Church in regard he applies some of the precedent words of
the same chapter of Isaie, to himself and the propagatior of the same Church
by his preaching.

And according to these and the like phrase of Scripture the ancient Fathers
do commonly speak of the Christian Church. S. Augustine in his second Book
against Cresconius Says thus. Extat Ecclesia cuncta clara atque perspicua,
Cap. 36.
quippe ciuitas quae abscondi non potest supra montem constituta. The Church is
all clear and perspicuous, as being a city which cannot hiden be placed upon
a mountain. And S. Chrysostom in hi^ fourth homily upon the 6. chap. of
Isaias has that memorable sentence. Facilius est solemn extingui quam Ecclesiam
obscurari. The sun m^ more easily be extinguished then the Church obscured.

I could allege most plain words to the same purpose out of the rest of the
ancient Doctors: but because those twoe alone are of segreat authority that
they ought to satisfy ani^ impartial judgment in matter of testification of
the sense and doctrine of ancient time touching this point, therefore I
esteemed (...) supersluous to produce their several sentences.

Perhaps some of our adversaries will say the do not deny but both scriptures
and Father do teach in general that the Church is visible: yet they deny
that scriptures and Fathers reach that it must necessarily be visible in all
ages and times, but rather that like unto the noone it suffers Eclypses and
defects by perseeution, or by other means.

To this which is a miere voluntary evasion as any one of judgment may
easily perceive, I answer first that supposing both the sentences of scriptures
and Fathers of the visibilitie of the Church are general, absolute, and
without limitation, it is manifestly convinced that their meaning could not be
that the Church is visible only for a time, or at certain times, and not
perpetually, by reason that according to ^he common rule of interpretation
general words are to be understood properly, and with ^ll their extension as
long as noe inconuenie^ce follows thereof, as certain it is and apparent that
none can follow of the continual visibi^tie of the Church, whereas on the
contrary both many and great in conueniences ensue of the want of the same,
as after shall be decla^ed. Neither can any one place either of scripture or
Fathers be produced by the opposers of this doctrine in which any such
limitation of the sentences of the Fathers is contained either ^n words or
sense, or in any other sort so ^lainely as by the generality of the foresaid
Phrases of Scripture and ancient Doctors all re^riction is excluded.

Secondly I impugn the same evasion for that if it be once granted that the
Church is not always visible, then it follows that in the times of the
inuisibilitie of the same, there are no visible Pastors nor preachers to
minister the true word and Sacraments to the people, yea and that there are no
such people in the world, and consequently that thereis noe Church either
visible or invisible, by reason that a Church whether we feign it to be
visible or invisible essentially consists of people, which people, are in like
manner essentially visible as muchas corporal, nor can they if they would, be
visible except it be either by miracle or else by art magique, or some such
unlawful means. Nay more if they were once invisible either by miracles,
art, or nature, how can it be known but by there own testimony that they
ever were truly extant? to which nevertheless noe man can prudently give
credit especially in a matter of such importance.

And thus we see that out of this one absur^itie of the want of visibilitie in
the Church a thousand others do follow, as that there are vivisible Pastors
and vet invisible, that there are visible people and yet invisible, that there is
a Church yet noe Church. And if our aduersa^ies say there are true Pastors, true
faithful people, and a true Church, and that there wants only a true
profession of faith in the Pastors, people, and Church. Then I reply first; it
is manifest that if there be no prefession of faith in neither Pastors, people,
nor any part of the Church, then can it not possible be a true Church or the
Church of the Predestinate as they will have it, but a Congregation only or
company of timorous and cowardly people which dare not profess their faith,
Ore autem confessio fit ad salutim
and consequently not the Church of Christ in which not faith only but also
profession of faith is necessary to salvation according to the doctrine of the
Apostle saying that, with the heart we believe unto justice, Romans 10.
but with the mouth coufesion is made to salvation.

And howbeit I conceive that the defenders of the inuisibilitie may instance
and say that profession of faith is not required to the essence of the true
Church, and by consequence that it may subsist with internal faith only:
nevertheless I reioyne to this, that althou' I should grant profession of
faith in metaphisical rigor to be no essential part of the true Church, yet
is it so necessarily annexed to the true Church as it neither is nor ever will
be found without professors: neither is there any authority either of
scriptures or Fathers whereby it can be proved that any such true Church ever
were or ever will be consisting of internal faith only. But all those places
which I have above alleged both of the absolute visibilitie of the Church and
necessity of profession of faith to salvation required by the ordinance and
commandment of Christ manifestly convince the contrary. Well may our
adversaries out of their accustomed temeritie and spirit of contradiction
against the Roman Church, and because they have no other means to maintain
the subsistence of their own new Congregation, affirm and teach that
internal faith alone without profession makes a true Church yet no judicious
man will ever be persuaded but that position is assumed by them mierlie for the
advantage of their own ill cause which without the use of it or some such
other of like nature, cannot possible be defended in the controversy whether
the true Church be ours or theirs. To omit that if no external profession of
faith be required to the true Church, it is impossible to conceive how any man
could ever come to know that such a Church as consists of internal faith
only, was ever extant in the world any in part of time since it was once
planted and established by our Savior and his Apostles. And yet admit that it
is not wholely impossible to conceive the possibility of a true Church without
the attribute of external profession, yet this is but a Metaphisicall case
grounded only in the discourse of him who so conceiueth it, and by
consequence it is not secure for any man to venture his salvation upon it, as
being either plainly false in it self, or at the least very subject to
error and fallibili^itie: but every prudent man ought rather to follow the
tenor of speech of the scripture and Fathers in the places before alleged, and
particularly the sentence of saint Augustine in the ^1. chapter of his 19.
book against Faustus. In nullum nomen religionis seu verum seu falsuu^
coagulari homines possunt nisi aliquo signaculorum vel Sacramentorum visibilium
consortio colligentur.
Where he affirms that men cannot be congregated or assembled together under
one name of Religion, unless they be tied together with some consorte or
socictie of visible signs, or Sacraments: In which words althou' he makes no
express mention of profession of faith as required to a Church, yet does he in
effect affirm the same in other words teaching the communication of
Sacraments to be necessary to the constitution of a Church: Which
communication of Sacraments is profession of faith in one of the highest
degrees, as no man can deny.

And now having sufficiently confuted the foresaid evasion of our aduersaties
touching the visibilitie I will yet further add positive proofs of the
perpetuity of the visible Church.

First therefore I prove it by those places of scripture which affirm that the
Church of Christ shall never perish; as math. the 16. Porta insert non
praualibuut aduersunam.
The Ports of hell shall not prevail against it. Where we see the Prophecy
and promise of our Savior touching the perpetuity of his Church, is general
and without limitation of time: and he speaks here of the same Church of which
those places of scripture speech which declare it to be visible which I have
already cited to that purpose; and for the adversary to limit these words to
the invisible Church as if Christ had meant that the gates of hell shall not
prevail against his invisible Church only, is a miere voluntary explication
of their own invention repugnant both to the text itself and reason: to the
text in regard that all the words and circumstances of it demonstrate that
Christ speaks of his visible Church either only or chiefly, as is the
government of the Church by saint Peter, which Church was to consist of men
whose sins the same Peter had power promised him to bind and loose, and that
upon earth, all which particular^ sound nothing but things visible.

Now the foresaid explication of our aduerfaries is also contrary to reason.
First for that supposing Christ planted such a Church upon earth in which there
were to be always visible pastors and preachers to administere the Sacraments,
Ephesians. 4. 1. Cor. 12. Act. 20. Luc. 12.
and teach, and publish the Gospel, as the scriptures testify: And supposing
he did not only command us to have his faith, but also to profess his name
before men, it is most absurd to imagine that he would, or did not use his
providence in the conservation of the same visible Church in all times and
occasions, as well as the invisible Church if any such he had established in
the world.

Secondly the same exposition is against reason in respect that by that
limitation of our Sauiors words which our adversaries use, they give us to
understand that Christ promissed much, but performed little or nothing of
importance in this particular. For if he assisted his Church so weakelie that
for the space of many years together the members of it were driven to
conceile their faith which nevertheless he himself obledgeth them to profess
in all occasions, surely he did not only come far short of his promise,
but also in a certain manner contradicted himself and deceived them. And if
for the gates of hell to have so fare much urged and vexed the Church as to
have le^ all the members thereof with a bare secret; and dissembling faith
only without any professing, or use of Sacraments for the space of many
succeeding ages, is not absolutely to have prevailed against it, and
consequently that Christ's words are falsified: then certainly neither had
they ben falsified in case hell gates had so far prevailed as quite to
extinguish even the professors themselves, yea and by an impossibility to
haueleft faith alone hanging upon the hedges for want of other subject all
which sequels being most absurd and yet consequent to our adversaries gloss
upon the words of scriptures above cited, they evidently argue the falsitie
of that their construction.

An other pregnant place for the perpetual continuation of the visible Church,
is that of the 4. to the Ephesians: where the Apostle says that Christ
appointed Pastors etc. Ad consummationem Sanctorum donec^ occurramus omnes in
virum perfectum. That is, he appointed some Bishops, other pastors, and others
Doctors etc. To the consummation of the Saints till we meet all into the unity
of faith and into aperfect man: That is until the day of judgment. Upon which
place saint Augustine in his 12 book of the City, has large discourses to
this purpose in the 16.17. and 18. chapters. And the truth is that Christ
himself having in this special manner designed such persons for governors and
teachers in his Church till the end of the world, doubtless his meaning was
not that they should be such dumme dogs as the establishers of the
inuisibilitie do affirm them to have been in their imaginary Church for a
long time together: But his divine will and pleasure was they should be
custodes Jerusalem qui tota die and tota nocte non tacebunt in perpetuum. That
is Christ would have them such watchmen or keepers of Jerusalem (that is to say
the Church) as shall not be silent till the end of the world in no time, nor
upon any occasion Which perpetuity of the visible government of the Church
is grounded in the perfection of Christ's divine providence and mercy toward
the members thereof for whom of his infinity goodness he pleased to have the
way to salvation continually open: Which otherwise if the true Church had been
at any time hidden or invisible as at the least some of those against whom I
now dispute will have it, then it could not possible have been so: Yea and
many thousands or rather millions of men had lived and dyed out of the state
of salvation as being impossible for them to find and enter into the true
Church all that space of time in which it is feigned by them to have remained
invisible or out of knowledge.

And thus much for the impugnation of that part of our adversaries which
defeds that the true Church is not perpetually or in all differences of times
visible: the absurdity of which doctrine diverse of the defenders of the
English Church of later standing aduertiseing, and also because they find it
not so plausible to their auditors as they could wish, they have ventured upon
another course, indeuoring to shewo that the same Church and Religion which is
now established in England has been always visible in the world from the time
of Christ and his Apostles even till this present: Which manner of proceeding
of theirs although it is much more difficult and hard to be defended then the
other now confuted, and that by this means the maintainers of it do but
incidere in syllam, that is by avoiding of one incouenience they fall in to a
greater: Yet because they persuade themselves they come nearer to the mark of
proving their Church to be Catholic in this respect as well as the Roman
Church has ever ben, (which indeed they might perform if they were able
truly to prove their visibilitie) therefore I will breefelie demonstrate that
they have no such visibilitie as is necessary to the constirution of the true
Catholic Church as they pretend.

Wherefore to come to the purpose and the more clearelie to convince my intent,
I frame this Sylogisme against the visibilitie of their Church.

That Church wantes perpetual visibilitie which cannot produce some visible
professors of their doctrine in all points and in all ages since the time of
the Apostles till this present.

But the Church of England cannot produce some visible professors of their
doctrine in all points and ages since the time of the Apostles to this present.

Therefore the Church of England wantes perpetual visibilitie.

The mayor is not denied by our adversaries, the minor has all the difficulty
and that I prove.

And inprimis that the defenders of the English faith can produce no scripture
for this point is most certain and evident for that this is only a matter of
fact which succeeded since the scriptures were published. By occasion of which
the reader may note that those professors of the English religion who in this
manner defend the visibilitie of their Church do not proceed consequenter to
that other negative principle of theirs to wit that nothing is to be believed
by faith but which is either expressly or by necessary illation contained in
the scriptures, which general rule of theirs in this case is manifestly
defective for that in it neither scripture nor deduction or consequence of
scripture can seruo their turn in this particular.

And if they reply that they can prove their visibilitie a priori, by
scriptures by those places which teach perpetuall^ visibilitie in the Church,
then I say that this is not the matter now in question but a subtlety to
delude the reader, for the controversy is whether they can prove their
visibilitie a posteriori, that is whether they can yealde us any authentical
proof or testimony whenby it may certainly appear that the Religion now
professed in England has been in deed perpetually visible in in all ages as the
scripture and Fathers above alleged affirm the true Church ought to be,
otherwise they do only suppose their Church is the same which is described in
the scripture, but prove it not. Neither do we ask them to she we us that
such a Church in general there is in the world as the scriptures do mention,
but we urge them to demonstrate that their Church in particular has the
property or attribute of perpetual visibilitie as the scriptures requires to
be found in the only individual true Church of Christ: and till they can
perform this they neither speak according to the sense of scriptures, nor
satisfy us in our demand.

Wherefore I prove the minor proposition of of the argument above framed,
because no authentical history can beproduced in which it is related that
this Religion of England now commonly there professed, believing and maintaining
that there ar but 22. books of Canonical scripture only. That they are to be
expounded by the spirit of every private person. That man is justified by faith
only. That there ar only two sacraments instituted by Christ. That the body
of Christ is given, received, and eaten in the Sacrament in a spiritual manner
that is by faith only: finally I say that for testimony of that these and
diverse others of the 39. articles of the English Religion have been taught or
preached in all ages since the time of Christ and his Apostles in any
Kingdom, province, town or yet in any one corner of the whole world though
never so abscure, there is not extant any kind of record: And therefore it is
incredible in the highest degree that any professors of it can be produced in
every several age since the foundation of the true Church of Christ: for that
if any such had been in any time or place for so long a space together, it is
as certain as it is certain there has been in all that success of time sun,
moon, and stars in the firmament, or fishes in the sea, that some writer or
other would have made mention of the same. And if Historiographers be so
curious and exact in this nature, that there was never any conuenticle of
sectaries so small or obscure but it has been noted and related by some of
them, much less could such a Church as our English Nouellists pretend theirs
to be, have lurked so closse as that no mention of it should be found in
histories or records of former ages before the days of Luther. It is not
absolutely impossible to conceive that Christ might have established an
invisible Church in this world at the least for a time, but that he should have
ordained his church with pertetuitie of visible pastors, and yet that neither
their names, seats, parishes, or any other monument of them either dead or
alive, can be produced to make it visibly appear that they were professors in
all points of the same Religion which now is professed in England, this I say
is above all admiration neither can it possible seem credible to any sound
understanding, on mature judgment.

Secondly I prove the same minor, for that diverse of our English aluersaries
having of late used the uttermost of their power and industry in this
particular, yet have they not come near the performance of their purposes, but
in lieu of produceing professors of their Religion in the several ages of the
Church, they cast in to their Catalogue either such as have been flatly against
them in diverse points in which they differ from the Roman Church, or such as
have been condemned for heretics in times past, and that partly even for
doctrine contrary to some of the articles of the English faith as appears for
example in wiclef and Hus, Maledicta ergo doctrina Wiclef quo considere iubet
etc. Wald. p 3. c. sep. and seq.
of which the first defended, that more confidence is to be placed in man's own
proper merits then in humble prayer: that a priest in mortal sin cannot
validly baptize, that for Ecclesiastical persons to have possessiones is
contrary to scripture. The second neue^idenyed the real presence, nor merit.
Or else those whom the defe^ders of the English faith dusigne for members of the
same, were such as because they speak some thing doubtfully in only some one
point of the Roman doctrine (of which rake is Presbiter Bertrame) they puti^hem
in their list as if they were wholely and intyrely theirs. Notobstanding they
are known to be quite apposite unto them in all the rest of their faith and
profession. The which how pore and inconsiderate a shifte it is, the judicious
reader will presently perceive and condeme their weak and false proceeding.

Lastely for confirmation of the impossibi^itie of ever proving the perpetual
visibilitie of ^he Church of England, it may be added that King James who was
the greatest and most ^amous defender of the new Religion that ^uer writ, as
it seems considering better this ^oint then others that follow him, was so
wary (...) circumspect that he would never cast himself into this most
dangerous gulf, as ap^eares by his Monitorie in which although his whole drift
was to prove his own Church to ^e the true Church of Christ, yet did he make
^o express mention of the visible Church more ^hen of the invisible, but only
proceeds (...) general terms and without distinction, as ^oulding it
impossible to maintain the visibi^^tie of it in all former times and ages, for
which ^^ason he prudently declined that contro^ersie.

And in deed the truth is that who soever he (...) that shall undertake the
task of proving ^erpetuall visibilitie in any of the pretensiue ^^formed
Churches, will be no more able to ^rforme it then an infant were able to roll
^siphus stone, or accomplish the labors of Hercules. whence it is consequent
that (...) adversaries what soever they pretend, true^ want universality of
time in their Church whether they defend it to be visible or in^^sible, which
is that same which the mayor and minor, of my second sylogisme above proposed
do affirm, and which may suffice for thi^ part of the discourse I here
prosecute.

Now touching the other twoe Kinds o^ vniuersallitie to wit of place and
persons, they are so annexed one to the other, that they a^ morally speaking
either all one, or at the lease out of the negation of the one, is necessarity
inferred the nagation of the other. For example if it be true that the religion
of England neither is nor was in every place of the world, it thence
infallibly falloweth that it neither i^ nor was in all persons of the world: as
in like manner it also follows, that if it was not for many ages together in
any place of the world it is also manifest it was not for the same spac^ of
time in any person in the world, and by reason of this connection betwixt the
vniuersallitie of place and persons, I will treat of the^ both under the name
of place, supposing for certain that whatsoever defect of vniuersallitie of
place shall be discovered in the English Religion, the same defect is found to
be i^ they muersallitie of persons and professors of it And here also I give
the reader notice by the way that when the Romanists exact of their ^duersaries
only to produce some professors ^f their Religion in every several age, they
^se no small favor toward them in that man^er of proceeding, in regard that
to convince their Church to have been perpetually visible, ^roperly speaking,
they ought not only to ^nde out some few persons of any sort of people what
soever, but they are obledged in ^eason to show a perfect order or Ierarchie of
^cclesiasticall persons to have been continually (...) their Church, for that
both the visible Church of Christ was so planted in the world ^y him self, and
also progated by his Apostles: (...) more over because the Romanists defacto
^an show the same to have been perpetually in ^^e Church and Religion which
they profess, that is in that Church of which have ever ben ^eades or Chief
Pastors the Popes of Rome ^y continual and ininterrupted succession from
(...). Peter who was the first Bishop and Pope of that most famous seat.

Now this being supposed I prove there is no ^niuersallitie of place in the
Church of En^land by this silogisme following.

There wants vniuersallitie of place in that Religion which in all points of it
doctrine neither is nor ever has been preached or profes^ed in all or most
places of the world.

But the Religion of England in all points of it doctrine neither is nor ever
has be^ preached or professed in all or most places (...) the world.

Ergo the Religion of England has no v^uersallitie of place.

I prove the Mayor, first by the etymolog^ or prime signification of the word
vniuersa^ which as I have already above declared imports one in many or
rather one in all, a^ appears in humane nature abstracted which is not only
one and the same in many, b^^ also participated in every particular or
individual person. And although it is true that vniuersallitie of Religion as
being only a moral matter, can not be understood with so much metaphisicall
rigor as in natural things it uses to be taken: yet for the verification of
such general sentences as we find both in scripture (...) Fathers, it must of
necessity be accepted with as great latitude as morally can be imagined For
example if there be any doctrine in the world which for the space of almost 16.
hundredth years neither is nor has been preached taught or professed in either
all, or at the least in most places of the world, then doubtless can that
universal proposition of the Apostle^ into all the earth has the sou^de of
them gone forth and that of S. Augustine. She (the Church) is like unto a vine
diffused or spread in euer^^ place, never be truly verified of it: and
consequently such a doctrine can not be truly said (...) have such
universality in it as scripture and ^athers require to the only true
Religion, and which in reason can not be judged less then ^at in all the for
said great number of years, neither is at th^s present, or has been in times
^ast preached and professed generally at the least (...) the greater part of
the world if not in every ^arte thereof.

And touching the universality of persons which as I declared before is either
included or ^ecessarily connected to the universality of ^ace, it is a matter
so clear and apparent that (...) is not to be found in the English Religion
^ther for the time paste or present, that even ^^e chief of the professors of
it dare not auer^e it to be universal in that nature, as is mani^est by the
authority of King James himself ^he Solomon of their sect. Who althou' he
la^oreth much in his book to Christian Princes (...) persuade them he defendes
no other then ^he Catholic faith, yet in the end of the same ^e is forced to
confess that (notobstanding he ^^cludes in the number all the professors of
the ^retended reformation even in other countries ^^gge and ragge) yet they do
nor by much a^ounte to so many as profess the contrary, that is the
Catholic Roman doctrine, and Re^gion: preached and practiced in so many
seue^all nations and places of the of the universal orb. In so much that if
any of our aduersari^^ were so impudent as to conteste or repugn^ to so plain
a truth, Regina Austri, I mean even the Infidels and Jews will be ready to
rise and proteste against him in the day of Judgment.

By which and the rest I have delivered, it is clearly consequent that the
English Religion (especially if it be intended as it is singular and different
in diverse points from the rest of the pretensiue reformed congregations) cannot
possible with any coulor of truth, be named Catholic or universal in number
of persons; supposing that according to the doctrine of Fathers, and the common
acception of the word among Christians, this appellation or sacred surname
agrees only to that Christian Religion which has generality of persons as
well as of time, place, object or matter, which generality cannot possibly be
conceived but in order or with relation to the greater number of believing
professing Christians, as being quite repugnant to reason that the lesser part
of a any multitude or total number should be named either general or common,
and much less reason there is it should obtain the most ample and vaste
denomination of universal especially where both parties are extant and remain
in the same present time.

But perhaps our adversaries will say that to ^he verifying of those and the
like general sen^ences of scripture and Fathers, it is not necessary that the
true Religion either is or has been already diffused over all or most parts
of the world, but it is sufficient that it will be preached in all or most
places before the end of the world, and so although this has not ben verified in
the English Religion as yet, never the less it will be so extended in the time
to come.

To this I reply that although there is some variety among divines about^ the
sense of the place cited and some other places of scripture to the same purpose
to wit whether they be understood of the Apostles only or of them and their
successors, In omnem terram exiuit sonus little etc. Romans 10.
as also whether they signify the time present or future, and finally whether
they be verified in all rigor or only in a common moral manner, nevertheless
I find they all agree in that the Church of Christ has been already so far
extended either by the Apostles them selves, or at least by them and their
successors, that it may be truly affirmed to have been long since diuulged, and
planted in the whole world defacto, and not in power or virtually only, even
according to the sense of the foresaid words and other places of scripture
which speak in the future tense, as appears plainly by the words of S.
Paul in his first chapter to the Colossians, where he affirms that even in his
time the Gospel was come unto hem, also it is (says he) in the universal
world and does fructify, and increasens it does in them. Which words I say are
so clear that there is no place of tergiuersation or reply in this particular,
but that according to them it must of necessity be granted by our adversaries
(except they will plainly contradict S. Paul and the scriptures) that the
foresaid extention of the faith of Christ does not expect the time to come, but
is already made as much as serves for explicating and verifying of the same
S. Paul to the Romans before related, whose words in my judgment are manifestly
cou^^nced, at the least in a chief part, to be understood in the present
tense by those otherwords of himself in the epistle to the Collossenses eue^
now by me related, which doubtless co^taine a plain exposition of the former,
as appears by the comentarie of S. Chrysostom upon them saying of the Church
of Christ. Adest vbique, suporat, and ob^inet vbique; praestat vbique.

And although I am not ignorant that both ancient Fathers and modern divines
teach that (as S. Hierome speaks upon those words. Pr^^^^ dicabitur
Euangelium hoc in vniuerso mundo) the complement or conclusion of the preaching
of the Gospel in every place shall not be performed before the consummation
of the world, as being a precedent sign thereof: nevertheless as this is true
in it self, so it in no respect (speaking absolutely) contrary to the
universality of the Church which at this present is and in times past has
ever ben, as is evidently convinced by the writings of the same ancient Fathers
and modern divines who most frequently teach that the true Church of Christ
was sufficiently spread in the world to make it universal eue^ in their own
primative ages, as their words by me rehearsed in diverse places of this
treatise, clearly testify: who also if they had lived in these present days
might with far greater reason have affirmed the same of the Roman church in
which then own books manifest them to have lived as parts and members,
being now much more extended then at that time it was.

And certainly for the defenders of the Church of England to imagine that
altho^ their Religion hi^herto has not ben universal in the world, yet that
hereafter it will be universal before the end of the world, is both void of
probability and ridiculous.

First because it is the nature of true Religion to bring zeal and feruor with
it especially in the beginning as appears in the Apostles and their successors
in the first ages who not obstanding all the impediments that the devil by
humane wit, and malice could contriue, yet d^d they extend and propagate the
faith of Christ in diverse nations and kingdoms both remote and barbarous.
Wherefore if the Religion of England had been the true faith of Christ
doubtless it would by the professors of it have been long since so extended and
dilated that it should not need to be brought to those streits as to fetch
their universality from the very end of the world.

Secondly because the nature of the Religion of England is such that it has no
convenient means for propagation of itself in the whole world, inregard that
those to whom the charge of preaching and teach the same is committed, are me^
that are all either actually tied to wives children, and posterity or else live
in expection, and and desire of those temporal, or transitory commodities,
and scarce ever dream of extending their Religion farther then their own
several Parishes: yea and their doctrine it self teaches them that either
they must all marie of necessity as some of them maintain, or at the least
that it is more expedient, and secure for them to marie then to lead a single
life: supposing which particulars it is morally impossible for them ever to
preach their faith to all nations (as Christ commands) with such clogges at
their heels as are wife, children, and posterity.

Thirdly it is certainly known that since the Religion of England was
established in the form and manner that now it is in, the professors of it
never went to ante foren nation purposely to preach their faith, and much less
have they ever taken any general course for the conversion of infidels by
any mission of Ministers, or by other means. Or if any of them have
traveled into strange countries (which are known to be very few in number)
it has been only, or cheefely for temporal respects as for that they have been silenced in their own country for preaching some extrauagant errors, or
else for some other crime or public offense committed; or perhaps some pore
vnbenificed, ignorant, and threedbare fellows who for want of means to
maintain themselves, resolve desperately to try their fortune in an other
place only for that respect and not for charity or zeal of reduceing people
to Christian Religion. And if perhaps they find any pore blackamore, or other
barbarian that heareing the name of Christians, desires to be of their
Religion, yet these false Apostles proceed so superficially with them, and
give them so small and ill instruction, that it is to be feared that after they
have baptized them on their fashion, they still remain as black as they were
before both in body and soul. Nay their devotion is so could in this nature,
that they themselves are ashamed either to write or to brag of it, as
experience does teach for that there is not any book extant that ever I could
hear of, in which it may appear that they have performed any notable matter
in this particular. The discalced Carmelits at this present hane obtained
Bishops for their mission in Persia even by the Kings permission as I am
informed.
Whereas yet on the contrary histories are full of the infinite number of
Infidels which the professors of the Roman Church have converted and daily
convert to the Christian faith both in the Oriental and Occidental Indies and
other places, and that with loss of their lives and whatsoever other
commodities they have in this world, as is manifest especially in the four
Orders of Mendicants and the Jesuits, who not obstanding innumerable
difficulties, still continue their annual Missions ordained to that same end
and purpose of propagating Catholic Religion in all countries and nations.

Lastelie I say that for the professors of the English faith to say, that their
Religion will be extended through the whole world before the day of Judgment is
mierlie their own prediction, to which no man of mature judgment ought to
give credit except they first prove themselves to be true Prophets which in my
opinion they can no more perform then they can prove the descent of their
pedigree from saint Michael the Archangell. And thus wesee plainly that the
English Religion as now it is professed being destitute of all means to
propagate it self: as hitherto it neither is nor ever was universal in the
world, so neither can it be imagined with any probable color of reason that
ever it can possible in future times come to be spread over all the nations of
the whole world as according to scriptures and Fathers the true Church ought to
be, and the mator of my former Sylogisme does affirm. And not to insiste any
longer in this matter, I in like manner prove the minor proposition of the same
argument by the same reasons which I have used for the proof of the foresaid
mator, which if they be duly applied to the English Religion they will
plainly demonstrate, that the Religion of England neither has been, is, nor
ever will be preached and published in all parts of the world and
consequently that it has not vniuersallitie of place which is that which the
conclusion of the argument does contain.

It is true I further conceive that the professors of the English faith as men
disposed to cauille, may yet once again reply, and say that in regard their
Religion is the same with the Religion of the Apostles, therefore it has the
same vniuersallitie which the Apostolical Religion has.

But to this I reioyne anser first that I have showed before that the Religion
now prosessed in England does differ in diverse points from the faith of the
Apostles, the particulars of which difference I have before specified, as is
that of justification by faith only, the deny all of the real presence and
the rest.

Secondly I say that this reply is that kind of absurdity in disputation
which the Logitia^s call petitio Principij that is, when that is assumed by the
disputant for a true and certain Principle which ought to be proved as being
the very matter in question, and so this is only an evasion of the
adversary which has no more force them his own authority gives it, which is
none at all.

And now by this and that more which has been said touching the vniuersallitie
of place and persons, it is most apparent that the English Religion has no
such attribute and consequently that it is defective in that nature.

Wherefore hence I pass to the last gender or kind of vniuersallitie which is
that of the general rule of faith, of which there be two sorts, the one is
nothing else but the word of God as it is contained in the scriptures or divine
and Apostolical traditions. The other rule is the visible Church by whose
authority we come to know certainly and infallibly the true sense of the
word of God, and all those things which his divine majesty has reuailed as
matter of faith to be believed by all sorts of people, or otherwise necessary
to salvation.

Tract. 1. Suarez de fide disp. ^. sec. 2. fine.
And of these two rules (which some divide in to three or more thou' in my
opinion not so properly and conveniently) the second which is the authority
of the Church is commonly called in the schools regula proponens, that is a
rule or way by which the prime reuailing verity or divine authority which is
the formal object and foundation of supernatural faith, is immediately
applied unto believers, And although if indeed the word of God were so clear
that every one by reading the words of scripture, or Apostolical traditions
as they are set down in the Councels or other records of the Church, could
not but understand them in a true and uniform sense, the first of those two
rules might suffice alone, yet because the scriptures are obscure and difficult
in their understanding as both themselves and experience testify: and also
because out of the imperfection of nature men's judgments often times disagree
in matters of doctrine and practice, therefore besides that speachlesse rule,
(I mean in decision of matters of controversy) there was necessary another
living and vocal rule by which the true meaning of the first and prime rule
which is the word of God, might so infallibly be declared unto the^ as all
doubts and scruples excluded, their minds and consciences might safely rest in
every point of faith by it proposed without any further question, or
tergiuersation.

Now to come to the purpose, in that first foundation of faith which is the
authority of God as he reuaileth matters to his Church, and without which true
faith cannot stand, the defenders of the English Religion agree with the
Romanists, as also they agree with them in the first of the two rules, at the
least so far as concerns this controversy, that is they hold Gods word to
be a rule of faith as the Roman Catholics hold: But the difference is in that
our adversaries will needs have the word of God to be the scripture only,
and that interpreted by the spirit of every private person who reads it, and
consequenter they hold this only for their rule proponent by which the
divine authority is applied to every point of faith in the believers.

Whereas on the contrary we Romanists believe and use the authority of the
most universal Church as the infallible applyer of Gods reuailing verity unto
us in all matters of faith and manners. And in this rule upon which all
certainty of faith dependes quoad nos that is for as much as touches the
believers or credents, I here prove that the English Religion wants this
vniuersallitie as well as the rest of the object and circumstances above
discussed the which I demonstrate in this form of argument.

That only proponent rule of faith his universal which is one and the same
in all or at the least in the greater part of believers.

But that which the professors of the English Religion hold for their
proponent rule of faith is not one and the same in all or the greater part of
believers.

Ergo that which the professors of the English Religion hold for their
proponent rule of faith is not universal.

The mayor of this Sylogisme is evident by the definition of universal, which
according to the doctrine of Philosophers is one in all if it be taken in rigor
of Logike, or as the Metaphisitians use the word. Or at the least it signifies
the greater part if it be accepted only in a moral sense, as here I take it.
From which declaration of the word universal is collected no less clear and
conuincent proof of the minor proposition which affirms that the proponent
rule of faith in the professors of the Church of England is not one and the
same in all, or yet in the greater part of believers. That which I she we
first, because the private spirit of every professor of the English Religion
which is the only immediate rule of says they profess to follow in matters
of faith as the very sound of the word does declare, is peculiar to those
that have it. and not common to all, therefore it cannot possible be general
or universal.

That the spirit by which the professors of the English Religion interpret the
word of God is peculiar to some only and not common to all such as
exteriorly profess the faith of Christ it is manifest in that it neither
passes into other countries with co^formitie in all points of belief to all
the rest of the pretended reformed Churches as appears in the controversy of
the real presence with the lutherans, the inamissibilitie of grace, In his
book directed to Christian Princes.
the point of Predestination, free will with the Arminians: nay nor yet does it
agree with the spirit of all the inhabitants of England it self, as both King
James does plainly suppose where he grants there ar many Puritans in his
Realm besides Papists and Protestants: and also experinental knowledge does
manifest the same, it being certainly known and generally confessed on all
sides that those three sorts of people be not governed by one uniform spirit,
but every one by their own rule of faith, the rule of the Romanists being one
and common among them selves in all places of the world, but on the contrary
the rule of the Protestants, and Puritans, being divided and several both in
their own country and out of it, both among themselves and also from the
Catholics wheresoever they be: which division both from themselves and others
is an infallible argument that they have no vniuersallitie in their propounding
rule of says. That which yet more plainly appears and is confirmed by a
work lately published by a Protestant Doctor (his name I do not remembers)
who describes several sects of Puritans or pure Caluinists all different both
among themselves and from the English Protestants. Which diversity of sects
cannot stand without a different spirit or rule of faith.

Secondly I prove the spirit of the professors of the English religion is not
one and the same in all or the greater part of credents, because it is not
that spirit by which the visible Church has been in all times, places, and
persons successively governed without interruption, ergo it is not an
universal spirit but only particular and private. The antecedent of this
argument is certain for that if it were the same, it would be found
conformable and subordinate to the spirit of the greater part of the Christian
Churches, and the Religion of England would be agreeable to the Religion of the
same Churches both in doctrine practice and government, which never thelesse
we see to be contrary and repugnant unto them.

Thirdly, the spirit of the maintainers of the present Religion of England is
not conformable to the spirit of their antecessors for above nine hundredth
years together at the least, therefore it is not universal. That the spirit of
the maintainers of the present Religion of England is not conformable to the
spirit of their ancestors, I prove by the authority of all historiographers and
wirters even the pretended reformers them selves who have either expressly
testified or at the least not denied but that in all this space of time even
until the days of King Edward the Sixth which is not yet a hundredth years,
the Mass and real presence was generally approved, the communion under one
Kind practiced, Altars and pictures used in Churches with honor and reverence.
Purgatory and prayer to saints taught and allowed, and finally all the points
of doctrine and manners between the Romanists and Anglicans now controuersed
were publikly professed, all which nevertheless is at this time condemned and
quite renounced and abandoned by the professors of the present English faith.
Of which both they and we are eye witnesses at this day. Which two things can
not possible be done by one and the same spirit of God in regard they are quite
apposite and co^tradictorie in them selves, and consequently the spirit of
those who profess to tepugne to that same doctrine which they know and
acknowled their predecessors to have embraced as sound and pious and
conformable to the world of God, so many former ages successively, cannot be
conceived to be an universal spirit, but private and proper to them selves.

Fourtly the spirit of the preachers and teachers of the English Religion is
quite different from the spirit of the doctors and writers that have adhered
and abeyed the Roman Church, in every several age, as is manifest to those
who read them and compare their works with the writings of the pretensiue
reforming doctors of our times the doctrine of those that have writ even from
the first Centurie of years imediately following the Apostles being sprinkled
with piety and devotion toward the saints in heaven and especially the
virgin Marie, as their sermons, Homilies upon their feasts, and other their
works do testify, of which matter good store is to be found especially in
S. Basil, Cyprian, Chrysostom, Hierome, Ambrose, Augustine. Gregory, Damacene,
Bernard, and the rest of the Roman divines which have writ ever since, even
till this present time, in whom also there is frequent mention and comendation
of miracles operated by the saints and their relics: none of which
particulars appear in any of the Writings of the professors of the English
Religion, but rather in their books and ordinary sermons they indeuore most
ernestly to persuade the people that they ought not to hearken after any such
matters, but hold them either for false and superstitious, or at the least for
idle, superfluous and impertinent, and so we clearly see by this that the
spirit of the English professors is contrary to the spirit of the whole
torrent of the most learned and renowned men of all ages past even to this
present day; and consequently it can not be general, common or universal, nor
a true spirit, except the owners of it will condemn the contrary spirit of
the most learned, judicious, and pious men of all ages since the time of Christ
and his Apostles to have been false and erroneous, and theirs only the reight
spirit of God. Which is the highest degree of temeritie that can be imagined.

Lastely. In practice of virtue and exercise of good life the spirit of the
preachers and teachers of the English Religion now professed, is disagreeable
to the practice and exercise of virtue of the doctors and pastors of the Roman
Church in all succeding times since the first foundation of the same: a great
part of whose writings ar replenished with rules and driections for prayer and
contemplation, mortification of the body and inordinate passions of the soul,
by fasting, use of hereclothes, disciplines, prostrations, acts of obedience,
and resignation of their wills to the command of superiors, vows of
obedience, chastity and poverty, monastical institutions, solitary life of
monks, Anachorites and Ermites, and other Religious conuentuall men and women,
and finally with all other meames which possible could be imagined as either
necessary or convenient for the exercise of a religious and virtuous course of
life. None of all which or at the least very little is to be found in the
books of the teachers of the English Religion, or heard in their public
sermons or private exhortations.

And although it is true that some of them as it seems moved with emulation of
the Romanists (who even in this present age labor much in that kind as our
adversaries cannot deny) have published some thing in the nature of prayer or
devotion, yet is it in such a manner as they reduce the exercise of a Christian
life either to the exercise of faith only or chiefly, excluding or at the
least not inducing to external works of Penance and mortification of the
body. Or else they proceed in such a new fashion (as being only suitable to
their own new Principles of faith and manners) as never was heard in any age
of the world before the days of Luther.

That which does particularly appear in a certain new work lately published
and entitled. The handmaid of piety, which nevertheless has not one dram
of true piety or one spark of that spirit which has reigned in the visible
Church since the the first plantation of Christian Religion: which book not
obstansting it has the name of a Mannuall yet is it not conform either to the
Mannuall of S. Augustine, or any other ever used hitherto among Christian
people: but forged in the anthors own proper brain, and consisting of such
froathie spitle as fell beside the pulpit when he made his preach^ngs, full of
pedantik terms and affectation as the word supparte and others, and as the
very first words of the title plainly testify which are in Latin to make it
more admired: and dedicated to a falsely supposed Patroness of his religion.
whom although the world did win for a small time, yet it never perverted her
noble and constant judgment, who now has returned to her ancient home with
far greater glory unto it then it lost by her absence.

And that which is more intolerable the profane minister with his feruor and
devotion he now and then mingleth a lie or a paradox. As page 617. where
speaking of the fast of lent, he affirms. That those of his profession place
not Religion or the substance of Gods worship in fasting or feasting, as says
she the Papist, do. And in the page following he says in his own name and in
the name of his brother Purita^s. We hold not fasting to be a work pleasing to
God. And yet in his page 609. he grautes that to fast religiously at some time
is Gods commandment. And page 611. that lent fast is partly religious and
ordered by the Church for religious ends and binds the conscience mediately:
which larring positions of this grand Doctor I am not able to reco^cile. And
yet for a part of twelfe days devotion he puts the payment of tithes,
which indeed is a devotion far more profitable to himself then pleasing to
others. All which particulars do manifestly declare that whatsoever apish
imitation these fellows use in writing some few books of devotion and
prayer, yet is their spirit quite contrary to the common spirit of the
universal Church, and wholely vertigenous, extrauagant, and peculiar to
themselves.

And to this the like may be added of their Church service and form of
administration of Sacraments as may be seem in their book of common prayer,
which, as it manifest to them that read it, does notably differ from all the
Lyturgies and public forms of prayers and pastorals that ever were used in
the Church before the preachings of Luther, not only in the manner of
administrating the Sacraments and service, but also in some substantial points
of them both. Their being not any mention in the book of common prayer of
either anointing with Chrisme in Baptism, or of extreme vnctio^ of the sick:
nor of consecrario^ of the Eucharist, or absolute command to receive it, but
only with condition or rather with express order or precept that there be a
whole congregation that is some persons more disposed to communicate with the
infirm party besides himself, and that otherwise he must have patience and
take his journey to an other world without his Viaticum. Neither is it there
ordained directly that that the Communicants shall use the homologesis, or
Sacrament of Penance consisting of contrition, confession, and satisfaction as
a necessary preparation to the communion, except only in in case they find
their consciences troubled with any weighty matter, and that when they are at
the point of death: contenting themselves at all other times of their receiving
the Lords supper with a general confession only; made either by one of the
communicants, or by the ministerin the name of the rest. The contrary of all
which particulars are nevertheless found in all Lythurgies, Missals, and
Directories of former times, in all places of the Christian world, as may be
seen in the Ierarchie of Saint Denis, and the Roman Order, of which even the
newer of the twoe was practiced in the Church at the least 80^ years ago.

But now to conclude having passed throu all the several kinds of
universality that can be imagined with an exact discussion of the nature and
properties of the same, and finding none of them in the Religion now publicly
professed in England: and besides this, it being certain both according to the
doctrine of the ancient Doctors of the Church and modern divines that the
word Catholic is the same that universal, Lib. 2. c. 38.
general or common as is apparent by S. Augustins responsion to Petilianus
where he says that the name Caetholicu^ signifies secundu^ totum: Lib. 2. c. 2.
as also against the epistle of Gaudentius. Teacing that the Church therefore is
called Catholic of the Greek word because it is exte^ded throu' the whole
world. This I say being infallibly true, it does by necessary conclusion
follow of the premises that the English Relilion is not Catholic, but a
private conuenticle or Congregation in which true faith is not found, and in
which by consequence no salvation can be hoped or expected for such as
obstinately seperating themselves from the unity and universality of the most
universally received Religion live and die in it. And this may suffice for the
declaration and confirmation of my first ptincipall argument or demonstration.

THE SECOND PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT.
MY second principal argument which proves the falsitie of the English
Religion is this. That Religion is false which has a false or at the least an
uncertain Canon of scripture.

But the Religion of England has a false or at the least an uncertain Canon
of scripture.

Ergo the Religion of England is a false Religion. The Mayor doubtless is
granted by our adversaries. The minor which they deny, I prove. And for the
proof of it I suppose that the true Canon of scripture can not be known but
by some external authority or means distinct from it self whether it be the
judgment of every faithful person assisted by the divine spirit as many of
our adversaries affirm, or whether it be the declaration of the Church
assisted by divine inspiration of which it shall be disputed in an other place.
More over these means or this authority must be infallible otherwise it can
engender no such certainetie in the minds of the believers touching the matter
in question, but they would remain still doubtful of the same. And the reason
for which this external authority is thus required to the knowledge of the
just quantity of the written word of God and for the distinguishing of the
true parts of the same from the Apochrypha and doubtful, is because that as
the scriptures do in no places affirm and declare them selves either in
totallitie (...) part reflectiuely to be the true word of God delivered by
Christ and his Apostles, so they much less auerre these determinate books or
parts of the Bible and no other, to be the only true authentical scriptures.

This being now supposed as certain on both sides, I prove the foresaie minor
to wit that the Church of England has a false, or at least an uncertain Canon
of scripture by an other silogisme in this manner.

That Canon of scripture is false, or at the least uncertain which disagreeth
from all other Canons that ever were in any Christian Church before the days
of Luther.

But the Canon of scripture used now in England is disagreeable to all other
Canons that ever were in any Christian Church before the days of Luther.

Ergo the Canon of scripture used now in the Church of England is a false or
at the least an uncertain Canon.

In the Mayor of this silogisme there is no doubt. The minor I prove by
comparing the Canon of England with those several Canons which according to
the diversity of opinions in that point among some of the ancient Fathers in
former times, ar found to be three in number, howbeit of those three there was
one which was ever more commonly received then the rest, to wit that Canon
which in the Councels of Florence and Trent was defined to be infallible and is
that same which at this present the Roman Church uses rejecting all other for
Apochryphall and inauthenticall.

Now the first of those three Canons or Orders of divine volumes consists of
those books of which there was never any doubt made but that they be sacred
and Canonical. The second order is of those of which there has b^n always
doubt neither hitherto ar received by the Church, to wit, the third and fourth
books of Esdras and the third of the Machabies. The third order contains
those books of which there has been doubt in former times. Which are Hester.
Judith Tobias. The two first books of the Machabies. The Ecclesiasticus, the
book of wisdom and the Prophet Baruch. Which belong to the old Testament. And
in the new Testament the epistle to the Hebrews. The epistles of S. James and
Jude, the second of S. Peter, and the second and third of S. John with his
Apochalips.

Now that the Canon of the Church of England does not agree with the first
order consisting of such books of scripture as of which no doubt has been ever
made, it is most evident for that in their Canon of the old Testament is
included the book of Hester of which doubt has been made by Melito, Nazianzene
and S. Athanasius: and in the new Testament they admit the epistle to the
Hebrews and the Apochalips (to omit others) of which nevertheless doubt has been made, of the first by origin, and of the second by Eusebius, which was also
quite omitted by Cyrill and Nazia^zene, nay and that which is more to this
purpose, Luther did expressly reject them both with the epistle of S. James.

Touching the second Order or Canon, there is no need to bring any proof, in
regard it is well know that the Church of England does not admit the two
first books of Machabeis, and much less do they allow of the third as
likewise neither they allow the third and fourth of Esdras.

Lastely touching the third and last Order, they admit Hester into their Canon
as by the sixth article of their new Creed does appear, but they reject Judith,
Tobie, the Machabeis, Ecclesiasticus, and the Prophet Baruch: And yet as I said
before Hester was doubted of at the least by Melito, Nazianzene and S.
Athanasius: and contrarily of the book of Judith it is confessed by saint
Hierome that it is read to have been numbered or counted among the holy
scriptures by the Council of Nyce, which book not obstanding is expresselie
excluded out of the English Canon of the old testament as the foresaid article
of theirs does declare.

And in the Canon of the new Testament they put the epistle of S. James and
Jude, the second and of saint Peter, the second and third of saint John and
his Apocalips, which yet in former times by some authors of accounte have been
either quite excluded from the Canon, or at the least held for doubtful. So we
see that our English professors differ and dissent in their Canon from all the
several Canons of scripture that either they themselves or any other can
imagine to have been in the world in any former age, yea even from the Lutherans
them selves whom nevertheless they use to rank among their brothers at the
least whenever they make for their purpose and advantage against the
Romanists.

Further more if perhaps they say they have the true Canon of scripture because
they have the same books of the old Testament which the Jews by infallible
authority held for Canonical: And the same books of the new Testament which
the Roman Church houldes for Canonical. Then I demand of them first how they
come to know that their Canon is just the same with that of the Jews neither
more nor less, and how they be assured that the ancient Jews who only and
not the modern Jews, were the true people of God and by him guided and ruled,
by what infallible means I say do they know that those Jews excluded those
same books of the old Testament, out of their Canon as Apochripha which the
Roman Church holds for Canonical? To wit Judith, Tobie, Sapience,
Ecclesiasticus, Machabies. And I urge them thus. Either they had that knowledge
from the Jews themselves, or from the scriptures themselves, or by tradition
of the Church, or by the spirit or inspiration of God. From the Jews they
could not possible have certain knowledge of the cano^. For that although their
authority were once infallible in receiving the true Canon of scripture either
in itself or by the assistance and providence of God: yet after the coming of
Christ and his establiment of the Evangelical law, that infallible authority
of theirs ceased, and so by them no infallible knowledge of Canonical
scriptures could possible be from thence derived unto the Church of Christ: Nay
neither was it suitable to the dignity of Christ and his Church that the Jews
should interpose their authority in that nature.

Secondly from the scriptures themselves it is clear our adversaries could
not receive infallible knowledge of the Canon of the old Testament in the
manner before declared, because neither the old nor new scripture does testify
that those only books are Canonical which the English Catalogue includes:
neiter do the writers of the new Testament cite places out of those books
only, but also out of either all or at the least some of those which
peculiarly the Roman Church aloweth for Canonical, and which I have above
rehearsed. For Ester is cited by saint Augustine in his epistle to Edicia:
Epist. 199.
and before him by saint Chrysostom in his third Homily to the people of
Antioch, and Origin defendes for Canonical even those last chapters of Hester
of which some doubt has been made even by some Romanists. Baruch is most
frequentlie cited by the ancient Fathers under the name of Hieremte, as
particularly may be known by saint Augustine in his 18. book of the City
and 33. chapter. Yea and diverse of the Fathers produce Baruch by name. Cyp. l.
2. contra Iud. cap. 5.
As saint Cyprian who cites those words of his. Hic est Deus noster etc. And
in his sermon upon our Lords prayer he cites the Epistle of Hieremie contained
in the last chapter of Baruch: Lib. 10. cont. Julian.
saint Cyrill also cites the same Baruch by name. The like do S. Hilarie in
the preface of his commentary upon the psalms saint Clement Alexandrine,
Lib. 2. Pedag. cap. 3. E^seb. lib. 6. demonst. Euang. cap. 19.
saint Ambrose in his first book of faith and second chapter. Eusebius cites
his third chapter, adding that, nothing ought to be added to divine vo^^^s. By
which words he declares Baruch to be divine scripture; as also does
Theodoretus in express words and commenteth upon the whole book. Sermon. de
ele^m.
Tobie is cited and approved for scripture in which the holy Ghost does speak
by saint Cyprian. Saint Ambrose calls the same book Prophetical scripture.
Inl. de Tob cap. 1.
The like do saint Basil in his oration of avarice, and saint Augustine in
his book entitled speculum, Judith is mentioned by the great Council of Nyce
as saint Hierome testifies. D^uin. nom. c 4.
Sap^ence or the book of wisdom is alleged by ancient S. Denis, and the
same do Melito in his epistle to Ones. saint Cyprian, Lib. cont. Julian.
in his book of the habit of Virgens, and saint Cyrill calls it divine
scripture, saint Augustine also calls it Canonical in his first book of
Predest. the 14. chap. Ecclesiasticus is cited by Clement Alexandrine, saint
Cyprian, Epiphanius, and Ambrose as divine Oracles, and saint Augustine calls
it divine scripture produceing those words: Altiorate ne quaesieris. In lib.
ad Oros. contra Priscil.
The same Fathers with Gregory Nazianzene cite the Machabies as appears by
saint Cyprian in his exhortation to Martyrdom the 11. chapter. Nazianzene in
his oration of the Machabies, saint Ambrose in his second book of Job the
10.11. and 12. chapters saint Isidore in his sixth book. First cap. saint
Augustine in two several places alowes of these books and often times cites
them. As in his 18. book of the city of God. Chapter 36. and in his second
book against the epistles of Gaudentius, and chapter 2.3. All which is a
conuincent argument that those books out of which the foresaid places are
cited in this manner and by these ancient and grave renowned Doctors are
Canonical and of as great authority as the rest how beit they might otherwise
have been unknow for such to the Jews both in regard that as the law of
Christ is more perfect then the old law was, so it ought in reason to have
more perfect knowledge of the word of God as likewise it has of diverse other
mysteries of faith, then the professors of that law had: as also for that as
in the law of Christ there are other matters of faith, manners, and
government then were in the time of the old testament, so might it be
necessary for the greater confirmation of Christ's doctrine and discipline that
some of those books which were not known to the Jews, should be declared to
Christians for Canonical scripture.

Thirdly from tradition of the Church the English Canon could not possible
receive authority, first because the maintainers of it deny the authority of
the visible Church to be infallible, and consequently it is clear the Canon
of scripture cannot have sufficient warrant from it. Secondly. It is most
apparent that the Primative Church was not certain in some of the first ages
whether all the books of the old Testament which the English Church houldes
for Canonical were in the Canon of the Jews, which uncertainty still
remained until the Council of Carthage celebrated in S. Austins time
determined the matter. Against which English Canon are also authentical
witnesses Mileto, Cham. lib. (...) Camone cap. 14. ^. 1.
S. Athanasius and Nazianzene of which at the least the two latter authors to
wit Athanasius and Nazianzene (even according to the grant of Daniell Chamier
one of our most peremptory adversaries) do omit the book of Hester in the
computation of their Canon of the old testament whom although Chamier does
reprehend for the same, Cham. lib. 5. de Can. c. 14 n. 1.
yet is he so impudent and vn^nindefull, that in another place of the same
book he numbreth both the same Athanasius and Nazianzene as defenders of his
own Canon which nevertheless includes Hester as the English Cano^doth. Cap.
11. n. 4.
So that it remains most evident there was no such certain tradition in the
Primative Church as could make the English Canon as they now use it,
infallible, the whole Church at that time having determined nothing iudicially
about that particular: and consequently it is manifestly false for the
professors of the English Religion to affirm that they have the tradition of
the Church for proof of their Canon. To which may be added that our
adversaries in maintaining their Canon by tradition, they should proceed
preposterouslie in respect that whereas in all other points of doctrine they
relect the authority of traditions as insufficient and contratie to the word
of God, or at the least as uncertain: yet in this particular of the Canonical
scripture which is one of the most important points of all other, and upon
which all the rest of Christian faith dependes, they would offer to rely upon
the same.

And although our adversaries, and particularly Daniell Chamier, do labor eue^
till they sweat in proving their Canon to be the same with the Canon of the
ancient Jews, yet does not one of the ^^thors that have writ since the matter
was determined by the Council of Carthage, exclude from the Christian Canon
those books which the Roman Church did receive for Canonical ever since that
Council. And how beit S. Hierome is he that of all antiquity does fauore our
adversaries in this particular point: yet besides that he writ before the
matter was determined by Pope Innoce^tius the first and the Council of
Carthage: nevertheless as he does not so defend the Canon of the Jews but
that he admits of the authority of the first Council of Nyce in receiving
the book of Hester in to the Canon of the Christian Church: so doubtless if
he had lived in succeeding times, he would have done the same touching the rest
of the books of the old Testament which were afterward added by the foresaid
Council of Carthage and other since that time. To omit that the professors of
the pretended reformation neither proceed consequenter to their own Principles
if in establishing of their Canon they follow the authority of Fathers whom
they make account to be subject to error and deceit, neither do they deal
securely in casting the maine foundation of their faith upon the authority of
one only man, especially considering that S. Hierome out of an inordinate
opinion and affection he had to Joseph the Jew, not only in this but also in
some other points of doctrinesuffered himself to be carried somat' beyond the
limits of reason though never beyond the limits of the true Catholic faith. And
yet I here desire the reader to be advertised that this which I have uttered
touching the agreement of the English Canon of S. Hierome, is only by way of
concessiue supposition in favor of my antagonists with whom I dispute even
upon terms of this liberal grant: persuading my self nevertheless that the
Canon of the old Testament which S. Hierome rehearses in his Prologue, is not
taken by him for the only true authentical Canon of the Christian Church, but
only his meaning is to relate the number of those books of the ancient
scripture according to the most common opinion of the Jews of his time. That
which is manifestely co^uinced by the authority of the same S. Hierome in the
like case touching certain chapters of the Prophet Daniel, of which although in
his preface to that book he once affirmed them not to be of authentical
authority, yet afterward in his second Apology against Rufinus, he
declares his meaning in the foresaid Prologue was not to signify his opinion
in that particular, but only to relate the doctrine or saying of the Jews.
Now this being so, it is plainly certain that our adversaries of all the
ancient Fathers have not as much as one S. Hierome undoubtedly in favor of
their Canon, but only the authority of the Jews.

Secondly our adversaries cannot have recourse to the spirit for the
approbatio^ of the Cano^ of the old Testament: first because if they rely upon
this, they ought to prove it before to be the true spirit of God which moves
them to believe their Canon to be of infallible authority, and that either by
some other Canonical scripture, or by some other conuincent reason or motive
as by miracles, sanctity, or by other external testimony, otherwise they
them selves can neither safely rely upon it, nor we can justly give credit
unto it, for that it is manifestly declared in the authentical scriptures them
selves that there be evil spirits as well as good by which men ar moved, yea
and that same spirit which seems good is often times discovered and known to
be the spirit of the common animie who the more easily and coulerably to
deceive and delude, does transform him self in to an Angel of leight
notobstanding he is darkness it self.

Finally that spirit by which the defenders of the Judicial cano^ (for so our
adversaries suppose theirs to be) prove the authority of it, is contrary as
well in other points of faith as in this, to the spirit of the most visible and
flourishing Church in all ages, neither is it common and general and
conformable to the greater part of Christians, but extrauagant, singular,
private and particular to them selves as I have showed in my precedent
argument, and consequently it can not be the spirit of God, but an ill spirit,
a familiar, a be in a box, to which who soever does obey and follow will
doubtless be led at the length in to a laberinth of errors where he will perish
without redemption.

More over for as much as concerns the Canon of the new Testament, for our
adversaries to say they have it from us, is a very pore shift, and considering
the want of authority which they hold to be in our Church as being in their
opinion of no credit in other matters of faith, yea plainly erroneous and
Antichristian, it does thence manifestly follow upon their Principles that
their Canon can not possible have infallible certainetie in regard that the
whole ground on which such certainty depend this supposed to be the
authority of our Church which they neuerthesse peremptorily auerre not only
to besubiect to error, but also to have already erred in diverse points of
faith. From whence and from the rest which has been inculcated in the proof
of the minor of my second silogisme the consequence both of it and my first
silogisme does inauoydably follow to wit that the Religion of England is
plainly false as not having any certain and infallible rule whereby to know
the true Canonical scriptures of the old and new Testament.

THE THIRD PRINGIPAL ARGUMENT.
MY third principal argument against the English Religion I frame in this
manner.

That Religion is false which has not the true interpretation and sense of
scriptures.

But the English Religion has not the true interpretation and fense of
scriptures.

Ergo the English Religion is a false Religion. The mayor can not be denied by
our adversaries. The minor in which only the question consists, I prove
first ont of their translations of the Bible in to the English tongue of which
that most famous defender of the new English faith King James of great Britanie
in the public assembly had by his authority as Hampton Court the year 1604.
sitting as President Cathedratically pronounced that he had never yet seen
any Bible (qnid adhuc egemus testibus) reightly translated into the English
tongue. And although the same King James for that reason caused an other new
translation to be made in which some thing which were in the former editions
are amended and corrected, yet I find by one of them which I have my self
printed at london the year 1608. that it contains still diverse of the same
errors which were in the first tra^slations of which the King himself did
complain: as appears by the second chapter of the Acts. Verse. 27.
Where for the words, non relinques animam meam in inferno, that is in plain
English: thou will not leave my soul in hell, the foresaid Bible has thou
will not leave my soul in grave, using also the very same translation upon
the words of the 16. psalm, out of which they are cited by the author of the
Acts of the Apostles. That which is done by the professors of the English
Religion for no other end then that those who please may freely defend their
negative positio^ of the real descent of Christ in to hell (as Beza
ingenuonsly confesses in his annotation upon this place) the affirmative of
which nevertheless the Apostolical Creed does expressly teach us. In which
passage our adversaries show both extreme great partiallitie and great
impudency in regard that in the Greek text which they them selves most
superstitiously profess to follow, has the word (...) in this place which by
the septuagint is put commonly for the word sheol in Hebrew, and as it is also
by them selves translated in other places of scripture, and as S. Hierome does
in like manner turn the same word (...) in to infernus in Latin, in English
hell, throu' the whole Bible.

And although Daniell Chamier in his book upon Christ's descent in to hell not
daring to deem this manner of translation to have been made by the septuagint
and S. Hierome, Tom. 2. Pantrat. l. 5. cap 5.
does somat^ murmr and grumble at them for the same as if they did often
times detorte the Greek and Latin words to the sense of the Hebrew with
neglect of the property of the language: yet this is but one Doctors opinion,
and if he had more to allege of his own sect it were no great matter, for
that by the common judgment of the whole Christian world those twoe sacred
Translaters far surpass in knowledge of the scriptures all the Doctors that
ever were or will be of his faction though they esteem themselves never so wise
and learned.

And suppose the Septuagint and S. Hierome do in deed frequently follow the
sense rather then the property of the Hebrewe words, what offense commit they
in that? Nay then what commendation do they not rather deserve? in respect it
is a generally known rule of the best Tra^slators not to tie themselves to the
words but to the sense. As on the contrary what reprehe^sion is not due to
the^ whose chief study is with neglect of that sense which those ancient
expositors who have gone before them both in time, virtue, and learning, to
invent and violently draw new interpretations of Scripture out of the
Etymologies and first imposition of words according to the verbal sound and
not according to the common acception of them, which yet is the common practice
of the Nouelists of these our days as is most apparent even by that particular
passage which I have in hand that is the place above cited in the second
chapter of the Acts, thou will not leave my soul in hell. Lib. 5. de descen.
Christ. c. ^. n.
About which Daniel Chamier having turned himself every way, and tossed all
the dictionaries he could find for his purpose, yet could he not find one
author more ancient then John Calvin his great master and first founder of his
Religion, who teaches that either in this place or in any other place of
scripture according to the proper and ordinary use, the word (...) does
signify the body carcass, or life, and the word (...) the grave as he and
his fellow partners will needs have the^ to signify, and as they usually
translate them in their Bibles, excepting only Arias Montanus if he be truly
cited by Chamier, In Idiotismis He^ braeis.
how be it himself grauntes that in the cited place of the 16. psalm the
Hebrewe words in steed of which the Septuagint puts (...) and (...), do
signify the soul and hell which is all that we can desire. For if the Hebrewe
text be the fountain of all true translations as all the Nouelists will have
it, neither can their translation of this place be true nor ours false, for
that theirs according to our adversary Chamiers, dissents from the Hebrewe and
ours agrees.

Diverse other places of the English Nouelists corrupted translations might be
produced, as that of the 26. of S. Mathewe, where for Hymno dicto in the Latin
and hymnizantes in the Greek, they translate, when they had sung a psalm. In
the 28. of the Acts: overseers for Bishops. And in the ninte chapter of the
first to the Corinthians. Have we not power to lead about a wife, where they
put a wife for a woman as if all woman were wives. And in the first chapter of
the second epistle of S. Peter, they leave out the words, by good works,
which nevertheless are found in diverse Greek copies, yea and Calvin himself
grauntes that if they be not expressed in the text, yet they are subintellected
or understood.

And to this may be added by the way that although it is not ill of it self to
translate the Bible into vulgar languages if it be done truly and sincerely
and by the authority of the Church or her chief Pastor, yet by these few
examples we may learn how greatly the word of God is abused by false
translations, and how far the truth is preiudicated by such partial
proceeding, supposing that all the foresaid places as they are by them turned
in to the English tongue do fauore diverse points of their new doctrine whereas
on the contrary they expressly make against it if they be truly tra^flated.
And particularly those words of their sixtineth psalm, thou will not leave my
soul in grave, are so absurdely contrary to sense and so extrauaga^t in the
phrase and manner of speech as the like is not to be found in any translation
that ever was extant ever since the scriptures were first published in vulgar
tongues even among the pretended reformers themselves. But now this may suffice
for examples of false translation of the scriptures used by our adversaries,
and for the first proof of the Minor of my silogisme above framed.

Which I further prove secondly for as much as concerns the exposition of the
scriptures, because the manner of interpretation which both our English
professors and also the rest of the pretensiue reformers use, is scarce in any
thing coformable to the exposition of the ancient Fathers and Doctors of the
precedent ages as it ought to be according to the rule of S. Augustine in his
second book against Julian where in the beginning he faith the Christian people
ought rather to adhere to the Fathers then unto those which teach the
contrary: and toward the end of the same book he adds thus: that which
they (to wit the Fathers) found in the church they hold, that which they had
from their Fathers, they delivered to their sons. But our new interpreters
as they are in their positions, so are they in their expositions of the word
of God singular and full of affected apish imitation of the Jewish glosses:
neither do they scarce ever allege any other expositions or constructions
then those of Rabbi Solomon. Rabbi Kimchi, Aben Ezra and the rest of that
rabble. Notobstanding they cannot be ignorant, but that some of them were
either Scribes, Phariseis, or Saduceis if not all, of whom it may be presumed
with reason that they frame their expositions more commonly according to their
own false traditions the^ according to the true sense and meaning of the law.
By which proceeding the reader may consider how impossible it is for our
adversaries to satisfy their consciences in the delivery of such doctrine as
dependes upon so uncertain and fayleable grou^des; and in how miserable a case
that flock is which has his instruction in matters of salvation from such
Pastors as partly out of the writings of those profane Jews and enemies of
Christ, partly also by their own industry coin new sense out of the old,
obstruse, decayed significations of words which they find in pedantik
humanists Lexico^s and Dictonaries, neglecting the common current acceptions
and Ecclesiastical use of the same. By all which the conclusion of my proposed
argument does appear true and sound which is that the Professors of the
English faith have no certain and infallible interpretation and sense of the
divine scriptures, and consequently their Religion must needs be void of
truth.

THE FOVRTH PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT.
MY fourth principal argument I propou^d in the form following.

That Religion is false which has a false rule of faith.

But the English Religion has a false rule of faith.

Ergo the English Religion is a false Religion.

The mayor is not denied by our adversaries and therefore it needs no proof:
And it they should be so refractorie as to deny it: It is co^uinced by the
very leight of natural reason which teaches that the ruled follows the
nature of the rule so that it cannot possible be streighter then the rule it
self, no more then a boton can be round if the moulde be square.

Now that the English Religion has a false rule of faith which is the Minor of
my silogisme, I demonstrate thus by an other silogisme.

The Religion of England has for the rule of faith scriptures interpreted and
expounded by every particular member of their Church.

But the scriptures interpreted and expounded by every particular member of
their Church, is a false rule of faith.

Therefore the Religion of England has a false rule of faith.

That the scriptures expounded by every particular member of the Church is a
false rule of faith I evidently prove, because the true rule of faith is of it
own nature certain, common, and known to all believers, not private,
unknown, and certain to him only who has it. Otherwise no man can
certainly and infallibly know what it is except himself and consequently
none but he only can follow it: whereas the true rule of faith is such as
every one is bound to know and embrace upon peril of his salvation.

Secondly I prove that this English rule is false because it is subject to
error the maintainers of themselves confessing that no man can infallibly
interpreter the scriptures so that his expositions even in the greatest matters
of faith be undoubtedly true and certain in such sort as he can infallibly
persuade others that they are according to that sense which the holy Ghost
intended when he dictated them to the divine writers. For confirmation of which
I further add that our adversaries commonly teach that not only every
particular and private person may err in faith but also the whole number of
Bishops (...) Prelates of their Church assembled in a Synod or Council. Out of
which it is infallibly consequent that their rule of faith is not certain
either in it self, or at the least not to others: neither can others lawfully
follow it for the same reason that it is unknown unto them and subject to
error, and deceipte. Besides although the professors of the English Religion
should deny this same, 1. Cor. 2.
yet is it convinced and concluded by scripture it self saying, for what man
knows the things of a man but the spirit of man which is in him?

Thirdly if the English rule of faith were not false to wit scriptures
expounded by every member of the Church, it would thence necessarily follow
that there were no need of prechers and teachers in the Church of England to
propose and declare the word of God un the people, because every particular
man and woman that can read the Bible can sufficiently understand and expound
it them selves at the least for as much as concerns their salvation. And for
the ignorant sort which can not read, it were also in vain for them to have
preachers in regard they can propose unto them no other rule of faith then
scriptures expounded by their own particular spirit, which nevertheless eue^
according to their own doctrine is fallible and subject to error and by
consequence obledgeth no man to follow it but rather to auoy de it by all
means possible.

Fourthly I prove the same, because this rule of our adversaries serves no man's
turn but his own who has it, and that but unto wardely, neither does it
obledge others to believe it, neither is it one and the same, but as many as
there be people in the whole Church of England all which is most absurd and
repugnant to the nature of true faith which ought to be one in all the
Christian world, certain, in fallible, and binding all persons to embrace it
by divine precept and command which nevertheless could not be such if the
rule which it follows were not one without all multipllcation and division.
And to this may be joy ned for conclusion of the proof of this argument that
which I have delivered touching our adversaries false translation and erroneous
manner of interpretation of divine scriptures.

THE FIFTH PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT.
MY fifth principal argument in order to prove the falsitie of the English
Religion is this.

That Religion is false which has not a perpetual and disinterrupted
succession of Bishops and Priests derived from the Apostles.

But the English Religion has not a perpetual disinterrupted succession of
Bishops and Priests derived from the Apostles.

Ergo the English Religion is a false Religion.

The mayor proposition is so certain and clear that our adversaries a the
least all or most of those of the Protestant faith can not deny it. And if
perpaps any of them or any other Sectaries should be so frontlesse and
imprudent as to deny it, they are manifestly convinced by those places of
scripture which prove the perpetuity of the government of the Church of
Christ in general. As in the fourth to the Ephesians, where it is affirmed
that Christ gave to his Church Pastors and doctors that is Bishops and Priests
to the consummation of the saints unto the word of the ministerit and that to
rule, govern, and feed the flock of the Church until the co^summation of the
world. And the Prophet David in his 47. psalm faith that God founded his city
(that is the Church as S. Augustine expoundes it) for ever. And surely if God
established his, Church for ever as truly according to this he did: it can
never want Bishops and Priests for that if it should want them, then it were no
more a true Church according to the saying S. Hierome. Where there is no Priest
there is no Church. In which word sacerdos Priest, Contra Luciferianos.
he includes also Bishops as being cheefely Priests, and those without whom
no Priests can be made of ordained. saint Cyprian also in the second epistle
of his fourth book toward the end teaches that the true Church cannot stand
without Bishops and Priests. And saint Augustine says plainly that it is the
succession of Priests (by Priests he means also Bishops) which keeps him in
the Church. Contra part. Donat.
And in his epistle 165. and upon the psalm against Donatus, he chalengeth his
adversaries the Donatists to number the Priests which have been even from the
seat of saint Peter, and see who has succeeded each other in that Order of
Fathers, in which Order of Fathers (meaning the Popes whose names he specifiech
in his epistle to Generosus even from S. Peter to Anastasius who was Pope in
his time) because he finds not one Donatist, therefore he concludes that
their Religion is false and not to be followed. So that the reader may
plainly perceive by these authorities (of which kind many more might be
alleged if need were and the place did admit any larger discourse) that the
ancient Fathers held the want of succession of Bishops and Priests for a common
and infallible argument of the falsitie of that Religion which not obstanding
whatsoever other colores of truth it might seem to have by pretext of
scripture or otherwise, was destitute of the same. That which is sufficient for
the proof of the mator of my Sylogisme in case any of the defenders of the
English Religion should have the face to deny it.

Wherefore hence I pass to the minor to wit that the English Religion has not
a continual and disinterrupted succession of Priests and Bishops derined from
the Apostles, which I prove first: Because it is certain by the testimony of
all writers of those ages that from the time of saint Gregory Pope of Rome
who sent saint Augustine the Monk into England to plant the then professed
Roman faith there were no other Priests or Bishops but such as had their
authority derived from the Roman seat, and such Bishops only as were ordained
and consecrated with the same matter and form of Order and with Unction,
Miter, Crosier and other such ornaments and ceremonies as the Church of Rome
actuallie uses at this day. Nay nor yet in the time of Wiclif or since is
there any mention in any history, writer or record either Catholic or
Protestant of any kind of either Bishops, Priests, or ordination of the same,
used in England before the Reign of Edward the sixth. Wherefore although we
should grant the Patrons of the English faith that their Religion was
professed in England in more ancient times as they pretend (the contrary of
which nevertheless is as certain as it is certain there is no mention of it
in any more ancienthistorie or record then the days of Edward the sixth) yet
is it manifest that it has had a notable interruption in the succession of
Bishops and Priests to wit for the space of 800. years at the least even
according to the confession of our adversaries: And consequently it is evident
that it has not a continual and disinterrupted succession of Bishops and
Priests derived from the Apostles.

Secondly I prove there is no coutinuall and disinterrupted succession of
Bishops and Priests in the English Religion derived from the Apostles. Because
although we should admit that in the time of King Edward by reason of the
immediate succession of his new Religion to the Religion of his Father Henry
the 8. at whose death we do not deny but there were true Bishops and Priests
left who might perhaps for as much as concerns the essence of the Order
(thou' not lawfully) either have consecrated others, or they themselves have
served in the Church according to the new form of the same, (which fact I
need not here dispute but omit as vngranted) Nevertheless it is certain and
granted by both parties that even in this there was another plain
interruption, and that within a very short time upon the succession of Queen
Marie to the Crown in here brothers place, who exauthorizing all that new
brood of Bishops and Priests, reestablished the Roman Religion in the same
form and with such Prelates and Priests as had been in the Realm in all former
times, as not only all written histories and records, but also some eye
witnesses who then did see the change, and being yet alive can at this day
testify the same. So that even in this particular manner the new Religion of
England has suffered an interruption in the succession of Bishops and Priests.

Thirdly. I prove the same minor proposition because at the time of the last
change of Religion at the death of Queen Marie, all the Roman Bishops were
deposed and deprived of their dignities excepting only the Archbishop of
Canterbury whose seat was vacant by his death; and others were put in their
places by the authority of Queen Elizabeth and here parleament: who
nevertheless were such as did not agree either in vocation, mission, or
Ordination with their predecessors: as appears particularly in Master Parker
who not obstanding he was the chief of the^ as being Archbishop of Caterburie
and primate, yet is he confessed by Master Mason a minister and professed
defender of the new clargie of England, to have been the first of 70.
Archbishops since fainct Augustine that received Orders and consecration without
the Popes Bulls, and the rest of the ceremomes used in the ordination of all
those 70. that preceded him. And the same he might have said of the new
Bishops of these days comparing them with all that long space of time.

The which difference in the manner of consecration although it were alone
sufficient according to the doctrine of the Roman Church to exclude the
ordained from true succession as being at the least schismatic in itself
and contrary to the practice of ancient times even before the days of saint
Augustine the Apostle of our country, as both the writings of the ancient
Fathers (which I will produce in an other place) and also some ancient
authentical histories or records of the Realm do testify: Yet even
according to the Principles of the English Religion there is an essential
defect found in the same, in regard that Master Barlowe, who^s by the
foresaid defender of the English ministry reported to have been the
consecrator of Parker, had never any consecration himself. Or if he had any,
he was made Bishop, (if not Priest also) only according to the form divised
in the time of Edward the Sixth, and confirmed by Queen Elizabeth the eight
year of her Reign. That which I suppose Master Mason himself does not deny.
Which form as it is set in their Rituall or manner of making Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons, printed at London 1607. as being neither found in scripture, nor
conformable to any other form of consecration ever used in any Christian
Church since the Christian Religion was founded, the persons consecrated or
ordained according to the tenor of it, cannot possible betrue Bishops priests
or Deacons, and by necessary consequence neither Master Parker nor any other
of his fellow Bishops could receive true Order or consecration as being
ordained both by one that had no power of Order himself, nor yet did cousecrate
them with the same essential matter and form which has been commonly used in
the Christian world in ancient ages: But only according to that new form
which as Master Mason confesses being devised and authorized only by King
Edward and Queen Elizabeth who had no power to alter the form of Ordination
practiced generally in the Christian Church before their times, could not
possible give the^ Apostolical power of ordination, and consequently they had
no continual disinterrupted succession in that nature derived from the
Apostles, which is that by the minor of my argument I intend to convince.

Peradventure our adversaries will reply and say. First that the whole
essential matter and form of Order consisting of imposition of hands and the
words, receive the holy Ghost were applied to Master Parker and the rest of
the ministry in their ordination, and the Roman rites or Ceremonies only
omitted, which neither make nor mar the substance of the Order.

But to this I reioine first that this does not clear Master Barlowes
consecration of which there being no authentical register or record extant,
he cannot be esteemed to have been a true Bishop, and consequenthe he had no
power to consecrate others, and so Master Parker supposing he had the true
matter and form of Episcopal Order applied unto him, yet could he not be true
Bishop for want of authority in his ordainer, who could not possible give that
he had not himself.

Secondly. It is false that those words, receive the holy Ghost, with
imposition of hands only, are the whole matter and form of consecration of
Bishops, for that neither scripture, Councels, nor Fathers, nor the ancient
practice of the Church, do teach the same: but rather on the contrary, it is
manifest that another form of Ordination was used in the primative Church as
does appear) to omit other authorities) by the words of saint Ambrose upon
the 13. chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. Where expounding those words,
Ieiunantes, imponentesque ^is manies: He says that imposition of hands is
mystical words, where with the person elected is confirmed to this work
receiving authority (his conscience bearing him witness) that he may be bold
in our Lords name to offer sacrifice to God. By which words, the reader may
plainly perceive that in saint Ambroses time there was more required in the
matter and form of consecration of Bishops then imposition of hands only
with those words receive the holy Ghost, to wit some other words by which
the person ordained receives power to offer Sacrifice, which words
nevertheless were never used in the consecration either of Master Parker or
any other of the Bishops or ministers of the English Church as by them
themselves is confessed who by necessary sequel must also needs confess the
same Bishops and ministers to be essentiallie defective and voy de of true
ordination.

Thirdly according to the story of the Nagges head tavern as it was related
by Master Neale some time professor of languages in Oxford, who was a man that
both by reason of his ancient years, as also for the means he had to know the
truth as being employed about this same business by Bishop Boner then deposed
and prisoner, ought in all reason to be credited: Master Parker was not
ordained at all by Master Barlowe but by Master Scorie who by reason he had she
name of Bishop during the Reign of King Enwarde, (and because Master Kitching
being a true Bishop though then deposed with the rest of the Catholic Bishops of
Queens Mary's time, partly out of scruple of conscience, and partly for
fear of Excommunication menaced toward him by Bishop Bonner, refused to
consecrate the new superintendents,) undertook the work in the foresaid
Tavern where a meeting was made to that purpose, and Scorie causing them all
to kneel, he took the Bible and laid it upon them bidding them take
authority to preach the word of God sincerely, who without any more words
or deeds all escaped Bishops of the new fashion: And Master Parker having
either better fortune or better favor then the rest, for his parce he got the
Archbishoprie of Canterbury and the primacie of England. The others being
seized according to their several lots and election of the Queen.

Whence it clearelie appears that by which soever of these forms Master
Parker and his fellows were consecrated, yet they have no true Canonical
ordination neither according to the scriptures nor according to the ancient
practice of the Church, and by unavoidable consequence they have no true
succession derived from the Apostles, but as an ancient Father says of other
heretics of his time, so we may say of them, that succeeding to none they are
prodigiouslie borne of themselves. Cypr. (...). de simpl. Prael.
And saint Cyprian of others says in like manner that without any law of
ordination they prefer themselves, and assume the name of Bishops not having
the Episcopate coferred upon them by any. Both which sentences may very
aptelie be applied to our nominall Bishops of England who as I have declared
receive their Bishopries without law full authority.

Yet notobstanding all this which has been said, perhaps some of them will
insiste further in their own defense and say that althou' they have no
personal succession, yet they have doctrinall succession from the Apostles in
respect they maintain the same doctrine which the Apostles and their
successors in the primative Church preached and tought.

To which I anser that this is the common evasion of those only who defend
the inuisibilitie of the Church, but it does nothing avail those who pretend
to defend the continual visibilitie of the same as they do against whom I
now dispute. Secondly whosoever maintains this, It is but a miere shif or
cloak wherewith to cover the nakedness of their newborn Religion, which if it
had not falselie disguised itself with the Apostolical robes it could not for
shame have appeared in public by reason of the great deformity it has in
doctrine.

Thirdly. If the English Religion has succession of doctrine and not of
persons, where was it from the fifth or sixth hundredth year till the days of
Luther. Was it in men or in beasts? In beasts they will not say for the
avoiding of their own shame. And if it was in men, then show us where, and
when those men lived, otherwise we will give no more credit unto our
adversaries words then we do when they cry out and say it is Apostolical
doctrine but proves it not, as ordinarily they do both in their books and
preachings.

Peradventure they will say their Religion was neither in men nor beasts but in
books they mean in the books of the old and new Testament. But this is yet
more false and absurd then the rest, for that doctrine inuolued in books can
not make succession, succession being and order or series of things imediately
following one and other, which order doctrine meluded in papers or partchement
can not possible have as being one and the same object of faith, and quite
indistinguible in it self, and can be only intentionally or obiectiuely
distinguished or divided by the persons in which as an accident it is subjected
and received. Besides. All the time that those fantastikes imagine their
doctrine to have been continually successiue in the Bible, if they them selves
or at least other their companions in sect were not, as there confess, how can
they know at this present that any such books or doctrine was then in the
world when themselves were not. If they say they have that knowledge from the
Romanists, then say I why do they not also give credit unto the same Romanists
in other matters of faith, as particularly in that point of the number of
Canonical scriptures, and of the true sense of them as they are applied to
every Controversy betwixt us and them during that long space in which there
were none of their Religion extant, among all which points of difference there
is none more important then that of the infallible knowledge of those divine
books (which the Romanists had in their custody all the time of their
adversaries non existence) to be the only true authentical word of God. So
that for these men to affirm they have all ways had a doctrinall succession
from the Apostles without a personal is a miere Puritanicall dream, and a
Chymericall conceit and paradox of their own forgeing, an Idea of Plato
abstracted only by distracted minds.

Finally for proof that the English Religion has no true Priests and Bishops
I add, that our Savior ordained his Apostles not only to preach his word but
also to remit sins and offer sacrifice according to those two texts of
scripture: (...). 22.
whose sins you shall remit they shall be remitted. And do this in my
remembrance. Wherefore our adversaries the profess^rs of the new Religion of
England who have not all this specified in the form of their ordination cannot
possible according to divine institution and truth of the scriptures, be
judged to receive either of the twoe powers when they are created Ministers,
and so they cannot in ^^is other respect truly be called Priests, and Bishop
but only by force and virtue of that sophistical and ridiculous conse^^ence,
they have benefices and Bishoprikes, therefore they are Priests and Bishops. And
yet besides this, I have one other argument. So urgent and forcible against our
adversaries that it alone is sufficient to convince even the most obstinate
judgments that the pre^^^iuereformed clergy of England bath no authority
power, or ^ud^^sdiction to preach or reach the Gospel, and consequently that
they are not true Pr^^sts nor Bishops. I lay the fou^datio^ of my argument upon
the whole streinth of ^at divine Principle of S. Paul. Quomodoprae^^abum nisi
mittantur? how shall they preach ^^cept they be sent? which as being an
express ^^xt of scripture is received by both parties for ^infallible truth.
I contriue my silogisme in ^is manner.

Those who have no mission want authority ^ower, or Jurisdiction to preach and
teach the Gospel.

But the new English clergy has no mission.

Ergo the new English clergy wantes ^uthoritie, power or Jurisdiction to
preach ^ne ^otpell.

The mayor proposition is so plainly con^ained in scripture that I am
persuaded even the most pure Caluinist or Caluinian Puritan dares not
absolutely deny it.

For proof of the minor I suppose and agree with my adversaries that there are
two only genders or kinds of mission. Viz. Either ordinary or
exterordinarie. This agreement so supposed I argue thus

If the professors of the English Religion have mission it is either ordinary,
or exterordinarie.

But the professors of the English Religion have neither ordinary, nor
extraordinary mission.

Ergo the professors of the English Religion have no mission.

That the professors of the English Religion have no extraordinary missio^ I
need not labor^ to prove in regard I know, excepting thos^ of the Puritan
faction, extraordinary missio^ is not maintained by our adversaries. And i^
any either Puritan Anabaptist, or other sectarie will auerre is mission to
beexterordinari^ the^ for the same reason that he defendes it to b^
extraordinary he is bound to prove it by extraordinary means, he must shoue
his paten^ or letters of ordination brought from heaven and firmed with the
broad seal of miracles, prophecy, or other manifestly divine testimony, or
else it is to be rejected as counterfeit evidence, forged to deceive and cosen
simple and ignorant people with evident prejudice to their eternal salvation.
And so leaving this as a fictitions of the founders or inuenters of it void of
both divine and humanane authority neither giueing any satisfaction to mature
and solid judgments, I pass to the ordinary mission which our aduersaties
most commonly pretend, and will manifestly prove they ardestitute of it,
because as exterordinarie mission can not be obtained but by exterordinarie
means, so neither can ordinary mission be had but by ordinary means. Now
this supposed I proceed thus in form of argument.

Ordina^^e nussion can be received of those only who (...) by conti^^all
succession of Bishops and Priests from the Apostles.

But the professors of the English Religion ^ue not received their mission from
those ^ho have continual succession of Bishops and Priests from the Apostles.

Ergo the professors of the English Religion ^aue no ordinary mission.

The minor proposition in which alone the difference and controversy may seem
to stand if ^nie there be, I prove because those who succed from the Apostles in
the foresaid manner and of whom the professors of the English faith against
whom I now dispute, confess they received their mission if any they have, ar
neither from the Popes of Rome, or such others as derived their authority from
that seat.

But now it is a fact clearer them the clear light of the clearest day that
neither the Pope himself, nor any other who derived his authority from him
did ever confer any mission, power, inrisdiction, or authority to preach
teach, or minister sacraments upon any of the professors of the English
Religion: that which ^demonstrate by this dilemma. For all those who can be
imagined to have given any mission to the professors of the English faith at
the time of change of Religion, either they were Roman Catholics at that
present, or not if they still remained Roman Catholic then is it infallibly
certain they would never have offered to give mission are power to them whom
they held for heretics an enemies to their own faith and profession: yea and if
they had attempted any such matter, their attempt had be void in regard the
Roman Church by virtu^ of her Ecclesiastical canons anulles all such collation
of iurisdictionarie power to heretics And according to this it is herby
apparently concluded that the professors of the English Religion neither one
way nor other could possible receive any mission, power or authority to
preach the Gospel or minister sacrament after their manner at their first
admittance to the ministry.

It is true Doctor Cranmer from whom the Bishops and ministers of the English
Religion allege they immediately had their mission, is supposed to have had the
caracter of Episcopal and Presbyterall Order, yet supposing by reason of his
separation from the faith and obedience of the Roman Church (from which he
received all the power of order and jurisdiction they pretend) he was deprived
of jurisdiction: I ingenuously confess my judgment is convinced by force of
argument that they cannot possible have any ordinary mission of Episcopal or
Preistlie function, for the preaching of the word of God and administration of
the Sacraments either according to divine or Ecclesiastical institution.

And I know indeed son of our adversaries ^ot many months paste after a
long time of deliberation hoping to satisfy their own restesse minds an
others in this their most important business produced certain new found
registers for testimony of their predecessors ordination. But in my judgment
the authority of the^ is so suspicious that they ought not to move any
prudent understanding. And if they were authentical why did they conceile them
till this present time in which no man urged them in any special manner to
bring them to leight? Whereas yet they have so often since the change of
religion demanded ben to show their letters of ordination in other occasions.

Moreover, suppose their registers were never so true and authentical: yet
since they do not testify that their ordination was in matter, form, and
authority of the ordinators perpetually used in the Catholic Church, they
neither satisfy us in our demand, nor yet are they sufficient warrant either
to the consciences of those that use them, or those who rely upon the effect
of them in their reception of the Sacraments. Neither surely are those
registers of any greater force for justification of the ordination of our
English pretensiue reformed clergy then the writings of an vsurarie contract
justify an usurer in his recept of money in that unlawful manner which they
declare. And so I conclude both for this and the reasons above alleged and
particularly for their most apparent defect of vocation, and mission, that
their case is very considerable yea and lamentable both in respect of
themselves, and in regard of those whose souls are by their own misfortune
committed to their charge, and government. And this may now suffice for the
declaration and confirmation of this my fifth chief and general argument which
concludes the faith of England to be an erroneous and false Religion.

THE SIXTH PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT.
MY sixth principal argument is this.

That Religion is false which has no true adoration or worship of God proper
to him only.

But the English Religion has no adoration nor worship of God proper to him
only.

Ergo the Religion of England is a false religion.

The Mayor must of necessity be granted by the professors of the English
Reigno^ least otherwise they destroy and amhilate the very life of all
Religion which is the worship or adoration of one only God with such honor as
is proper and due unto him as both divine faith and leight of nature do teach:
yea and doutlesse the truth of this proposition is contained in the first
commandment which does not only exclude the plurality of Gods and their
adoration, but also includes that worship which is due and proper to one only
God and not to any creature or oother entitie whatsoever. And for this cause
God himself in other places co^maundes: Dominum Deum tuum adorabis and illi
soli seruies. Thou shall adore thy Lord thy God and serve him only. And,
honore^ meu^ alteri non dabo. I will not give my honor to another: where God
calls it his own honor because there is a kind of honor due and proper unto
him only and not common to others. And now this precept being grounded in the
law of nature, the natural instinct of reason does likewise suggest the same,
so that no rational creature can deny it.

Now the Minor of my silogisme in which all or the greatest part of the
difficulty consists I prove it by an other silogisme in this manner.

That Religion has no true adoration or worship of God which has no exercise
of a true and proper sacrifice or oblation.

But the Religion of England has no exercise of a true and proper sacrifice or
oblation.

Ergo the Religion of England has no true adoration or worship of God.

The Mayor of the latter silogisme in case it should be denied by our
adversaries, and prove first by scripture and then by testimonies of ancient
Fathers to wit that true Religion cannot stand without true and proper worship
of God by frequent use or exercise of a true and proper sacrifice.

And although this might be sufficiently proved by a general induction drawn
not only from the practice of the universal world in all ages as well in the
professors of the true God of which the old Testament gives evidence as also
from the false religion of all sorts of Idolaters, Gentiles and Paganes. Yet
because I know the Nouelists out of their presumption and impudency will not
stick to deny the consequence I will omit to persecute this manner of
argument, and only insist in those authorities of Scripture and doctors of the
Church which immediately convince the same to be true also in our Christian
Religion of the new Testament.

My first proof of scripture I take out of some certain places of the
Prophets, which notobstanding they seem to belong to the old testament yet in
realitie they appertain to the new as being predictions of the state of
Religion in the same. To which purpose the Prophecy of Malachie is most plain
for the future practice of a proper and general sacrifice in the new
Testament, affirming. That the Lord of Hosts says this. I have no will in you
(meaning the Priests of the old Testament) nor will I receive an offering at
your hands for from therising of the sun to the setting my name is great
among the Gentiles, and in euerieplace is there Sacrificed and offered unto my
name a clean oblation, because my name is great among nations. Thus far the
Prophet. Now the words and circumstances of this place so plainly demonstrate
that the Prophet Malachie speaks of some kind of sacrifice which was not the^
or ever before used in any time or place but was to be used in the new
testament, that our adversaries least they should be convinced of error in
their Religion for that it has no external oblation to God at all, they find
no other refuge then to feign that the Prophet speaks only of the
metaphorical sacrifice of prayer and good works. Which interpretation of
theirs although it were never so true (as it is most clearly false) yet is it
little suitable to other positions and practice at least of Caluinists, Vid.
Dan. Cham.
as that good works are sins in themselves yea and damnable if God did not
mercifully perdon them: and that they are not pleasing to God. Nay prayer and
good works are so little and couldly practiced among them all that if there were
no other sacrifice in the world, doubtless God almighty should, by them
especially, be very couldly served.

How be it that clear it is out of the related text that Malachie treates not
of any vnpropersacrifice. First because it is evident that he prophesied of
such a future sacrifice as should be more proper and pleasing to God then
thesacrifices offered in the time of the old law which nevertheless being
properly and truly sacrifices although in other respects defective, that which
should succeed unto them could not in comparison of them be esteemed more
proper and pleasing sacrifice to God then they were, if truly and properly it
had not ben a sacrifice.

Secondly. The Hebrewe text with the clean oblation joins incense which
conjunction of both those rites together does manifestly show the Prophecy to
be of an external rite and oblation to God, and consequently a proper
sacrifice.

Thirdly. It is plain by the words of the text that the Prophet speaks of
such an external ritie as mayntaines the greatness of Gods name even among
Gentiles and infidels, which prayer and good works only cannot effect by
reason they are neither so apparent and known among the^, nor so public a
testimony of the majesty of God as sacrifice is without which his divine
renown, magnificence and soueraintie would be extinguished in people in
process of time.

Fourthly true and proper sacrifice is an essential part of a true and proper
Religion and a maine distinctiue sign from un proper and false Religions, and
of such a one the Prophet treates as is both different from the sacrifice of
the Gentiles yea and of the Jews them selves: now prayer and works ar common
to every Religion every one according to their several manner.

And to this declaration of the text I add the expesitions of all those
ancient Fathers who have applied this place of malachie to the Eucharist as to
the only and proper sacrifice of the new Testament there being not one extant
in all antiquity who has delivered any contrary sense of it, or that has
explicated it of prayers or works alone. S. Justin martyr who lived within the
compass of the second age, speaks plainly to this purpose citing the words
of the prophet, Dialogo c^ Tryphone.
in which he affirms that malachie foretells a new oblation to succeed the
sacrifice of the Jews, saying. De hostijs quae ipsi (deo) a nobis Gentibus
vbique offeruntur id est Eucharistiae, tum predicit cum ait, a nobis nomen suum
gloria affici vobis autem pollui. Which is this in English. God by Malachye the
Prophet (for in this manner Justin speaks in his precedent words) does
prophecy of the hoastes or sacrifices which are in every place offered by us
Gentiles (meaning converted Gentiles) that is of the bread of the Eucharist, and
likewise of the cup of the Encharist, when he says that his name is glorified
by us but polluted by you, meaning the Priests of the old Testament.

Now since this renowned martyr both particularly declares that the Prophet
Malachies prediction is meante of the Eucharist, and supposing he further
affirms the same Eucharist to have been offered by the Christian Priests of his
time in all places, yea and that thereby the name of God is glorified: it is
extreme want of judgment or rather plain madness in our adversaries, to deny
that the Prophet speaks of a true and proper sacrifice.

And althou the same Father in his precedent lines does insinuate that the
Eucharist is a gratiarumaction or rendering of thanks for diverse benefits
received by Christians at the hands of God as the creation of the world and
the memory of their Redemption and other of that nature: yet those or the like
causes of the offering of the Eucharist do no more diminish the nature of a
true sacrifice included in the same, then hostia pacifica the hoaste of
pacification did cease to be a true oblation or sacrifice because it was
offered by way of thanks giving for benefits received, or else to obtain new
favors and graces of God almighty. By which also the frivolous evasion of
kemntitius and other Nouellists appears to be void of force while they
endeavor to illude the streingth of this most pregnant testimony for the
proof of the Euchariticall sacrifice of the law of Christ, for that reason to
wit because the author of the same testimony in the same place affirms our
savior to have commanded the Eucharist to be celebrated in remembrance of his
death an passion, as if the one and the other could not be included in the same
action either according to divine scripture or natural reason, neither of
which is found repugnant but rather most conformable and agreeing. Lib. 4.
cap. 32. Eum qui est ex creatura pa nem accepit, and gratias egit dicens. Hoc
est corpus meum and salicem similiter qui est ex ca crentura qua est secundum
nos suum sanguinem confessus est and noui Testamenti nouam docuit oblationem.
Quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens offert Deo in vniuerso mundo ei
quialimenta nobis prastat primitias suorum munerum de quo and in duodectm
Prophetis sic Malachias prasignauit. Lib. 4. cap. 32.


S. Irenaeus in like manner being one of the same standing testifies that the
Prophet Malachie did presignifie the Eucharist in those same words which he
cites and says. That bread which is made of a creature he (that is Christ)
took and gave thanks saying this is my body. And likewise the chalis which
is of a creature which is according to us, confessed it to be his own blood,
and taught us a new oblation of the new Testament, which the Church receiving
from the Apostles offers to God in the universal world to him who gives us for
nourishment the primicies of first fruits of his gifts, of which Malachie one
of the twelve Prophets did so presignifie. Lhaue no pleasure in you. And that
saint Irenaeus speaks not of an improper Sacrifice as Kemnitius and some
other sectaries do cauille, is most evident by other words of his toward
the end of the same chapter, where he adds that the former people that is the
Jews shall cease to offer to God: Yet nevertheless that in every place a
pure Sacrifice is offerred unto him, and his name glorified among the Gentiles.

More over in his 24. chapter he says that one kind of sacrifice is reproved
by God meaning the sacrifice of the Jews, to which the sacrifice the of Church
succeedes. By which discourse and particularly by those words which he says
of Christ, noui Testamenti nouam docuit oblatiouem, that is he taught a new
oblation of the new Testament, it is clearelie convinced that this holy
Father by the word oblation could not possible understand alms as our
adversaries contendes because although it be in some sort an oblation to God,
yet is it neither new nor proper to the new Testament only, but common to
both old and new as the scripture it self does most frequently teach and
inculcate. More over this place of saint Irenaeus did so far convince the
judgment of Calvin in this particular that like the devils which according to
the relation of the Evangelist, acknowledged Christ against their wills, he
confesses him to have expounded it of the Mass just as the Romanists of
later times use to interpret and apply it, and has no other refuge then
plainly to contradict the foresaid ancient Fathers exposition in this
impudent and audatious manner sayeing of the Roman divines. When they object
the place of Malachie to be understood so (of the Sacrifice of the Mass) by
Irenaeus, and the offering of Melchisedech in like manner by Athanasius,
Ambrose, Augustine, and Arnobius: it is breefelie ansered, that the same writers
do in other places also interpret bread the body of Christ, but so
ridiculouslie that reason and truth constreineth us to dissent from them: thus
this saucie Nouellist, speaks of his betters, whose pride and bouldnes the
Centurists imitate treating this same point in their third Centurie, as if they
were the only men in the world borne for reason, and not those rather who
immediately succeeding the Apostles did infinitlie surpass them both in
virtue and knowledge of Christian doctrine and true sense of Gods divine word
and institution.

Tertullian declaring the sacrifice prophesied by Malachie against Marcion,
Sacrificium purum gloria, scilicet, relatio and benedictio, and laus, and hymni
etc. Lib. 3. Contra Marc.
alluding to his words says thus. In every place sacrifice is offerred to my
name, and pure sacrifice viz. of glory relation and benediction, praise and
hymns etc. In which words the entyre tenor of the Mass is breefelie
described thou' soma't obscurelie as the custom of this author is. By relation
he understands the Epistle and Gospel, by benediction the consecration, by
praise and himnes the glory, prayers and other spiritual passages contained
in that mystery. And although this author in an other place of this same book
does affirm the place of Malachie to be understood of sacrifice of prayer,
and in his book against the Jews, of spiritual not of terrene sacrifices:
Yet in neither place does he deny it to be truly interpreted of the Eucharist:
But in the first place he calls it a spiritual sacrifice because it was
instituted by the divine spirit and not by humane invention: as also for that
it is not ministered in that carnal and gross manner in which the Jewish
sacrifices were ministered by effusion of blood, by fire and knife, but by
benediction and consecration as such a pure oblation ought to be handled and
celebrated. In the second place Tertullian only interprets one part of the
sentence of Malachie to wit the word incense which is in the Hebrewe text, of
prayer offered to God. But the other words, oblatio munda, he expoundes of the
sacrifice of the Mass, in the place now cited. To which if we add an other
place of the same author in which he speaks of the Eucharisticall sacrifice,
De Oratione cap. 14.
all tergiuersation must necessarily cease in any indifferent mind touching
this authors true meaning. For thus he says. Will not thy station be more
solemn if thou assiste at Gods Altar. Having received and reserved the body
of our Lord, both the one and the other is safe, the participation of the
sacrifice, and the execution of the office. By which words it is manifest that
ancient Tertullian could never deny the Sacrament of the Altar to be a proper
oblation who here so absolutely affirms it to be a sacrifice celebrated in
the Altar.

S. Cyprian living within the third hundredth year in like manner cites the
same place of Malachie in the 16. chapter of his book against the Jews to
prove that which he puts in the title of the same chapter, to wit that the
ancient sacrifice is euacuated and a new on celebrated, which new sacrifice
can be no other the^ the Eucharist, which only and no other is new in respect
of the sacrifices of the old Testament.

The next in Order and age is Eusebius who living in the beginning of the 400.
Lib. 1. demonst. Euang. cap. vlt.
year interprets this place of Malachie in the same sense, sayeing. We
therefore sacrifice unto the most high God a sacrifice of laud: We sacrifice a
sacrifice Deo plenum, full of God: And bringing an odoriferous sent with it,
and a sacred or Sacrosainct sacrifice, we sacrifice after a new manner a pure
or clean sacrifice according to the new Testament. Where it is plain that
Eusebius applies the place of Malachie to the solemn sacrifice of the Mass,
which is performed by prayer and oblation and therefore called by his a
sacrifice of laud, and which only can be truly said to be full of God by
reason of Christ whom it contains, and which only can be called truly the
sacrifice of the new Testament, and affirmed to be offered in a new fashion.
All which particular and special circumstances no man of judgment or common
sense can apply to prayer or alms only.

S. Chrysostom in his commentary of the psalm 95. having cited the words of
Malachie adds his exposition of them saying. Behold how copiouslie and
clearlie he (Malachie) has declared the mystical table which is the incruent
or unbloody hoaste: and furthermore he calls the sacred prayers which are
offered after the hoaste, pure Thymiame or odoriferous perfume. Comment. in
Malac.
Thus S. Chry sostome of the Prophet Malachie.

S. Hierome although by the word incense he understands prayer, yet the word
pure ohlation he commonly interprets to be the oblation of the Eucharist: as
also did saint Irenaeus before him in the place cited. Which exposition is as
fit for the Romanists as can be imagined supposing the Mass includes both
prayer and pure oblation or sacrifice. And the same I say of saint Augustine
and who soever else of the Fathers interprets the foresaid word in^ense in the
Prophecy of Malachie in that manner.

Moreover saint Augustine both in his 18. Cap. 35. Cap. 23.
and 19. book of the City uses the same place of Malachie for proof of the
cessation of the Jewish sacrifices and exercise of the Christian sacrifice by
the Priests of Christ according to the Order of Melchisadech, for thus he
discourses against the Jews in the first of the two places cited. I have no
will in ye nor offering will I receive at your hand. For from the rising of
the sun to the setting my name is great among the Gentiles: and in every
place shall be sacrificed, and a pure oblation is offerred to my name. This
sacrifice since we see it offered in all places from the rising of the sun to
the setting by the sacerdoce or Priest function of Christ according to the
Order of Melchisadech: but the sacrifice of the Jews (to whom it is said, I
have no pleasure in you) they cannot deny to have ceased, why do they yet
expect an other Christ since this which they read prophesied and see
accomplished could not be fulfilled but by him. It is true saint Augustine
speaks not so plain in the second place as here he does, nevertheless he
alludes to the same place and in the same sense.

Theodoret also comments upon this same place of Malachie in the same sense and
in most plain words, teaching that according to the prediction of Malachie in
lieu of irrational hoastes is now sacrificed an immaculate lamb.

Lastelie saint Damacen and Rupert agree to Dam. de fide lib. 4. cap. 14.
Rupertus in Com. Malach.
the rest in the exposition of the place of Malachie whose words although most
plain I do not cite because I know the Nouellists m^st commonly reject
their authority as not being writers of the first five hundredth years. In
which how little reason they have to proceed in that manner with learned and
grave authors I will not now discuss: only this I say that I doubt not but
any indifferent reader will absolutely condemn them of extreme temeritie in
offering to resist such an army of old soldiers as I have here placed in
battill array to feight against them. And hence I pass to the producing of
testimonies of the new Testament for proof of a proper sacrifice in the law
of Christ.

Christ in the fourth chapter of the Euangell of saint John, affirms that
the hour is now come when true adorers shall adore the eternal Father in
spirit and truth: and neither in the mountain of Samaria nor in Jerusalem as
he said immediately before: Garizim
in which place the word adore signifies to sacrifice as in diverse other
places of scripture it does and particularly the 22. of Genesis where Abraham
preparing to sacrifice is son says to his servants. Expect here with the
ass I and the boy making haste thither after we have adored will return unto
you. Where it is clear that the word adore cannot signify any other
adoration then that which Abraham was about, that is the sacrifice of his
son. The likeplace you have John the 12. of certain Gentiles who ascended in
to the temple to adore in the feast day. And the Eunuch come to adore in
Jerusalem the 8. of the Acts. In comment. Malach. 1.
In fine according to the judgment of Theodoret and Rupert, this place of
saint John alludes to that other of Malachie above cited and discussed and
has the like sense. Which perhaps these two authors received from Eusebius who
affirms the same in his first book of his Euang. demonst. and sixth chapter.
and thence it is consequent that this place is understood of the Eucharist as
the place of the Prophet is, that is in a proper signification of sacrifice.

And other principal proof of a proper sacrifice in the new Testament is
deduced from the institution of the Eucharist the 28. of saint Matthew the 14.
of saint Mark the 22. of S. Luke and the 11. chapter of the first to the
Corinthians, in this manner and form of Sylogisme.

A proper sacrifice is an external oblation of some sensible and permanent
creature consecrated and changed by mystical ryte or Ceremony by a lawful
Priest, for the a knowledgement of the divine majesty and supreme power and
dominion of God.

But Christ in his last supper made such an oblation when he instituted the
Eucharist.

Ergo Christ in his laft supper offered a proper sacrifice when he instituted
the Eucharist.

In the mayor there is no controversy betwixt us and our adversaries as I
suppose, or at the least I persuade my self they will not much stand upon it.
The minor I prove by an other Sylogisme.

Christ in his last supper being a lawful Priest according to the Order of
Melchisadech offered his own body and blood to his eternal Father under the
sensible forms of bread and wine commanding his Apostles to do the same.

But this is a true and proper sacrifice.

Therefore Christ offered and commanded his Apostles to offer a true and
proper sacrifice in his last supper.

The mayor of this latter Sylogisme I prove because except Christ had not
offered in this manner in his last supper he had never performed the function
of a true Priest according to the Order of Melchisadec. Neither had he
properly verified and fulfilled the figure of the Pasquall lamb. Nor could he
have truly affirmed his blood in his last supper to be the blood of the new
testament if he had not offered then both body and blood in sacrifice.

Moreover the Euanglist S. Luke relating the institution of the Eucharist under
the form of wine affirms our savior to have used these words. This chalis is
the new Testament in my blood which is shed for you. Iuc. 22.
In which words both the word shed which is the present tense, as also the
relative which: which (according to the Greek text which our adversaries most
esteem and follow) must of necessity have relation to the present sheding of
the cup, or chalis: and like wise those words for you, manifestly conclude
that our savior did then in that solemn action of his last supper, sacrifice
his blood: and the same is of his body of which the same S. Luke says in the
present tense which is given for you: yea I say all the circumstances plainly
demonstrate to all vnobstinate minds that Christ did truly and properly
sacrifice his body and blood when he instituted and delivered the Eucharist to
his Apostles with an express commandment to do the same. And hence it
necessarily follows that tho Eucharist is a true and proper sacrifice of the
new Testament, as often as it is celebrated by Priests according to the
institution and precept of Christ.

An other argument to prove that the Eucharist is a proper sacrifice I frame
thus.

That is a proper sacrifice in which a victime or hoaste is received as a thing
offered of given for the receivers in honor of God.

But in the Eucharist the victime or host of Christ's body and blood is
received as a thing offered or given for the receivers in honor of God.

Ergo the Eucharist is a proper sacrifice.

In the mayor there is no doubt as I conceive. The Minor in which the
controversy stands. I prove first because S. Luke affirms Christ to have
said. This is my body which is given for you. Cap 22.
And the like he says of the chalis in the manner above declared according to
the phrase of the Greek text. And according to this sense of the Evangelist S.
Augustine in the 9. book and 13. chapters of his confessions, relates that his
mother day lie served the Altar in which she did know the holy victime or
hoaste to be dispensed or ministered. Now that there is oblation in the
Eucharist, the very nature of the matter does plainly argue, for that where a
victime or hoaste is, there of necessity must be immolation as being
correlatiues the one in respect of the other, yea and immolation necessarily
includes oblatio^ for the sanie reason of correlation: and moreover both these
are included in consecration which by the power of Gods word makes present
the body and blood of Christ in such a manner as they may be decently and
conveniently consummated by participation of the Sacrament.

And in this sort the Eucharist included all those conditions which a proper
sacrifice even according to our adversaries at least the Lutherans, ought to
have. First the substance of the hoaste or victim. Secondly a certain ryte or
action of offering prescribed by God, which is the celebration of the Eucharist
instituted by Christ in the form described by the Evangelists and the Apostle
S. Paul. 1. Cor. 1.
Thirdly the person offering deputed by God to that function which is the
Priest. Fourthly. The same intention of offering or the same end which is
appointed by God in his word that is to the honor of God and for the
representation of the passion of Christ. Neither is it necessary that all
these particulars be contained in the Institution in express words, but it is
sufficient that they be included in it in some intelligible manner. Otherwises
it follows that the passion of Christ had been no true and proper sacrifice
because he used not the words offer or sacrifice when he suffered upon the
Cross, which sequel I am persuaded our adversaries will not grant.

Diverse other places of scripture ar alleged by Bellarmin and other divines
for the proof of this point, but for the auoy dance of prolixitie, I will
conclude with that only of the 13. chapter of the Acts. Where for the
ordination of S. Paul and S. Bernabe it is related that the Apostles were
ministing to our lord and fasting. Now to minister to our lord can not consist
either in prayer only, or in singing uf psalms, which needed no Kind of
ministration more then opening their mouths and hearts: where as yet the word
ministere does necessarily include some external ryte more the^ that as the
Greek word (...) does clearly denote, and signify. And therefore Erasmus a
great fauorit of the Nouellists doubted not plainly to translate, for the
words ministantibus Domino, sacrificeing to God.

To the authority of scriptures, I will here add such testimonies of ancient
Fathers as I have not yet cited, and such as being within the compass of the
five privative ages clearly testify the Eucharist to be a sacrifice S. Cyprian
says thus, who is more Priest Dei summi of the chief God the our Lord Jesus
Christ, Lib 2. ep. 3.
who offered sacrifice to God the Father and offered that same which
Melchisedech offered to wit bread and wine, that is his body and blood. Which
words ar so plain that they forced the Centurists to confess of this Father.
That he affirmed the Priest to perform the office of Christ, and offer
sacrifice to God the Father. Now if according to S. Cyprian the Priest
performs the office of Christ and offers sacrifice as the Centurians confess
of S. Centur. 3. col. 83.
Cyprian doubtless it is no other but the Eucharist which he offers. Vice
Christi fungi. -- Magdeburg. Centur. 3. or 4.


The glorious martyr S. Hypotelicus in his oration of Antichrist, introduces
Christ saying to the Prests of he new Testament in the day of Judgment. come
you. Rashops and Priest who daily immolatedor facrificed my pretions body and
blood in the world.

S. Ambrose upon the psalm we did se (says he) the Paince of Priests coming
unto us. Wi did se him and hear him offering for us his blood. Let us Priests
follow him that we may offer sacrifice unto him for although we be infirm or
weak in merit, yet ar we honorable in sacrifice, for although Christ does not at
the least as they conceive, now seem to offer, yet he is offered on earth
when Christ's boilie is offered. Yea and he is manifested to offer in us whose
wordedoth sanctify the sacrifice which is offered.

S. Gregory nyssene in his first oration upon the Resurrection has these
memorable words. For inthat ineffable secret, and to men invisible manner of
sacrifice, by his divine ordinance he does prcoccupate the violent brunt, and
offers him self for us being both victim and oblation, both Priest and lamb
of God. When did this happen? when he exhibited his body to be eaten and his
blood to be drunken by his familiar freindes.

S. Chrysostom in his 24. Hom. 2. in postertorem Epist. ad Tim. Circa fine.
homily upon the first to the Corinthians speaking of Christ says that he
commanded himself to be offered iusteed of brute beasts. And in another
place he speaks thus. The sacred oblation it self whether Peter or Paul, or
of what merit soever the Priest is who offers it, is the same which Christ
himself gave to his disciples, and which now also Priests d^e make, this has
nothing less them that. Why so? because men do not sacrifice this, but Christ
who had consecrated it before.

S. Augustine in diverse places of his works, but most clearly in his second
sermon upon the psalm 33. of our savior says thus in plain terms. He
(Christ) instituted a sacrifice of his body and blood according to the order
of Melchisadech. Nostrum sacrificium non solum Euangelicis sed etiam
Propheticis libris demonstratu^ est.
And conformable to this the same S. Augustine in his 49. epistle affirms the
sacrifice of us Catholic Christians to be demonstrated not only by the
Evangelical but also by the Prophetical books. Also in his 20. chapter of
his 17. books of the City of God: he has most express words to the same
purpose, which because they are somat large and otherwise well known, I omit
them to be viewed by the reader if he please.

S. Leo the great also one of the writers of the fifth age, in his seventh
sermon of the Passion teaches that the sacrifices of the old law yealded or
gave place to the sacrifice of the Eucharist as the shadow to the body. His
words at these. Wherefore to the end that the shadows should yeald to the
body, and images to the presence of verity or truth, the ancient observance
is taken a way with a new sacrament: one hoaste is changed in to an other,
blood does exclude blood, and the legal sestinitie while it is changed, is
fulfilled. And some lines after he adds: but Jesus knowing certainly his
counsel, and being undaunted in the ordinance of has Father, did consu^mate
the old Testament, and instituted the new Pasque for his disciples being set
to eat the mystical supper, when in the Court of Carphas it was consulted
how Christ. should be put to death, he ordaiding the sacrament of his body and
blood did teach in what manner an hoaste was to be offered to God. Epist. 81,
Ad Discorum.
And the same Father in an other place ordaining that more Masses then one be
celebrated in one and the same Church when one does not serve by reason of the
multitude of the pleople, says thus. Our will is that when the solemnity of
afeast has drawn such a multitude of faithful persons together as the Church
can not receive, let then the oblation of the sacrifice be undoubtedly
reiterated or repeated. since it is a thing full of piety and reason that so
often as the Church is filled with new people so often an other following
sacrifice be offered. For it must needs be that some part of the people be
deprived of their devotion if the custom of celebrating one only Mass
observed, they only that come first may offer the sacrifice. Thus this ancient
and grave Father, in whose words oblation and sacrifice of the Mass ar three
several times repeated.

Isichius or Hesichius who lived about the same time has these words
touching the same matter. Lib. 2. in Leuit. c. 8.
Our lord being at supper with his disciples first with the figurative lamb,
afterward offered his own sacrifice. Lib. 2. in Exodus c. 6.


Rupert in like manner speaks of the same sacrifice saying. Our lord being in
the agome of his Passion, first immolated or sacrificed him self to God the
Father with his own proper bands taking bread etc.

Now to conclude, since the testimonies of these Fathers and doctors of the
primative Church ar both most ancient as being all included in the circle of
the first five hundredth years next succeeding to the time of Christ and his
Apostles, Et quidem ipsa^ actione^ canae Dominica and quidem ipsum corpus and
sangui^no in cana a veteribu^ vocari sa^risicium o blationem, hostiam, victimam
etc. Kemnit. page 788.
and also they being so plain and pregnant that a chief adversary was forced
to confess that there is frequent mention in the ancient writers treaking of
the Eucharist, of the words, sacrifice, oblation, hoaste, victim, to which may
be added that the same Fathers in like manner use the words altar and Priest
very commonly, all which are so fit for the purpose of signifiing a true and
proper sacrifice, that no writer either divine or profane could ever invent
other more significant and apt, as it undoubtedly appears for that their
writings manifest that they never used any other words or phrases when they
treated of the nature and use of a proper sacrifice: since this I say is so
apparently true I ernestly request of my reader to consider how void not only
of reason but also of common sense the sectaries of this our present age may
justly be judged and how shamelesly obstinate they be who deny that to be a
true and proper sacrifice which is as plainly affirmed to be such both by
scripture it self and the true Interpreters there of as in words and phrases
they possible could declare to humane sense and understanding. And with this I
conclude the proof of the mayor of my sixth and last argument framed directly
against the English Relion, and hence I pass to the second part of my
treatise in which I will positiuely demonstrate by six other affirmative
arguments the truth of the Roman faith now professed in the greater part of
the Christian world framing and compounding my silogismes of the contradictorie
propositions to those which I have used before for the confutation of the
English faith, in this ensuing manner.

THE SECOND PART OF THE CONVICTION CONtaining the defensive arguments.
-- Adhuc excellentiorem viam vobis demonstro. 1. Cor. 12.31.
ALTHOUGH 'in realitie and rigor of truth especially for the more learned sort of
people, there is no necessity of other proof of the truth of the Roman
Catholic faith, then the disproofe which I have already made of the English
Religion, in regard that there being only their Religion and ours here in
question theirs being false, as I have plainly demonstrated, ours must by
vnauoy dable consequence be true, supposing two contradictories cannot be both
true in one and the same matter or subject: nevertheless for greater
satisfaction of the reader and more clear conuincement of the truth, I will
breefely proceed by positive and affirmative arguments in defense of the Roman
faith and Religion.

THE HRST PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT.
I Propounde my first sylogisme in this form and manner.

That only Religion is true which is truly Catholic.

But the Roman Religion only is truly Catholic.

Therefore the Roman Religion is the only true Religion.

The Mayor needs no proof, as being granted by our adversaries, and being
once admitted with the Minor the other does thence necessarily follow according
to the rules of Logike, which teaches that the premises being, true and truly
disposed, the consequence cannot fail.

The Minor which our Antagonists deny I prone, because the Roman Religion
only has all the conditions required to true Catho^^^^^^e, that is it has
universality of matter or object of faith, it has vniuersallitie of time,
place and persons that profess it: and also it has vniuersallitie of the rule
or reason which directs the professors in the confession and exercise of their
faith, and with all it has unity in the same.

And first that the Roman Religion has vniuersallitie in matter it is most
manifest for that the adversaries them selves can not deny but that it
conprehendeth by faith and believes not only all that is contained in the
scriptures, but also what soever else is proposed by their Church as matter of
faith, comprehended either in the written word of God, or divine traditions
which are the unwritten word of God: which is the most large and compleit
vniuersallitie of faith that can be imagined, to the latitude of which the
object or matter of the English faith comes not near as being by them limited
to the bare scriptures only. As likewise because they deny points which the
Roman Church maintains for matters of faith. As ar Purgatory, prayer to
saints etc.

Secondly. That the Roman Religion has vniuersallitie in the rule or reason
which guides the professors of it in their true belief it is also evident in
regard they neither believe, nor refuse ^o believe any thing as matter of
faith for any other immediate motive or cause then for that it is proposed
unto them by the infallible authority of their Church to be believed or not to
be believed as the word of God which is the prime and formal object of their
faith, which generallitie or universality of rule is so great and solid that
it is inpossible to imagine any more ample and perfect in that nature.

Thirdly. This most constant and unvariable vniuersallitie of the total rule
of faith as it is but one only in it self, so does one only agreeable and
uniform consent of faith necessarily flow and issue out of it as from a most
clear fountain, which is unity in the same faith among all and every one of
the professors of it: supposing that according to true Philosophy, where the
formal object is one, the actions though neuerso many, must of necessity be of
one and the same species or nature, that which in supernatural faith is yet
more certain and apparent by reason the object of it is exceedingly more
uniform and unvariable then any natural object is.

Fourthly. Vniuersallitie of time, place and persons is so manifestly found in
the Roman Religion: that the adversaries them selves confess that there has been ever a visible Roman Religion in the world from the time of the Apostles
even to this present day: which yet if they were so impudent as to deny, all
histories, all writings, all acts and monuncents, even the very stones them
selves in many places would quite convince and confound them. Only one
exception or evasion they have to wit by alledgeing that although the Roman
Church for the space of the five hundredth first years was a true Church yea
and the mother Church of all the rest of the particular Christian Churches,
Praesatmon.
as great King James does ingenuously confess, yet say they has it since
failed in faith, and of the Church of Christ is turned in to the seat of
Antichrist: viz: when Phocas the Emperor gave unto Boniface the third Pope of
that name the title of universal Bishop.

This therefore is our adversaries common allegation for proof of the supposed
defection of the Roman Church in matters of faith, but so feeble frivolous and
false that both they themselves, if they were not very bleareyed, and all
others might as it were in a miroir, or perspectiue glass clearly discover
this by the view of the success of times to be but false colors and painting
whereby to limme their own inexcusable defection from that faith which they
found universally established in the Christian world when their first
founders began to broach their own pretended reformation.

For first I say that if for either Phocas to give or Bonifacius to take the
title of universal Bishop were to revolt or make a defection from the true
faith or Church: then should the whole General Council of Calcedon have
revolted from the true faith by offering to attribute it to Pope Leo, Lib. 47.
Epist. 32.
as saint Gregory does testify: and if this had been so heinous a business as
our adversaries contend, it is temeritie to affirm or imagine that so famous a
Council consisting of so many grave and learned Bishops both Grecians and
Latin and which our adversaries themselves admit for legitimate would ever have
as much as mentioned such a matter.

Secondly. This being a matter of fact which can not be decided by either
scriptures or ancient Fathers or the Primative ages in regard it is known to
have happened after them both: our only judges must be those historians who
have made relation of this passage. Now those relators which are Anastasius
Bibliothecarius, Pulus Diaconus, Ado, and venerable Beda, none of them affirm
either that Phocas did give Boniface any authority of Primacie which he had
not before, nor yet do they or lay any censure upon the one or the other for
that action whatsouer it was.

Thirdly. Certain it is that neither Boniface nor any of his successors ever
either claimed or used in their public acts or writings thetitle of universal
Bishop: but rather all of them humble themselves so far as they ordinarily
style themselves no other then servants of the servants of God: howsoever that
title and style might be offered them or used by others for their greater honor
and authority.

Fourthly. Suppose Pope Boniface and others his successors had accepted and
used the title of universal Bishop I mean in a true sense that is so as
universal Bishop signifies only Bishop or pastor of the universal Church,
what great and odious crime had this ben therefore to deserve the name of
Antichrist, or usurper of the supremicie in the universal Church, since that
both the title of head of the universal Church, and the authority also of the
head was attributed unto precedent Popes long before the time of Phocas,
Iustinianus senior in epist. ad Io. 2. Valentinianus epist. ad Theod. of Prima
seeds a nemine iudicatur. Vid. Council. chal. in Epist. ad Leonem Papam. Vid.
Act. 1. and 3.
as does appear not only by the testimonies of two famous Emperors
Justinian and valentinian, but also by the acts of the Chalcedon Councels that
title is acknowledged in plain terms. In so much that even in those prime
ages it was turned in to a common proverb, that the first seat that is the
Roman seat was to beiudged by noman.

Fiftlie, If Pope Boniface is to be accounted Antichrist by the professors of
the English Religion because they feign him to have usurped the title and
power of universal Bishop, how I pray will their Kings escape the same censure
who have received the title, and power of the head of the English Church from
their predecessor King Henry the 8. who nevertheless had no more power (nay
much less) to confer it upon them then the Emperor Phocas had to declare
the same, or the like to be due to the Pope.

Lastelie. The truth is, that it is not found in any of the foresaid
historiographers or any others of the Roman Religion, that Phocas gave to the
Pope either the power or yet the title of universal Bishop: but they relate
only that Phocas by his imperial edict did declare against the presumption of
John Patriarch of Constantinople that this title of head or Bishop of the
universal Church was proper to the Bishop of Rome but not to him, or any
other: and moreover that it was no way due to the Bishops of the
Constantinopolitan seat or Church. And this only the cited authors relate
without any mention of the words universal Bishop, but only they mention
the words primate, prime seat, and head of the Churches, or the like phrases,
as may be seen in their books. So that this is a gross imposture of the
Nouellists of our time in using the testimonies of these grave authors against
the Popes of Rome by miere cheating, and cousinage: and by this means in steed
of proving their intent they prove nothing else but themselves to be miere
Sycophants and deceivers, to whom supposing they publish to the world the
forsaid supposititious change of Religion made by Pope Boniface in the Roman
Church, without either divine or humane testimony, more then their own
presumed and presumptious authority, no prudent Christian ought to give any
more credit then he gives to the incredulous and impious Jews who calumniate
Christ as a peruerter of the law of God because he established his own most
perfect Church and Religion in lieu of their Ceremonial Synogog. And by this
it is clear that the minor proposition of this my first argument stands still
firm and vnanserable to wit that the Roman Religion only is and ever was
truly Catholic, which is that I here intend to demonstrate.

THE SECOND PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT.
THIS my second argument I reduce to this form of Sylogisme.

That only Religion is true which has the true Canon of scripture.

But the Roman Religion only has the true Canon of scripture.

Therefore the Roman Religion only is the true Religion.

The mayor doubtless is granted as certain by our adversaries, wherefore it
needs no further proof.

The minor which I know they deny, I prove because the Roman Church only
has that same Canon of scripture which has been generally received in the
Church both before and since the time of saint Augustine who in his second
book of Christian doctrine has the very same number and names of diuine^
volumes which at this present the Roman Church uses and in formor ages used
since the time of the Apostles: Cap. 8.
which Canonical books saint Augustine received from the Council of Carthage,
and this Council from Pope Innocent^us the first of that name, who also had
them as descending by tradition of all or at the least, of the chief and
greater part of the Church since they were delivered to it by the Apostles, as
I have more largely declared in the confutation of the English Canon, in which
point I need not insiste any longer because the same arguments which I used
for disproofe of it, abundantelie serve for the proof of the minor proposition
of this my positive argument, to wit that the Roman Church only has that
same Canon of scripture completly and entirely, which has been ever most
generally received in the Christian world.

THE THIRD PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT.
MY third reason for demonstration of the truth of the Roman Religion is this.

That Religion only is true which has the true interpretation and sense of
scripture.

But the Roman Religion only has the true interpretation and sense of
scripture.

Therefore the Roman Religion only is the true Religion.

The mayor of this silogisme is allowed for true and questionless by both
parties. The minor only is in contronersie, for the more clear proof of
which it is to be supposed that both parties agree in this point to wit that,
that Church only has the true infallible interpretation and sense of
scripture which has the infallible assistance of the holy Cost in that
action: although in deed this argreement well considered is only in words, for
not obstanding this it yet further remains Controuersed betwixt us and our
adversaries in whom this special assistance of the divine spirit resides
whether in the Prelates and Pastors of the Church, duly (...) ^^bled or in
e^^^e particular person of the Church. In which controversy nevertheless both
parties yet further accord that whersoeuer the foresaid true inspuration of
God does assist, there only is the true interpretation of the divine word.

Besides this, it is to be supposed that there ar two manners, or two sorts of
means, or ways by which people attain to the true understanding and sense of
the scriptures. The one is by a sole conference of one place of scripture with
another by every private Christian man or woman learned or unlearned by reading
the bare text of the scripture and judging of the sense according to the spirit
which guides them good or bad. The other way or manner of exposition is
performed not by a miere solitary or private conference and comparison of
places of scripture one with another, but both by comparing or collating them
in that manner, and also by an exact view of the expositions of the holy and
learned Fathers or doctors of all former times and succeeding ages even to the
present time in which the expounders live, which form of proceeding as it is
most mainfest, neither is to be performed by every private person
authe^tically and with infallible certainly, but by the public Prelate^ and
Pastors of the Church and especially by the chief pastor of it. Now this being
noted and advertised I prove the min^ of my argument with an^ her silogisme in
(...) manner.

That only Church has the true interpretation and sense of scripture which
receives it from the Priests, Prelates, and Pastors especially the chief
Pastor of the Church succeeding linially from the Apostles, by conference of
places and view of expositions of the holy Fathers and doctors of all
successiue ages from the Apostles to the end of he world and not by every
private man or woman.

But the Roman Church only receines the interpretation and sense of scripture
from the Priests, Prelates, and Pastors especially the cheese pastor of the
Church in the forsaid manner.

Ergo the Roman Church only has the true interpretation and sense of
scripture.

The major of this silogisme in which the difficulte co^sistes, I could prove
first by scriptures which both in the old and new Testament assign this
faculty and power to Priests, Bishops, and Pastors as gouerners and rules of
the Church with a strict command for the people to obey them. But because I
d^e not here profess to make a^ie exact and large discourse upon that point,
but only intend breefely to make good and justify my former argumentation,
therefore I remit the rest of the places of scripture which I could allege to
be se^^ as they at cited and declared by Bellarmin and other divines, and will
urge only that one text of S. Paul in his epistle to the Ephesians which is
most clear and pregnant for this purpose.

Wherefore in his 4. Bell. lib. 3. de verbo Dei c. 4 and sequent.
chapter of this Epistle speaking of the institution of the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy by Christ, he says thus. And he gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and other some Evangelists, and others pastors and doctors to the
consummatior of the saints unto the work of the ministry, unto the
edification of the body of Christ, until we meet all into the unity of
faith, and knowledge of the son of God, into a perfect man, into the m^sure
of the age of the fulness of Christ, that now we be not children wavering with
every wind of doctrine in the wickedness of men in craftines of the
circumuention of error. By which words it is manifest that our savior among
the rest appointed Pastors and doctors and them not only for the
Ecclesiastical government of the Church but also to deliver the true doctrine
of Christ to the people least if they were left to them selves in that
particular of the knowledge of the true faith, they should fall into errors,
and this was thus ordained by Christ not for any limited time but eue^ unto
the consummation of the world in all ages. By which it is evident that since
Christ our savior (as the Apostle relates) (...) ^^point this order and
subordination of the C^^gie in his Church for the government and instruction
of the members thereof in true faith and perfection of virtuous life, and as
superiors to whom he commanded them to obey according to that of the Apostle.
Obedite prepositis and subiacete eis. It is I say by necessary consequence
most manifest that Christ's divine pleasure also was that the common people
should not be their own caruers, but should receive the interpretation and
sense of his divine word from those whom he himself designed for their
rulers and superiors in all matters concerning the safety of their souls,
supposing as a certain and evident truth that the whole structure and
perfection of a Christian faith and life does necessarily depened upon the
orthodoxe sense and meaning of the word of God. That which the general and
perpetual practice of the Church from time to time does manifestly convince,
which in all occasions of controversy in matters of faith and manners has
used no other proceeding then by assembling of Councels consisting of the
Prelates and Pastors and cheefely of the chief and supreme Pastors the Bishops
of Rome according to their several times and standings, for deciding of
doubdts and questions broached by erroneous teachers: and that by declaration
of the true sense of those places of scripture about which the controversy
was begun. For so did the General Council of Nyce under Pope Siluester
expound and declare to the whole Church and every particular member thereof
the true sense of those words! Pater ma^or me est. And in the first Council
of Constantinople under Pope Damasus those: Joan. Amos. 4. Romans 8.
Ego Dominus formans tonitru and creans spiritum. And those: spiritus postula^
pronobis. In the Council of Ephesus under Pope Celestin against Nestorius
those: Math. 26. Philip. 2.
Deus Deus meus quare me dereliquisti. And those: habitu inuentus vt homo. In
the Council of Chalcedon under Pope leo against Entyches those: Ioa. 1.
verhum carofactum est.

To this I add consent of Fathers who write of this matter generally teaching
this same doctrine. Lib. 3. c. 4.
S. Irenaeus in his book against heresies says thus. We ought not still to
seek for the truth (...) others, which may easily befounde in the Church,
since the Apostles have most abundantly deposited in it as in a rich storchouse
all things appertaining to truth, Potum vitae.
that all those that will may receive liquore of life, for it is the entrance
into life, all others are the^ues and robbers. Lib. 4. c. 43. Qui succ. ssionem
^^^ent ab Apo^^o^^s cum Episcopatus successione charisma verit^ it is certum so
cund ^m pla^^tum Patri^ accepe^unt.
In which words it is plain that by the Church S. Irenaeus understands no
other then the Bishops and chief Pastors from whom as he teaches, the rest of
the people must receive their doctrine. And therefore he adds in another place
that those (meaning Bishops) who have succession from the Apostles jointly with
the succession of their Episcopate or Bishoprie received a certain grace or
gift of truth according to the pleasure of God the Father.

And in this same matter in like forte S. Augustine speaks in his first and
tenth chapter of his second Book against Julian saying in the first place. I
am now to perfurme that which is put in the third place of my disposition which
is to subutrter destroy by the sentenees of Bishops who have handled the
scriptures with great commendation or glory, by the assistance of God, thy
machinations o Iu^^an. And a little after he adds of the same Bishps and
Doctors, Call. Instit.
saying whom Christian people ought to antepose or prefer before your profane
novelties, and adhere to them rather then to you. By which words S. Augustine
who even in our adversaries judgment is a faithful witness of antiquity,
plainly testifies what the practice of the ancient Church was in this
particular of the peoples receiving the scriptures exposition and sense from
their superiors and not from any other private person or every one by his
own reading and industry, how soever he may seem to have the spirit of God
for interpretation of his word.

And now by this (to omit of her testimonies of Fathers to this purpose which
cannot be included in so small a compass) I conclude the whole confirmation
and force of my silogisme assuring my self that none of solid judgment can
firmly persuade themselves (how beit for temporal respects and to accommodate
themselves to the current of the time they may exteriorly profess the
contrary) to be credible that Christ our Savior whose wisdom was divine and
infinite, should have taught the professors of his faith to play every man in
his humor with the sacred scripture, and to have committed the true
authentical exposition of it to every Jack and Gill rather them to his*
Priests, Bishops and chief commanders of his Church in a linial succession
from the Apostles, as being public and visible ministers to whom it should
obey especially in matters of faith and salvation.

THE FOVRTH PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT.
MY fourth argument for positive proof of the Roman Religion is as follows.

That Religion only is true which has a public and known rule of faith.

But the Roman Religion only has a public and known rule of faith.

(...) to Roman Religion only is the true Religion.

Touching the filogisme there may seem to be controversy betwixt us and the
Nouelists both in the Mayor and the Minor wherefore I will prove them both
several though breefely as the nature of my disputation requires.

The Mayor proposition I prove aduertising the reader by the way that by a
public rule of faith I mean such a rule as is cognoscible or as may be known
to all sorts of people as well those which are already members of the true
Church and faith, as also to others who as yet being out of it desire by their
conversion to be received into it. This supposed I argue in this manner.

It is a necessary property of the true Religion to have a public and known
rule of faith. Therefore the true Religion necessarily has a Public and
known rule of faith.

The antecendent of the argument in which only the difficulty of it co^sists,
I prove because if the true religion has not a public known rule of faith it
is impossible for such as want it to find it in regard that finding cannot be
had but by seeking, quarite and inuenietis.
and to seek or inquire for that which is not so public that it can possible
be found, is to seek and not to find and consequently to labor in vain. Now
true Religion is of it own nature such as may befound by those who endeuore to
know it as day lie experience does teach. And therefore our Savior says:
quaerite and inuenietis, seek and you shall find: which sentence being
general, it cannot be more comodiouslie understood then of true Religion as
being the most important business which people can inquire for or seek in
this world as being the only way to salvation.

Concerning the minor of both my Sylogismes which in substance are one and the
same proposition, to wit that the Roman Religion only has the necessary
property of a true Religion and not the English faith, that is a public and
known rule of faith, it is most evident for that the rule of faith which the
Roman Church proposes to be followed is the word of God expounded by the
public, visible, and known authority of the Bishops and Pastors of the most
universal Church in the manner and form above declared in my precedent
demonstration: And not as the professors of the English Religion teach to wit
by every private person in a sense secret and only known to him who has
it: and which cannot possible be any more understood or perceived by others
then the most secret cogitations of an others mind: All which as it plainly
appears is quite repugnant and as it were does directly intercept the means
ordained by God for the salvation of souls, who out of his infinite bounty and
mercy has provided a way to Paradise so plain and perspicious that even
children may be able to find and walkein. And now by this the force of my fifth
argument remains confirmed and established and the truth of the Roman
Religion convinced.

THE FIFTH PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT.
MY fifth positive argument I propose in this manner.

That Religion only is true which has a perpetual and disinterrupted
succession of true Bishops and Priests derived from the Apostles.

But the Roman Religion only has a perpetual and disinterupted succession
of true Bishops and Priests derived from the Apostles.

Ergo the Roman Religion only is the true Religion.

The mayor I know not certainly whether the adversaries will grant or no but
in case they deny it, I have sufficiently proved it before in my
demonstration of their want of succession.

The minor in which the controversy either entirely or cheesely consistes, I
prove first by the same reasons and arguments I convinced in the fifte
principal Sylogisme of the first part of this treatise, that the English
Religion has no such succession from whence (upon the supposit^on in which we
both agree that there is no other true Religion but theirs or ours) it
infalliblie follows that the Roman Religion only has perpetual succession
of Prelates and Pastors.

Secondly. I prove this succession in the Roman Church by grant of all or the
greater part of the adversaries who most ordinarily use to distinguish
betwixt succession of persons and succession of doctrine leaving the first for
us and claiming the second to themselves, although most falselie as I have
sufficiently demonstrated in my negative argument upon this point. Yet if any
be so obstinate as to deny the continual succession of Pastors in the Roman
Church, let him only read saint Augustin's epistle to Generosus and he will
find by him related the names of all the Bishops of Rome from saint Peter to
Pope Anastasius who the^ did sit as chief Pastor in the Church of Rome. And
the rest of the Roman Bishops names he may find in diverse modern histories or
Chronologies, and particularly in Platina and Onuphrius: Yea and in the
Centurists or Centu^^ators who notobstanding they be adversaries, yet we are
content to admit them for our Judges in this particular of the personal
succession of Pastors in the Church of Rome. And now by this and that which I
have treated touching this same matter in my negative argument framed against
the English Religion in the first part of my disputation this argument also is
sufficiently declared to be sound and of approved force and efficacy.

THE SIXTH PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT.
I frame my sixth and last principal argument in this manner.

That only Religion is true which has and practices a true and proper
external sacrifice.

But the Roman Religion only has and practices a true and proper external
sacrifice.

Ergo the Roman Religion only is the true Religion.

The Mayor which only is in question I have largely proved already in the
declaration and confirmation of my negative argument propounded against the
English Religion in this point. To which I add that external sacrifice is the
essential part of the external service of God and the very quintessence of
Religion ordained for a special acknowledgement of his supreme power, dominion
and majesty. And althou' it is true that Christ our Savior offered himself in
sacrifice upon the Cross for the reconciliation of humane nature, which
sacrifice was of far greater estimation and value in the sight of God then
all the oblations and sacrifices of the old Testament, and therefore had no
necessity to be offered more then once: Nevertheless because this sacrifice
was only or chiefly for the redemption of man kind and was not offered by
us but by him alone for us, therefore it was further convenient and necessary
that besides that singular and divine oblation, there should be a quotidian and
daily sacrifice in the Church on our parts both for a perpetual memory of
the former, ^^ge Sacrif^ium.
and also for an external protestation of our own infirmity, and the
sovereign power and majesty of him who created us and conserueth us by his
continual providence and manutention, and for a sign and testimony of our
gratitude toward him from whom we receive essence, life, and motion.

Sacrifice only is an honor peculiar to God alone of which he himself says,
honorem meum alteri non dabo. All other sorts of honor as prayers and praise
of their own quality and nature ar common to creatures, for we may lawfully
both pray and praise mortal men even in this world, but sacrifice unto them
we can not, no not to the greatest Angel or saint in heaven. And in this
chiefly consistes the error of Gentiles and Pagan people, which had not ben so
gross if they had not sacrificed to creatures but only given them supreme
honor of laud and prayer. It seems the very instinct of nature tought men to
sacrifice to God, and that God and sacrifice and in some sort ar correlatiues
according to the sayeing of God himself of himself. Si Dominus sum vbi est
honor meus, that word meus significes property in other things and much more
in this of sacrifice. Hence it is that no nation was ever so barbarous which if
it did acknowledge any kind of God thou never so false and absurd, did not
honor him with sacrifice. And surely they commit no less crime them heigh
treason against the divine supremacy who deprive God of the honor of
sacrifice; yea doublesse they take a course to extinguish by degrees the
memory of that attribute and open the way to Athisme who extinguish the
exercise of an external sacrifice. If in the time of the old Testament
sacrifices were so frequent when God almighty conferred his gifts with a
scarce and sparing ^and: much more freque^tly and with far more devotion and
perfection ought a sacrifice to be offered in the law of Christ, which is by
excellency named the law of grace because of the infinite abundance of graces,
favors, and benefits which God powereth upon those who embrace the true faith
and Religion supposing that by how much the gifts be greater by so much the
acknowledgment ought to be more exact and accurate.

Now for conclusion of my whole treatise I aduertice the reader that I have put
all my arguments in such a form of Sylogisme as is most clear and obuious and
of that nature that if the premises be once granted for true, the consequence
most undoubtedly follows. They be also in a mode and figure most known and
common. For these terms, that Religion are to be accepted for a kind of
universal or indefinit subject as signifying one among many indeterminately,
and so every Sylogisme is in Darij, which both in mode and figure is one of the
plaineth forms. Which form of argument I judged most fit for my purpose in
respect my chief design in this matter is to convince the understanding of
the more intelligent and scholasticall sort of people in the truth of the
Roman Religion, and falsitie of the contrary: who if they have so much
ingenuitie in them as to yeald to the truth when by judicious meditation and
pondering of the premises they shall find it discovered and set in their
seight, I doubt not but they will perceive themselves by force of the
consequences concluded and captiuated in obedience of faith, which is that
only honor or profit I hope and desire to reap of my labors.

FINIS*
APPROBATIO.
VIso testimonio, cuiusdam viri docti mihi de fide and doctrina probe noti,
quotestatur tractatum hunc Anglicanum, qui inscribitur Conuictio nouitatis and
antiquitatis defensio, nihil contra fidem aut bonosmores continere, dignum
eundem iudicaui qui praelo committeretur. Datum Duaci 28. Nouembris. Anno
Domini 1632.

GEORGIUS COLVENERIVS etc.

THE PRINTERS ERRORS.
Page 3. line 5. for Campion read Campian. And p. 40. in the marginal note for
quo read qu. The I rest remitte to the readers discretion.


