THE SCOVRGE of Security, OR THE EXPVLSION and return of the unclean Spirit.

By William Est, Minister and Preacher of Gods word, at Bedford in Devonshire.

2. Pet. 2.^0. For if they, after they have escaped from the filthiness of the
world through the knowiedge of the Lord, and of the Savior Jesus Christ, are
yet tangled again therein, and overcome, the last end is worse with them then
the beginning.

LONDON, Printed by T. C. for Thomas Down, and Ephraim Dauson, and are to be
sold at their Shop in Fleete-streete, at the Inner Temple-gate. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful S. Barnard Grayn^ile Knight, my singular good Patron:
all increase of spiritual blessings in this life, and everlasting blessedness
in the life to come.
Having (Right Worshipful) rudely cast the plot of this present pamphlet, for
mine own private use and meditation, and for the better edifying of the flock
committed unto my charge, (as it may appear by the tenue filum, incompt and
unpolished parts of this edifice) it chanced to come into the hands of some of
my familiar and assured friends, which when they had perused it, labored to
persuade me to permit to pass into the public view of the world, laying
before me the profit which of this subject, many (especially in these sinful
times) might reap. But (to speak the truth) suadebant potius quam
persuadebant, they motioned rather then moved me, as utterly unwilling to
pester the print, or oppress the press with more pamphlets which seems to
groan already under such burdens, and chiefly in this curious critical and
carping age; always hating that humor which the Eatyrist Iuuenal, noted in
this days: Tenet insanabile multos Scribend, cacoethes. Beside, when I saw
many well furnished, rich men to cast of their superfluity in the Lords
treasure, I judged my poor Widows mite to be needelesse. Yet at length being
overcome with their importunities, and having ever a desire to do good, and
that by all means (which more prevailed with me then any thing else,) I
yielded to their requests, and suffered it to pass as it is, unpolished,
having no leisure by reason of my other employments, to adorn it with any
other coat, then the first. And resolved with my self, that if among so many
master builders, I do but as a poor labourer bring stones, or mortar, or the
least thing toward the building of the temple, it may stand in some steed.
For though this age be furnished, with many excellent writers; ad nauseam
vsque, yet of such as labor to make the Theoricke of Christianity, meet with
the practicke, the press (I think) does not surfeit. As for the viperous teeth
of base Momus his mates, to whom it is easier momeisthai potiut quam
mimeisthai, to emulate rather then imitate the good purpose of others, let them
know I little regard their Theonine barkings. Only this with Martial I tell
them, Carpere vel noli nostra, velede tua: Either cease to carpe at writing
mine,
Or else set forth some thing of thine.


But the courteous reader I request to judge freely, admonish friendly, and
correct charitablie. And I in the mean time sub tabulit delitescam, imitating
that excellent painter Apelles, and will hearken unto his friendly censure.
This small paper gift I commend unto your Worships protection, being the best
at this time that I am able to give, desiring your favorable acceptance of
this pledge of my good will, which if it be worthy any respect, to you being
my Patron in many respects it is due. And thus with the penner of the story of
the Machabees I end: If I have done well, and as my text required, let God have
the glory, but if I have done slenderly and barely, it is that I could. I
beseech the Almighty to bless, preserve, and keep you and yours, and to power
his spiritual graces upon you in this life present, and bring you to the
fruitio^ of his everlasting glory in the life to come. From Bydforde. January.
6. 1609.

Your Worships in Christ to command, William Este.

THE SCOVRGE OF Security.
Luc. 11.14. unto verse 17. Then he cast out a Devil, etc.


THis Scripture (dearly beloved) offers unto us this general division.

1 The miracle it self, of the Devil cast out of the man that was dumb,
verse 14.

2 The diverse judgments of the beholders concerning the same, verse 15.16.

3 The Apology of Christ against the calumniation of the Pharisees and Jews:
from ver. 17. unto 27.

1 The miracle it self, the Evangelist describes in few words, 1. Subiectum
in quo editum, when he says, which was dumb: per metonymians effecti.
because he made the man dumb whom he possessed. Miserable therefore was the
condition of this wretched man, which is here amplified a priuantibus, for he
was not only dumb, but also deaf, Mar. 7. For the Greek (...) signifies
both deaf and dumb: because for the most part the dumb are also deaf, for
(after the opinion of the Physicians) by reason of the mutual consent of the
muscles and nerves which serve both the tongue and hearing, vno vitiato alterum
laedi solet. Mat. 12.22. says, he was also blind.

2 The form also of the miracle is expressed, when it is said, that the Devil
was cast out by the omnipotent power of God, and the man delivered from his
cruelty.

3 For the illustration of the miracle, he amplifieth the same, ab effectis
contrariis, when he adds, that the Devil being cast out, the dumb spoke:
(...) qui ante fuerit mutus, and the deaf did hear, and the blind saw. Mas.
12.22.

Obser. and doctri.
1 THis fearful spectacles of the possessed, sets before our eyes the
great malice and power of Satan, which by Gods permission inuadeth the living
bodies of men, miserably afflicted, horribly tormenteth, and deformeth them:
as it appeateth in the possessed with a dumb spirit, Mar. 9. in the
lunaticke, Mat. 17. in the possessed with a legion of Devils most cruelly,
Luc. 8. and diverse other, he goes about like a roaring Lion, 1. Pet. 5. as a
hunter to lay snares, Ps. 91.3. as a Fowler to spread his net, and snares to
catch souls, Ps. 124. desiring to winnow us as wheat, Luc. 22. and labors
to draw us to horrible sin and wickedness, having great wrath. Apoc. 12.
Infomuch, Vt si tantum nocere posset quantum vellet, aliquis iustorum non
remaneret. Aug. We are here to note, that the Devil tormented this man but by
the permission of God, for he could not enter into the heard of Swine without
the leave of Christ. Mat. 8. Therefore it is said. 1. Sam. 16. that the evil
spirit of God came upon Saul, because he is the creature of God, and his
minister, so that without the license of God, he cannot so much as shake one
leaf from a tree. And this permission God gives him, both in the godly, and
in the wicked, as it appears in Job. 2. He many times afflicts them both,
but for diverse respects and ends: the wicked for their punishment and
correction; the godly for their trial, good and increase of their glory. Here
learn, that for many causes God permits the Devil to possess and afflict
men in this life.

1 That having before our eyes how tyrannously and cruelly he deals with us,
we should prosecute him with extreme hatred, hold ever enmity with him, much
less to hearken to his counsels and suggestions, and by these external
persecutions, to consider how much more grievously he desires to afflict the
soul: and for this cause God permits him to appear sometime in horrible
and ugly shapes, that we should detest and fly from him as from a most
pernicious pestilence.

2 That setting before our eyes the cruelty of this infernal Leuiathan, we
should be sober and watch, 1. Pet. 5. and at every moment commend our selves
to God, and whether we rise or lie down, to pray unto God for his defense and
protection, and say with Chrysostom, Renuncio tibi diabole; et dome tibi
Christ.

3 That with the swinish Epicures, we should not think these things to be
inania terriculamenta, nor at every three words, and light occasion (as the
manner of some profane persons is) to imprecate, curse, or deuote our selves
or others to the Devil. Which surely is a thing so much the more greatly to be
lamented, as we see it common in the world, that seeing the Devil is such an
enemy unto man, any should have his odious and detestable name ever in their
mouths, yea the very infants following the wicked example of their elders,
even from their cradles, in cursing and banning (rejecting the sweet name of
Jesus) toss too and fro this odious name in their mouths.

4 That as often as we behold any possessed, deaf, dumb, that we should call
to mind the filthiness of sin, which is cause that such power is given unto
the Devil upon men; and learn to detest sin, quae vita sunt diaboli,
Origin. For as long as sin reigns in a man, tamdiu victus a diabolo
possidetur, and vexatur. Aug. To conclude this; when we have a sound and
perfect body, let us give God thanks, and use the vigor both of mind and
members, godly, to his praise and glory.

2 The corporal possession of the Devil in this wretched man, puts us in
mind of the spiritual possession of heart, which this enemy of mankind
effects in the hearts of them, through his fraud and deceits: for he made
this wretched man, not only dumb, but also blind and deaf: that is, deprived
him almost of all his senses; all which he spiritually effects, in those
whom through sin he holds captive. For as the spirit of God where it
rests, makes men dumb, deaf, and blind, to earthly and carnal things,
that they may give themselves to the contemplation of the things above: so this
wicked spirit labors to make them dumb, deaf, and blind, to all
spiritual things, that without all fear of God, and remorse of conscience,
they might wholly give themselves to all filthiness. First, even as the Wolf
when he prays upon the Sheep, catches him first by the throat, that he
might not cry, least the Shepherd being awaked, should reskue the poor
Sheep from his jaws: so this hellish infernal Wolf, makes many mute, that
they never call upon God, pray, or ever have in their mouths, any godly and
spiritual communication, which if they know or hear any infirmity by their
neighbor, forget this rule of Christ. Mat. 18. If thy brother trespass, etc.
And that of the Apostles, Gal. 6. Brethren, if a man be fallen, etc. But are
talkatiue enough, to publish it to the infamy and hurt of their brother: such
are all unjust advocates, which are mute in the poor ma^s cause, but in the
cause of the rich, etc. Such are all perjured false witnesse-bearers, which
conceal the truth for a reward, etc. Another sort there are, whom the Devil
makes dumb, like such as are naturally borne dumb: for as those that are
borne blind, do make show and signs, for what they would have: so all
hypocrites seek for the glory and praise of men, only by the outward shows
of virtues, they come to Church, show themselves zealous, etc. All but only in
show, all but in signs; but if thou put them to the touchstone of
Christianity, show me thy faith by thy works, Iac. 2. Thou shall find all to
be but in dumb shows and signs, all counterfeit copper and dross: look
into their works, and there you find a worme-eaten conscience, with the canker
of usury, the viper of envy, with the serpents of detraction, back biting,
etc. Crocadils in dissimulation, 2. Lions in their fury, worse then the very
Tigers in revenge, in secreate stinging likes scorpions, etc. All these the
devil makes mute, etc.

2 The Devil also makes them whom he spiritually possesses, blind, that they
may not see their sin, and the danger they are in; like the Wolf, he takes
him by the throat, that he may not call unto the true Sheapheard Jesus Christ
for succor, and as a ravenous Vultur, he seeks to pick out his spiritual
eyes, that the sinner may not see the filthiness of sin, nor the imminent
danger he is in. The covenant which this enemy requires of his servants, is
like that which proud and cruel Nahash the Ammonite, demanded of the
Gileadite, 1. Sam. 11. that he might pull out all their right eyes. In like
manner the Devil seeks to pull out the eyes of our mind, that the sinner
seeing, might not see, for their own wickedness has blinded them. Wis. 2.
The sinful man and woman, when they are most blinded in their wickedness,
they think that they have Lynceos, oculos. Like the fool Harpastes, that Sen.
6. lib. Epist. 52. speaks of, who being suddenly deprived of her sight,
nescet se esse caecam, paedagogum rogat vt migret, domum tenebrosam esse. This
which we laugh at in her (says he) we practice in our selves: nemo se auarum
esse intelligit, ne cupidum, yet worse then the blind in this; they seek a
guide, nos sine duce erramus, et dicimus, non ego ambitiosus sum, I am not
covetous, nor luxurious, etc. It is not my vice that I am rash, angry, it is
the fault of my youth: and therefore we are hardly cured, quia nos aegrotare
nescimus, nec medicum quidem quaerimus: should we not think him to be mad or
blind, who being intent in doing some thing, one should run unto him with a
naked sword, and minace him death, if he presently left not off; and
notwithstanding without any fear he goes on with his work? would we not
think him to be blind, which feeth not the sword drawn to strike him? And
what is the cause (I pray you) that some men give themselves over unto so many
sins, and securely wallow in their filthiness, and some others live soberly,
warily, and labors to avoid even the smallest sin? Surely the reason is,
because the one has the spiritual eyes of his mind blinded so, that he
sees not how great and grievous evil hang over his head, which that high
judge reserueth for him against the day of vengeance: the other setting Gods
justice before their eyes, and the severity of the eternal torments, which
the just judge inflicteth upon these short and fading pleasures of sin, by
all means endeavors to refrain the same. O that men were not distitute of
these eyes of their mind, that they might contemplate upon the miseries and
torments which are laid up in hell for the wicked, that they might betime
betake them to newness of life, and come out of the snares, wherewith this
prince of darkness holds them captive; and will in the end (unless they
repent) cast the^ for ever into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. The Devil now stops their eyes with earth, that is, with
the vile corruptible, and abject things of the world, for the love whereof they
make small reckoning of the life to come: but then to their perpetual grief,
they shall perceive how they were blinded, and confess too late, we have erred
from the way of truth, and the light of righteousness has not shined unto us,
Wis. 5.

Now let us see how the Devil makes the sinner also deaf: when ye see a man
warned, counseled, exhorted, persuaded by many that he should in his journey
turn, and decline from such a way, for there are thieves lying in wait to take
away his money and life: he harkeneth to none of them, goes boldly on his
journey, the way infested with Thieves, falls into their hands, is robbed and
slain, would ye not think this man to be deaf, or out of his wits? In like
manner when God by his word, Preachers, divine inspirations, etc. Incessantly
warns, and calls unto the sinner, knocks at the door of their hearts,
desires, craves, and beggeth them to open unto him, his head being full of
deawe, and his lock of the drops of the night. Cant. 5.2. Shows him the
dangerous course he takes, the pit of destruction he is falling into, the way
he goes leads to eternal torments, etc. Notwithstanding, he will not
hear, but goes on still the broad way that leads unto hell: shall we doubt
but that the Devil has stopped the spiritual ears of such?

Thus ye see how the Devil makes the sinner dumb, deaf, and blind, that he
may the more quietly keep possession of his soul. Even as a man that would
quietly sleep and take his rest, commands his servants and family to keep
silence, that the noise may not disturb him: 2. he shuts the windows that
the light may not offend his eyes, he gets him into a close room, and if
any enquire for him, wills his servants to deny him to be within: all these
this subtle enemy of mankind causes in the sinner, that he may sleep
quietly in his sin, he diligently labors to stop the entrings and passages
of the soul, which are the senses, that no Divine light should come in at the
windows thereof; to disperce the darkness, and blindness of the mind: as we
see in Pharao, and the Scribes and Pharisees, which could not be won nor
reclaimed by the miracles they saw with their cies. And if we beat their
ears with never so many Sermons, lay before their cyes, the joys of the
heavenly kingdom, the most horrible torments of hell, they still persist in
their life as if they heard nothing at all: so we see many to continue so
indurate, in inueterate hatred, or in unchaste love, that with no persuasions,
no preaching, no counsel, they will be reclaimed from their hatred or filthy
lust: who sees not here the power of the Devil in stopping both their
spiritual cares and eyes, least they should convert and escape out of his
claws? He stops also their mouths that no spiritual communication of God,
or godliness, should proceed from thence, partaining to the salvation of
their soul, when to scurrilitie, cursing, etc. and all corrupt, and rotten
communication, their mouths are always open and lavish. If a man should ask
them whose mouth ouerrunne with filthy words (like an unclean Mill that cannot
grind without foul water) whether they have had at any time all this year,
any godly conference concerning God and the salvation of their souls: they
will answer (if they would confess the truth) that they never had any thought
or speech of any such thing: who does not here plainly see, that those are
also dumb, though otherwise very talkatiue? vae tacentibus de te domine:
(says Augustine) quia ipsi loquaces muti sunt cum non tuas lauds dicunt. Aug.
in medit. And lastly, he laboreth to keep the^ from conuersing with good men,
least that the light of their good examples should expel the darkness of
their minds, their wholesome exhortations rouse the^ from the sleep of sin,
and so they might repent and be turned unto God, etc. Take heed therefore
(says Cyprian) quisathanam habent suggestorem, habebunt etiam tortorem. In
ser. de ieiuni.

3 In this one man 4 miracles, were wrought: the deaf did hear, the dumb
spoke, the blind saw, and the possessed was delivered. This evidently euinceth
that Christ is the true Messiah, to save and free us from the power of Satan;
who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the Devil,
Act. 10. For this purpose appeared the Son of God, that he might loose the
works of the Devil. 1. Job. 3. Let us therefore fly unto him in all our
dangers and necessities, and he will refresh us. Mat. 11.

Finis 1. part. vel conc. primae.

Pars 2. vel conc. secunda.
IN this part is described the effect of the miracle, which according to the
diversity of the subjects was threefolde, and that according to the three
diverse opinions and judgment of the beholders.

1 In the promiscuall company says Mat. 12.23. All the people were amazed:
that is, they admired the power of God, which shined forth in this miracle, 72.
they spoke honorably of Christ the Messiah, the Author thereof: Is not this the
son of David? that is, the promised savior of the line of David, of whom it
was foretold that he should do such miracles. Esa. 35.5. And this effect of
the miracle it self was good, simple, true, and sincere. 2. verse 15. in the
Pharisees, which maliciously did slander this Divine miracle, affirming that
the efficient and principal worker thereof was Beelzebub, a most abominable
and filthy Devil, by whose power Christ as his Minister did cast out Devils:
which blasphemous sla^der against their own conscience, they did to that end
publicly before, deliver before the people, that by extenuating and
diminishing of the miracle, they might withdraw and alienate the minds of the
simple people from Christ: Beelzebub signifies dominum seuregem muscarum, it
was the God or Idol of Accaron, or Ekron, 2. Rog. 1.3. with whom Ahaziah,
contrary to the word of the Lord consulted: Baal was a common name of all the
Idols, which were worshipped of the infidel nations that bordered upon
Palestina, or Jury: the Caldeans called it Bece, adding for difference sake
some other name, as Beelphegor, the Idol of the Moabite, ^^alpear, the Idol
of the Amonite. etc. This Idol was called Beelzebub, because of the multitude
of flies, that swarmed about the Temple of this Idol, because of the many
sacrifices which there were slain. The Jews in contempt did call the Devil
by this name, the prince of the Dinels: because he is the prince that rules in
the air, the Prince of the darkness of this world. Ephesians. 2. and 6. and had
sub Vexillo suo, exercitum diabolorum, like flies swarming in the air. 3.
verse 16. In others which tempted him, seeking a sign from heaven: and these
were of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 12: which were not ashamed by
extenuating to calumniate this notable miracle, collatione imparium, craving a
more excellent miracle to be showed in the sky, either that he should raise up
thunder, as in the time of Samuel, 1. Sam. 12. or to call for fire from heaven
as Eliah did, 1. Reg. 18. or to make the Sun to stand still. Ios. 10. or the
Sun to go backward, 2 Reg. 20. or to rain down Manna from heaven as in the
Desert: but this they craved to a perverse end, that they might take occasion
hereby to blaspheme, and the more quarrel with him: and therefore Christ called
them an evil, and adulterous generation, Mat. 12. And these are the effects of
this miracle, per accidens, proceeding from the perverse malice and hatred of
the Scribes and Pharisees.

Obser. and Doct.
Here obscrue, out of the 15. chap. 16. verse. that nothing can be safe from
the viperous teeth of the Sycophaut, as we may see in the diverse judgments,
which the beholders of this miracle had of Christ. The same chanced to John
Baptist, Mat. 11. to Steven, Act. 7. to Paul, whom for preaching of Christ,
they sought to kill. Act. 9. and at this day, this is too common in the world,
for there are not wanting certain perverse, critical, and malicious,
maleuolent, ce^surers, which are ready to give their perverse judgments of
good men, and to traduce whatsoever they speak, or do well, imitating Xoilus
herein: who being asked why he spoke evil of all men: answered, quoniam
malefacere, Cum velim non possim. Aelian. va^hist. lib. 11. but as long as thou
do well, fear nothing, the bitings of viperous tongues, think that the
same measure was offered unto Christ, the servant is not greater then his
Master, if they have called the Master of the house, etc. Mat. 10. imitate
Plato herein, who when it was told him that many rayled upon him, answered:
At ego sic viuam, vt illis fide^ non habeatur.

2 Note here the nature of the wicked; there is no virtue so excellent, nothing
so well done, nothing so worthily commended, and extolled by the voice of all
good-men, which the wicked do not carp at, and dispraise: even as if he put a
staff, or a piece of timber half way into the water, that part which is in
the water, seems crooked and broken, and the other strait, when indeed it
is all alike strait: so the same action which to an upright judgment, seems
well done, and praise worthy, to the wicked it seems crooked and defective;
not that it is so, but by reason of their depraved and corrupt judgment, which
deceives them, because they look into the actions of others, through the
water of envy and malice. If thou be humble and lowly, they will judge thee
abject and vile; if patient, white-liuered, and a dastard: if studious, an
hypocrite: if frugall, a nigard and covetous: if silent, they will judge thee a
fool: if talkatiue, a babbler: if devout, a dissembler: if thou do justice,
they will count thee cruel: if pitiful, remiss, and corrupt: if mild, they
will contemn thee: if liberal, they will count thee prodigal: if sparing, a
myzer. etc. And nothing may be so well done, but that envious and wicked men,
will take occasion thereby to backbite and slander thee: even as a great River,
receives into it self all other Rivers that come: and the fire conuerteth
into it self all things it takes: the Serpent eats the sweet flower, and
conuerteth it into poison, out of which the Be sucketh honey: so the wicked at
the very same thing take occasion to murmr, and dishonor God; by which the
godly are incited to love, praise, and serve the Lord. For when Christ did many
miracles, the high Priests and Pharisees, consulted how they might put him to
death. Now, if thou demand of the high Priests and Pharisees, why they would
kill Christ, 1. they will answer, for this man does many miracles, Io. 11. But
if thou ask of Peter, James, John, and the rest of the Disciples, why they
believe in Christ, forsake all that they have and follow him; they will also
say; because he does many miracles, which none but the Messiah could do,
therefore we believed in him, follow, and serve him. If you ask why the
people did praise and extol Christ; they would say, because the dumb spoke,
etc. But if ye ask the Pharisees why they mock, and blaspheme Christ, they
will also say, because the dumb spoke, etc. What is the cause why this one
miracle brings forth such contrary effects? surely because the hearts of
both are diverse, and different. Whereby it comes to pass, that what to the
one is a medicine and present remedy, to the other is a deadly poison.

O that many also at this day were not like unto these Pharisees, which when
they should be converted by Christ's miracles, won with his benefits, and
their hearts mollified, and even melt with the love of God, they take occasion
thereby to become worse, and more obdurate in their sin: Is it not an
inestimable benefit, that when thou committest so many, and great sins, yet
God patiently suffers thee, expecting thy conversion? this goodness of God
which should so inflame thy mind with his love, and so bind thy affection
unto him, that thou should not dare to offend, so loving and merciful a God
thou abusest to presume the more boldly to commit the greater sin, adding
without any fear, sin upon sin, and say God is merciful, he is a good
God, he came into the world, suffered death upon the cross to save sinners.
Indeed he is infinitely merciful, else would he not suffer thee to make his
mercy, and goodness, an occasion of sin, and a cause of thy further
wickedness, and the cross which he endured to destroy the Kingdom of the
Devil; to take occasion thereby, the more boldly to sin, and to uphold the
Kingdom of the Devil. Know thou not (O wrech) that this bountifulness of
God leads thee to repentance? but thou after etc. Romans 2. etc.

3 Here obscrue; The monstrous ingratitude of man toward God, which may be
considered, not only in that they are made the worse by Gods benefits, but
also by the circumstance of time: for at that time when they should especially
be converted, and admire the works of God, at the same very time, malice
possessing their hearts, they did murmr and blaspheme. The tongue of man is
scarce able to utter how great the unthankfulness of man is; which the greater
the benefits are which they receive, the less do they fear to offend God. So
the Israelites while God on the Mount was delivering laws unto Moses, for
their good; they were making a golden calfe in the Vallie, to provoke him to
wrath with their Idolatry. So Christ, when he was at his last Supper,
instituting the holy Sacrament of his body and blood, for the benefit and
comfort of man; at the very same time they were consulting together how to
betray him: which time the Ap. 1. Cor. 11. notes, when he says, Our Lord
Jesus Christ in the same night, etc.

And no less monstrous is the ingratitude of many now adays, which while they
sit at their play, swearing and blaspheming the name of God, and committing
other grievous sin; in the mean time is God creating, and providing for
their sustenance and benefit the fruits of the earth, and pouring his
blessings upon them, whiles they are crucifying the Son of God again to
themselves, and making a mock of him, Heb. 6. O detestable ingratitude, etc.

4 Note here, how far different the judgment of God is from the judgment
of men: The Pharisees in the opinion of men were reputed holy, and righteous
men, and the common people, simple, and foolish; yet the spirit of God here
says, that the Pharisees, were most wicked and blasphemous sinners. We learn
here, to examine our own consciences, and not to content our selves with the
praise of men, for according to their favor, or hatred, they approve evil,
and condemn what is good: plebs est morosa lage^do, ille been de te dicet, at
ille male: He often erreth in iudgemen which listneth to the voices of the
people: hatred and favor, are 2. partial judges. Errat amans pariter dum
iudicat, errat et osor namque odium fallit, failit and omnis amor. Says one. I
pass very little to be judged of you, or of man's judgment, 1. Cor. 4.

5 The Pharisees, are an example unto us of the wretched and abject estate of
that man which is forsaken of God; how headlong they fall into all grievous
sin. This use let us make of it, that when we see men to fall into horrible
sin, without any feeling of conscience, let us think that we our selves
should fall into the same or greater, if God should give us over, or take his
grace from us: let us ever have before our cies these examples of Gods
judgments, to stir up the fear of God in our hearts, that we may learn to
know our selves, how insufficient we are of our selves, if the hand of
God-should not hold us up; Let him that stands take heed least he fall, 1.
Cor. 10. Wherefore let every good Christian, pray with the princely Prophet,
Ps. 51. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from
me: without him we cannot stand, without him we fall into all kind of
wickedness, learn then to hate sin which separateth betwixt God and us, and
hides his face from us. Es. 59.

6 In that the Pharisees lied, speaking contrary to their own conscience; let
us learn to hate all lying and falshoode. For it is written, Ps. 5. Thou shall
destroy all them that speak lies: At the general flood God destroyed the
whole world, but saved Noe and his family, he burned Sodom, but spared Lot. He
took into his society Peter, an offender, Paul a persecutor, Magdeline a
sinner, etc. But we find not that he admitted any liar.

Hell (says the wise man) is better then an evil tongue. Ecc. 28. For hell
fire tormenteth but the wicked and the damned, but an evil tongue hurts both
good and bad. Who so harkeneth thereto, shall never find rest, nor dwell
quietly. Ibid. The heart of fools is in their mouth, but the mouth of the wise
is in their heart, Ecc. 22. The tongue should follow the heart, the heart and
reason should go before the tongue, as the guide to direct and govern every
word, least the tongue run at random: linqua tanquam calamus esse debet, qui
per se nihil facit, no farther then it is moved by the Scribe, that it be not
exorbitant from the rule and order of Christian charity, and truth, etc.

7 Out of the 14. verse. we learn (in the censure of the people) that
notwithstanding the malicious carping of wicked men, there are not wanting some
which will judge truly, and sincerely of the sayings and doings of others: for
the word of God is never preached in vain, Esa. 55. Our labor is not in vain
in the Lord. 1. Cor. 15. Here is a great comfort, to all Preachers, that they
be not discoraged in their calling, when the malignant company do contradict
them, slander, hate, and rail upon them: for always from the beginning the
greater part were the worst, which ferrea quada^ peruicacia did oppose
themselves against the servants of God, and lade his Ministers with scoffs,
and reproaches, for reproving their beloved sin: Let us not marvel, nor be
dismaide heereat, seeing Christ himself could not be free from such malicious
detractors, etc.

Lastly, ex verse. 16. In that they required a sign from heaven, I observe,
There are at this day which expect miracles to confirm the Doctrine of the
Gospel: whom with Christ we may answer, Mat. 12. An evil and adulterous
generation seeks asigne, etc. Miracles in the primitive Church were
necessary, vt quae introitus sunt at fide, (says Greg. li. 27. Mor. and
infidelium causa maxim fiunt. But now we need them not, because our Doctrine
is not new, but confirmed by the Apostles, with diverse signs and miracles, and
gifts of the holy Ghost. lib. 2. Whosoever therefore (says Aug. li. 22. de
ciuitate dei) prodigia quaerit vt credat, ipse magnum est prodigium, cum toto
mundo credente non credat. Many such prodigious sinners there are in the world
which seek signs, such are they which wallowing all their life long in their
sin, presume upon mercy at the last gasp of their life: these seek a sign
of God at the end of their life: when the general rule of Gods law is, he
will reward every man according unto his works. Romans 2. Ps. 62.2. Cor. 5. Vt
quimale vixit, malo pereat. So when thou have lived 30.40.60. years in all
licentiousness of life, casting the fear of God behind thee, sinning against
thine own conscience, thou presumest upon the late repentance of the last
hour of thy life, and think that to be sufficient: why do thou not fear
the wrath of God, and persuade thy self rather, that thou shall die in thy
sins, which all thy life time thou have frequented? do thou not know,
that repentance is the gift of God? and that it is not in thine own power? why
do thou not repent betime, whils the long sufferance of God inuiteth thee to
repentance? why do thou lose the golden opportunity of time, that God of
his mercy offers thee, and in vtramque aurem dormi, heaping sin upon
sin, as if one moments repentance (which yet is not in thine own power)
should make amends for all? Incredible surely is thy madness: What is this but
to tempt God? 1. What is this but to seek a sign from heaven? 2. Think
thou that God is tied to thy pleasure, to open to thee the door of heaven,
which all thy life long did rebel against him, and had thy will always
crossing to his?

Pars tertia. Christ's Apology.
FRom the 17. verse. vsque ad. 27. is described the Apology of Christ, against
the calumniation of the Pharisees; impiously ascribing this miracle unto
Beelzebub; Christ's general theme is: I do not cast out Devils through
Beelzebub. To the proof whereof he uses in order four arguments. The first
whereof is taken ab effectu discordia, consisting traiectione partium, and
complicatione syltogismi, ac porsyllogismi. The principal Syllogism is thus:
If through Beelzebub I cast out devils, Satan is divided against himself.

But Satan is not divided against himself: therefore I cast not out Devils
through Beelzebub.

The Connex of the proposition is plain by the nature of contraries, which
expel and kill one the other. The assumption he proves by a prosyllogisme
thus:

If Satan be divided against himself, his kingdom cannot stand immovable,
but the kingdom of Satan stands immovable.

Ergo, Satan is not divided against himself. The proposition of this
Prosyllogisme is proved A genere, per compaerationem similium, taken from
kingdoms, or houses which by mutual division and dissension come to mine and
destruction. The 2. Arg. verse. 19. Is taken ab exemplo pari, of them which
among the Jews had the gift of casting out Devils, whom the Pharisees
confessed to cast out Devils by the power of God. These were the Apostles, and
70. Disciples: he calls them their children, because they were borne and
bred among the Jews; to whom the Lord gave power ouervncleane spirits. Luc. 9.
the argument is thus.

If I by Beelzebub cast out Devils, then your children also by him do cast
them out: but your children do not cast them out through Beelzebub.

Ergo, neither do I.

The consequent of the proposition, is not set down in express words, but yet
is insinuated with a figurative interrogation, by whom, etc. The assumption is
omitted, as granted by themselves, for they themselves affirmed that by the
power of God they cast out Devils. And therefore he says, they shall be your
Judges. That is, by their own confession, and the confession of their
children, they be co^uinced in the judgment, that against their own
conscience, they have most maliciously ascribed this miracle to the Devil. By
the same argument also he concludes that he casts out Devils by the power
of God: in this manner.

If your children by the power of God cast out Devils, by the same power do I
cast them out: but your children by the power of God cast out Devils; therefore
I by the power of God cast them out.

Which conclusion he amplifieth, verse. 20. But if I by the finger of God, cast
them out, etc. Where, by the finger of God, he understands the spirit of
God, as Mat. 12.28. Explaineth it. By the kingdom of God, is understood the
kingdom of the Messiah. He reasons from the immediate proper effects, to
show the cause from the benefits and miracles, only proper to the Messiah, he
proves himself to be the Messiah, and so by their own confession he
infers, because he cast out Devils by the finger of God. They ought
undoubtedly to know that the kingdom of the Messiah is come unto them, and is
begun among them.

The 3. argument is conceived, verse. 21. and 22. And is taken ab effectis,
similitudine bellica, of a strong man armed, which by a more stronger is
expelled and cast out of his Palace. Where 1. by the strong man armed, is
meant the the Devil, 2. his Palace, are wicked men, which he has under his
government; his armor wherein he trusted, is the great power of the Devil.
The argument may be thus concluded in the 2. figure.

He that overcomes, and casts out another by his own power, is stronger
then he that is cast out and overcome: but I by my own power do overcome, and
cast out Devils.

Ergo, I am stronger then the Devils, and by consequent, I do not cast out
Devils through Beelzebub.

The 4. argument is taken a contrariis rugnantium personarum studus, and
effectis: verse. 23. He that is not with me, etc. It is a prouerbiall gnome, or
sentence which sllogistice in 1. fig. may thus be inferred.

Whosoever in all things is against me, and contrary unto me, by his power I
cannot cast out Devils: but Satan in all things is contrary to me, Ergo, etc.

Betwixt Christ and Satan, there is always bellum hostile, Christ is the God
of truth, the Devil is the father of lies: what Christ builds, the Devil
labors to pull down: what fellowship then between Christ and Beliai? etc.
2. Cor. 6. This also he proves by an allegorical similitude, adorned by a
Prosopopaeia, of an enemy which with an infatigable study, labors to
invade, and take possession of his adversary. Ab adiuncto pertinaci studio
diaboli, et a causis adiuuantibus. verse. 24.25.26. When the unclean spirit,
etc. 1. By the unclean spirit, he understands the Diuell' which is called
unclean, 1. Ab abiunctis by reason of his natural uncleanness: 2. Exeffectis,
because he makes them unclean, whom he polluteth with finne. 2. Exit iste,
he goes forth, when by the virtue of Christ, and of his word through
repentance he is cast out. 3 He walks through dry places: by dry places,
most interpreters understand, partly the Godly, and partly the wicked and
infidels; for in neither of these, he sets his rest; for when by repentance,
and the grace of Christ, he is cast out of the heart of the penitent sinner,
he incessantly walks about hunting after his prey, and catching after
souls, and assaulteth the godly, seeking to possess, and to enter into their
hearts: for the hearts of the godly are called (says one) loca arida, because
nihil melle, nihil dissolutum habent: sed omnia solida and firma quae arida and
solicita sunt (says Theophilact) and are wary and careful of their souls;
seeking rest: that is, to batter down, and to win the fort of their hearts,
and to make it a dwelling place of all wickedness, but finds none; they
yield not to his suggestions, they resist him steadfast in faith. 1. Pet. 5.
They stand against the assaults of the Devil, being strong in the Lord, and in
the power of his might. Ephesians. 6. They give no way unto him. So the hearts of
the godly are the solid, firm, and dry places, which will admit no noisome
humor of suggestions, whereon the Devil may fasten his pestilent seed of
temptations, there is no moisture of dissolute living to nourish it, etc. And
so minus gratum est hoc daemonibus habitaculum, as the dry places are unfit to
inhabit, (says another.) etc.

They which take loca arid^ and inaquos^, for the mind and hearts of wicked
men, interpret it thus. The hearts of the wicked are called dry places, that
we might understand their unhappy estate and condition, they are compared
squalentis cremi sterilitati; because there is found in them, no culture of
life, no study of godliness, no fruit of good works, no humor of piety,
mercy, devotion, but all things are dry, barraine, and unfruitful. In those
the Devil seeks rest, and finds none: for as a covetous man, is never
satisfied with that he has, but greedily gapeth after more: (for he is more
grieved with the desire of other men's, then he rejoices in that which is his
own) so our ghostly enemy, which is insatiable and greedy of souls, rests
not satisfied with them, whom he has made already his own, but most eagerly
gapeth after that which belongs not unto him: that is, which pertain unto
God, he still cries like the daughter of the Horsleach, affer, affer, Pro. 30.
More, more, nec enim illos quaerit quos iamsubegit, hos enim captiuos tenet:
illos pergit lacessere in quibus Christum cernit habitare. Cypri. Now when in
these places he finds no rest (for with infatigable labor, he gapeth and
seeks to ensnare and catch others) he resolves to return again unto his
house whence he came out: and finding it empty, Mat. 12. swept and garnished.
That is, made ready and prepared, as a house is trimmed, decked, and adorned,
inuiteth guests to enter into it: So when the Devil sees men secure,
negligent of their salvation, when they keep not their eyes, cares, tongue,
nor the rest of their senses, (which are as it were the doors of the soul.)
When (I say) they keep not careful watch over their souls, and are destitute
of their spiritual armor, faith, etc. Prayer, divine meditations. The enemy
is hereby invited, to enter into his former habitation. The 7. other spirits
worse then himself: are many more infernal spirits, by whose power and
operation the hearts of wicked men (by the just judgment of God, punishing
their security) are blinded, hardened, and holden captive. All these hellish
army combine themselves together, every one in his place, to assault, and
invade the walls of the spiritual Castle of the soul; one stirring him
forward to pride; another pricking him to covetousness; another incensing with
a desire of revenge; another alluring him to lechery; another drawing him to
envy, etc. So that this wreched man, if he resist some of these assaults, he
may yet be taken with the other. This place contains a most grave admonition,
to beware of carnal security: it is directed generally unto all Christians,
but especially unto those which make a revolt from God, that they should be
carefully careful to beware of the impudent malice of this so unclean spirit:
The reasons here he uses, are 2; 1. ab adiuncto studio, of the Devil and his
accomplices, that they have to seek the destruction of mankind. verse. 24. The 2.
is a perieuloso euentu. The last state of that man is worse then the first. For
if they after they have escaped from the filthiness of the world, through the
knowledge of the Lord, and of the Sa. I. C. are yet entangled again therein,
and overcome, the later end of that man is worse then the beginning. 2. Pet. 2.

Obs. and doct.
EX verse. 17.1. In that Christ knew their thoughts, he plainly showed himself
to be the true God, he is Cardiognostes, he is omniscius, he searches every
secret corner of the heart, and has no need that any should testify of men.
Io. 2. O that the sinner would reuolue this always in his mind, that God
sees all things, even his secret thoughts: There is none so shameless and
impudent, that will dare to commit those sins before men, which yet without
blushing, they fear not daily to commit in the open sight of God; If God
knows the thoughts of thy heart, how (think thou) shall he be ignorant of
thy wicked deeds? Hear (O foolish man) what God says to Samuel, 1. Sa. 16.
God sees not as man sees, for man looks on the outward appearance, but God
beholds the heart. But such is the blindness of wicked men, and the stupide
foolishness that sin causes, that seeing he sees not God, he supposes
that God sees not him. Elisha was environed about with angels, but his servant
saw it not, 2. Reg. 6. So assure thy self, that whatsoever thou do, God and
his Angels beholds thee, though thou see them not. Learn here to fear
the Lord, seeing we have to do with him, who is both a judge and a witness,
to whom our very thoughts are manifest, much more our wicked actions, etc.
Herein they are like children, which winking with their eyes see no body,
they think that they are seen of none. 2. vors. and 17. Every kingdom
divided, etc. Seeing there is an indissoluble consent of wicked spirits in
upholding their Kingdom: let us also be invincible, and of one mind, in
maintaining the unity of the Church, through the band of peace, Ephesians. 4. Be of
like affection one toward another. Romans 12. Be of one mind, live in peace. 2.
Cor. 13. Which invincible band of Christian unity, as it wonderfully
furthereth the course of the Gospel: so dissentions, strife, and contention,
greatly hinders the same: If ye bite and devour one another, take heed,
etc. Gal. 5. quae priuatae inimicitiae, maximo semper detrimento ecclesiam
affecerunt, and relligionem in multas sectas dissecuerunt. As truly says
Nicephorus, lib. 11. Hist. Eccles. Let us beware therefore (brethren) that
through our fault no schisms, and rents, may arise in the Church.

3 Seeing no City, or house or kingdom, if it be divided against it self can
stand. We are taught that concord in every state of life is to be embraced: as
Menenius Agippa in Liu. l. 2. a Roman, wisely confessed, when by an elegant
Apology of the dissension of the members of the body, reduced to unity the
Senate, and people of Rome, being at discord. Again, King Mycipsa, being about
to die, in a fatherly affection, exhorting his children to concord, commended
unto them this sentence, worthy to be written in golden letters: Concordia res
paruae crescunt, discordia magna dilabuntur. Salust. Teaching all parents at
their death, to bequeath co^corde unto their children, the best legacy they
may leave them; As Plut. de garru. reports of Scylurus the Scythian, who had
80. Sons; who at his death bad his Sons to bring him a sheafe of arrows,
which he delivered unto his Sons, commanding each of them, to break them in
pieces all at once: which when not one of them could do, he himself pulling
them out, one, by one, easily brake them before their faces; showing them by
this parable, the truth of that which Salo. teaches, Pro. 18. That a brother
united to a brother, is like an impugnable City: and their counsels, like
the bar of a Palace, which cannot be broken: for if their contentions be
such, much more their concord and unity. But to learn this point, I may send
you as the Apostle did the Corinthians, to the school of nature, 1. Cor. 11.
Nonne ipsa vos natura hoc docet? This reciprocal and mutual concord, nature
her self teaches us in the fabrike and structure of the body, for she has
made most parts, 2. or double, germana and gemella, as hands, feet, eyes,
ears, nostrils, signifying hereby that all these for mutual help, not hurt,
are so distinguished, that they might the better succor and help one the
other. Now if the hand which God created to help one the other, neglecting
this, should hurt one the other; or if the feet which were created to bear
one another burden, leaving this, should suppla^t one the other: or if the
eyes which like Caleb, and Iosuah, are fellow spies in the Microcosme, and
little world of the body, should not look for one another help, but look
asquint at the good of each other, were not this unnatural and monstrous in the
body? how much more monstrous is it for us, which are brethren and Christians,
all members of one body, to live in discord, and seek the hurt one of
another? For the nearer the cause is of conjunction, the greater must needs
be the wrong which does dissipate it. The wounds which Brutus his friend gave
to Caesar, went nearer his heart, then all the stabs of his foes: (...), (quoth
he) and thou also my son Brutus. This made David complain, Ps. 55. If mine
enemy, etc. So monstrous and barbarous a thing it is, to bear enmity, with
them especially, to whom we owe most love and affection. Wherefore as Salo.
sent the sluggard to the Emmet to school, that he might learn to labor,
Pro. 6. Esaias, the ungrateful to the Ox and Ass, to learn thankfulness,
Esa. 1. Jeremy the neglecter of season, to the storke and crane, the Turtle,
and the Swallow, to learn the opportunity of time, Iere. 8. and our Savior
the worldling, to the Ravens to learn Gods providence, and contentation: Mat.
6. So may I send the refractarie, and contentious persons to behold the frame
of the world, which preaches concord and unity unto man. We see the
celestial Orbs and Spheres of heaven, though their motions be diverse, and
their reuolutions thwartingly crossing one another (as Eras. in pacis
quaerimonia says) yet are they ever constant in the first covenant of peace,
wherein the God of unity at first placed them. The Elements though in nature
contrary, and in operation opposite, (as drought and moisture, cold and
heat) yet concordi pace ligantur: they all conspire together in a friendly
temperature for the preservation of man's body. The beasts of the field, the
fishes of the Sea, the fowls of the air, in their proper kinds, armentatim
pascunt, gregatim natant, turmatim v^lant (says he) feed by herds, swim by
companies, fly by flocks, and all to preach concord and unity unto man. The
very Serpents bite not one another. The ravenous fishes devour none of their
own kind: the most greedy birds and beasts, will not prey upon their like:
and shall man more unnatural then all other creatures be divided? seek the
spoil one of another, and worse then the Tigers, Dragons, and Serpents, work
the destruction one of another, which yet are bound together by God, with more
bands of amity then all the rest?

When God created man, he created him alone, but vnicum, as a thing of unity
without division, (when all other creatures were made couples, and twoes, Genesis
1.) Which one though the Creator made 2. by and after creation, yet made he
these 2. one again by conjunction of marriage, vt sciamus quam concorditer
viuere deberenous. Aug. 11. de ciuitate dei cap. 21. that thereby we might
know how peaceably, we should live together in one mind. Wherefore ( brethren
let the san^e mind, What? shall I say with the Apostle, the s^^e mind that
was in Christ Jesus, Phil. 2. No I dare not, I am out of hope of it, he was
such a lover of men, that he laid down his most precious life, and suffered
the most ignominious death, to save man his most rebellious enemy. But if not
the same, yet let the like mind be in you. Be ye followers of Christ as dear
children, and walk in love, Ephesians. 5. Nay let but the mind of beasts to them
of their own kind, be in you. For where as all motions of enmity in them be
but single, and peculiar to their own nature, they all concur together in
one man, as all rivers run into the sea. Man to man is in head crafty as a
Fox; in greediness like a Wolf, in fierceness like a Tiger, in tongue as
venomous as the Serpent, in their evil eye, as deadly as the Cockatrice; in
bloody hands resembling the cruelty of Lions. And whereas the integrity of
our forefathers brought forth this Proverb, Ho^o homini Deus. This corrupt age
has turned Deus into Lupus, from a preserver of man, into a deuourer of man,
to spoil one the other: nay, Homo homini Damon, to imitate the Devil one
toward another in envy, etc.

And surely what should more link our minds together, then the very name of
a Christian, if we had spiritual eyes to look into it? We are all borne of
one immortal seed, in one womb of the Church, growing up in one body to the
full stature of Christ, as members knit together by one spirit, all travailing
to one Chanaan, and hope of our calling, serving all one Lord, professing all
one faith, having all made the same vow in Baptism. In rebus tam multis
consortium and in vitatam inexplicabile dissiaium: says one, In so many
things fellowship, and in life no friendship? all one body, and in the members
no simpathie? in all one spirit, and in the affections no harmony? all one
hope of heaven, and in coheires no simphonie? all one Lord, and in fellow
servants no unity? all one faith, and in opinions no simmetrie? all sworn in
one Baptism, and in fellow soldiers no symmachie? all adopted by one father,
and among brethren no fraternity? so many ones and no unity? This of all
other is Argumentum maximi monenti, says a father, the most inducing motive,
and strongest argument that may be unto love, that we are al by one God and
Father made one body, through one spirit, to serve one Lord, in one faith, and
consecrated to him by one Baptism, do hope all for one glorious inheritance
whereunto we are called, Ephesians. 4. Behold how good, etc. Psalm. 133. It is both
bonum and iucundum, says August miscuit vtile dulci he has mingled
pleasantnes to make thee taste, with good to make thee savor this great blessing
of the Lord: for pleasantness, he likeneth it to the sweet savor of Aarons
precious ointment: for the profit thereof unto deaw of Hermon, and for the
happiness thereof, he expresses the promise of blessedness, for there the
Lord has promised his blessing in this life, and life for evermore in the
heavenly Kingdom.

Which blessed virtue of concord, as it is required in all Christians, if ever
they think to be partakers of the eternal blessedness: so especially it is
commended to the wedded estate, for nullius reipossessio coniugasi pace possit
esse iucundior. For they which in this state live peaceably futurae iam vitae
imaginem quandam referunt quae visio pacis appellatur. (Says this father) as
contrariwise, they which ^arre among themselves with private contentions and
strife, in this life they here begin their hell, and shall taste of a double hell,
in this life present, and in the life to come. Whosoever would aspire to this
peace, let him crave it of God, who only makes men to be of one mind in an
house, and at the beginning of his Church, gathered together a multitude, of
the believing in nature discrepant and diverse, that they might be one heart,
and one soul, Act. 4. And next, let every one renounce his own will and
judgment, especially the wives, whom God commands to be subject unto their
husbands, otherwise if they will stiffly stand upon their summum ius their peace
and safety cannot long endure. Faelices ter and amplius, quos irrupta tenet
copula, etc. Hor. lib. 3. This was the Legacy which Christ bequeathed to his
children at his departing, peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you,
Io. 14. For this he prayed especially unto the father, Io. 17. That they may be
one, as thou a father art in me, and I in thee. If any Prince travailing into a
far country, should give unto his Queen and spouse any precious Jewel, as a
pledge of his love, and she after his departing, should contemn and set light
by it, were she not worthy to be condemned of monstrous ingratitude? but this
precious jewel Christ gave before his departing to his father, which we so
vilely esteem that for the least occasion we fear not to violate the same:
how then shall we be thought to have any part with Christ, what assurance that
we are his children, or how should we look to be partakers of his glory, if
our wills be so ouer-thwart and crossing to his most holy will and disposition?

4 Note that there be many men now adays, herein rightly resembling the
devils, which though they live in perpetual strife and enmity among
themselves, yet to persecute the godly and innocent, they peaceably combine
themselves together. So Herod and Pilate, though they were at mortal
discord, yet they agreed together, to condemn Christ, and were made friends,
Luc. 2. So wicked men though in all other things their natures be crossing,
yet conspire they together to do mischief: and even so as this godly peace
conserueth, and corroborateth the kingdom of Christ; so the perverse peace of
the wicked, vpholdeth the kingdom of satan.

5 Ex verse, 21. We have this comfortable Doctrine: that Christ is stronger
then the devil, which is called the strong armed man, he has bruised his
head, Genesis 3. He has judged him, Io. 16. He has taken away his power over us,
he has divided the spoils, he has spoiled the principalities, and powers,
and made a show of them openly, Col. 2. Sitting at the right hand of the
father, defends our cause against the accuser of the brethren, Reave. 12. This
God of peace shall shortly tread satan under our feet. Romans 16. Let us
therefore stand fast in the Lord, and fear not, for greater is he that is in
us, then he that is in the world. 1. Io. 4. Non debet timere hostem fortem qui
dominum habet fortiorem, Chrysostom.

6 Again, here is one thing to be observed; in that he says, when the
Devil keeps his palace, the things he possesses are in peace. Here is
showed the nature of this infernal enemy, when once he has possessed the
soul of the sinner, he labors by all means to bring him to security, that
without feeling he may rest in his sin, and as the proverb is, in vtramque
aurem dormire, that if it be possible he may not feel the pricking and sting
of conscience, least by repentance he should escape out of his claws;
therefore he endeavors to hold him still in this deadly sleep of sin. And
as they that led the Israelites captive, required of them songs and mirth in
their heaviness, saying: sing us one of the songs of Sion, Psalm. 137. So the
devil when he has brought any into the miserable servitude, and captivity of
sin, seeks by all means to make him sing, rejoice, play, and rest secure
in his sins, that so he might forget the danger and misery he is in. To whom
(brethren) let us answer as it follows in the same Psalm: how shall we sing
the Lords song in a strange land? how, seeing we are inhabitants of heaven, and
have here no continuing City, but we seek one to come. Heb. 13. How (I say)
in this our pilgrimage, in this place of exile, and misery should we rejoice?
how should we sing and Iubilate the song of mirth, and carnal security,
having a conscience clogged with sin? dwelling here in the Babylon and
confusion of sin: when we call to remembrance, the celestial Jerusalem, the
country of the blessed, how should we choose but with sighings, gronings, and
tears in heart, aspire unto the same? But (alas) there are many ^o drowned in
their sins, and detained with such tyranny in the snares of the devil, that
in this most wreched state they are secure, they rejoice, and sing, they
remember neither the heavenly Jerusalem, the country of the blessed Saints of
God, nor think upon their own unhappy servitude; and thus the the devil
holds them in quiet and peaceable possession. O wretched and most cruel
peace; This felicity is most bitter grief. Esa. 38.17. They shall find this
of truth, Ierc. 2.1^. That it is both an evil, and a bitter thing to forsake
the Lord their God. For though outwardly they seem to have peace with the
world and the flesh, yet inwardly they have always most cruel conflicts, and
restless war with their passions: they say peace, peace, when there is no
peace, Iere. 6. This crafty enemy deals with the sinner, as we use to do
with our gardens or Orchards: when the Trees are yet budding and blooming, and
the fruit not yet come to maturitie and ripeness, we use no great care in
watching and keeping it: but when the fruit begins to come to the expected
ripenes, we look more carefully unto it. So when thy sin begins to wax
ripe, and to grow toward hardness of heart, then this enemy watches, and
is the more careful and vigilant of thee, least thou should hearken to the
voice of God, knocking at the door of thy heart; and open unto his Divine
inspirations, until thou be come into profundum peccati into the deepth of
sin, and into the ripeness of iniquity, and be made a fit dish for the
devils table

This is the miserable captivity wherein he holds the wicked, which yet
willingly subject themselves unto him, choose rather to fight under his banner,
so they may quietly follow their pleasures for a season, then as the good
Soldiers of Christ valiantly to resist him. And herein they imitate the
Israelites, which chose rather to subject themselves unto the unjust yoke of
cruel Pharoe, then to sustain a little labor for the land of Promise. Exodus
16. Sometime the lewd man, or whorishwoman, resolve with themselves to give
over their filthy life, knowing how odious this sin is in the sight of God:
now the devil fearing to loose his pray bestirreth him, and suggesteth into
the mind of this wretched woman, that if she give over this filthy trade, she
shall live in penury, and want maintenance, and that he may in peace possess
them, he lays before their eyes the strictness of Gods judgments, the
implacablenesse of his wrath, that repentance is now too late, and in vain,
and therefore wills them to take the present fruit of their pleasures. So he
lays before the Usurer, the hardness of the times, the sweetness of the
gain which without any pains comes rolling into his bags, etc. and by no
means will have the sinner to forsake his damnable ways. But (my brethren)
let us stop our ears to the pestilent counsels of this hellish fiend,
consider that all the pretended impediments of Satan are in deed but strawes,
and feathers, they appear to be something, when they are indeed nothing but
shadows, let him not with these paper-darts shake or weaken our confidence in
God: he cannot lie which said, Psalm. 37. Trust thou in the Lord, and be doing
good: dwell in the land, and assuredly thou shall be fed.

7. Verse. 23. He that is not with me is against me: This gnome of Christ is
diligently to be noted: we must therefore of necessity stand on Christ's side,
or on Satan's, we must either scrue God or Mammon, assent with Christ or with
Belial, 2 Cor. 9. Nullum est hic tertium, here is no third; for what communion
has light with darkness. 2. Cor. 6 Harken to this ye Neutralists which halte
between two opinions, 1. Reg. 18. Non nascitur ex bono malum, non magis quam
ex ficu olea, good cannot spring of evil, no more then the olive of the
figtree. Says Seneca. 30. Epist. Bonus animus nunquam erranti obsequium
accommodat, A good mind never reaches the helping hand to uphold error. Says
he again. Solon never reputeth him a good Citizen, which in a civil
dissension would associate himself to neither part and in dissensions of
matters of faith shall we think such to be good men? God will spewe them out
of his mouth. Apoc. 3.

8. Verse. 24. When this unclean spirit walking through dry places could find
no rest, to settle his habitation there, he resolves with himself to return
into his house, from whence he came out: He calls it his house, not by
creation, for all things are Gods, but by possession. Consider here (O wretch)
what guest thou reiectest, and whom thou receyuest when thou seruest him: thou
reiectest God, and admittest the Devil: thou expellest life, and receiuest
death: thou fliest light, and entertainest the Prince of darkness. Even as
through Saul's disobedience the spirit of God departed from him, presently the
evil spirit possessed him, which horribly tormented both his body and soul:
which inflamed him with the fire of envy and ambition, which incensed him to
persecute innocent David, and most barbarously to murder the priests of the
Lord, and lastly to be his own butcher: 1. Sam. 22 to 31. So (brethren) let us
assure our selves, that if we forsake the Lord, he will forsake us. 2. Chro.
15. If we suffer sin to reign in us, the spirit of God will forsake us, and
then presently our hearts are made an habitation for the unclean spirit O
(brethren) how fearful and miserable is the state of that man which is
forsaken of God, the fountain of all goodness, and possessed of the devil
the author of all evil? What evil is there that this most cruel, and
mighty enemy, will not effect in them whom he possesses? Note here that
the devil says not, I will go into some other house: but I will return into
the house from whence I came. See here the impudent boldness of this enemy:
he presumes that the doors of that house are always open unto him. He
knows that they which have ever been accustomed to sin, casting aside al
fear, will easily be drawn back to their vomit, and brought to their old
bias, and when he comes he finds it empty, Mat. 12. Swept and garnished,
Swept, Per consuetudinem peccati, empty, of faith, good works, and all holy
exercises, per pigritiam, and nogligentiam, garnished with counterfe^it
virtues, per hypocrisin: says an ancient writer.

1. Swept. The Broom swe epeth away but the dust, it leaves the dirt and
whatsoever sticks fast, it moves not that. So many will use Verriculo
panitentiae, the Broom of repentance, in sweeping the house of their soul
lightly, and superficially, they leave still behind their evil customs, and
wicked habit of sin which cleaves fast unto them. We see many Usurers will
hate adultery, make conscience of swearing and perjury, etc. These Cobwebs
they sweep clean away, but as for the filthy habit, gainful custom, wicked
trade of Usury, because it brings profit, they leave that untouched, their
broom reaches not so far. Likewise, many adulterers (though well monied)
detest Usury as utterly unlawful, and forbidden of God, upon pain of
damnation. Psalm. 15. Ezech. 18. etc. They will (perhaps) loath lying, craft
oppression, etc. but as for Adultery, their beloved sin, which continual
custom has brought to an habit, that filthy dirt they leave unswept, that
cleaves still fast to the walls of their spiritual house. The like may be
said of all other accustomed sin. These are like hypocritical Naaman, 2.
King. 5.18. which when he resolved to serve the God of heaven, he excepted one
thing with God, The Lord be merciful to me (says he) in this point. So the
Hypocrites would feign indent with God, to dispense with their beloved sin,
their gainful sin which they are loath to forgo? But, beloved, mark here I
beseech you, the policy of our ghostly enemy. Satan will seem to be
(forsooth) very reasonable in this point, he says to the sinner, Give thy
heart to God, serve him, leave me but one part, one little corner in this
house, and it shall suffice me. O dearly beloved, this is but one of Satan's
old tricks, hearken not unto him, heknoweth well, that if he has any part, God
will have none, God will have all or none, God will not hold any part with
Satan. He will be ant Casar, aut nihil, reign in thy heart, or have no part,
have the whole, or let the devil take al. My son give me thine heart (says
God) Pro. 23. Learn here (brother) to pluck up the evil seed by the root,
leave no root behind of evil custom, least it spring up to the pestilent
weed of a settled habit of sin, and so this unclean spirit looking into the
door of this spiritual house, seeing it lightly swept over, perfunctorie and
velut aliud agens, the filth of evil customs, still cleaving fast. This
sweeping well pleases him, and being invited hereby, he presumes to make a
reentrie into this house. Let us therefore (brethren) use violence to our
wicked customs, this requires no light care, old diseases are not so lightly
cured: Non leuiore manu, ferrosanantur and igni. And this let us do by
opposing the custom of virtue, and practice of godliness against our former
wicked customs, that we may stop the door of our souls against this
unclean spirit.

Thus the unclean spirit seeing his house swept fit for his purpose, looks
further into it, and finds it also empty, that is void of faith, good
works, holy meditations, Christian exercises, idle, careless, secure, and
slothful in serving of God, neglecting to keep diligent watch over their
souls. So the City Laishe, being careless and without mistrust, was taken
by the children of Dan, Judge. 18 They are not easily taken in the snare of the
devil, which are intent to any godly exercise. We may see many whom a man
would think to be very much busied, they are troubled about many things, they
are clogged with many cares, so that they have searce leisure Caput scalpere,
to scratch their head (as it is in the proverb) but if we look into their
actions, we shall find indeed all this business to be but mere idleness, it is
but an idle care which makes not for the life eternal, or profits not the
soul. When we see children busied in making houses with chippes and sticks, we
judge them to be idle, but they think themselves to be very busy, so when we
are plodding and intent to the fading, vain and momentanie things of the
world, never fixing our thoughts on the eternal and heavenly things, we may
rightly be said to be idle. The true business indeed is to be occupied in the
service of the Lord, in prayer, hearing the word, and to keep careful watch
over our soul, that the devil may not find us idle. In this life we should
be diligent and cast of all sluggishnes, until the wished Sabbath of eternal
glory come, when we shall labor no more, but enjoy for ever the fruits of our
labors. Semper aliquid agito, vt te diabolus occupatum inueniat: no^ facile
capitur qui bono vacat e^e^ citio, says Hiero. be always doing somewhat that
the devil may find thee occupied, he is not easily caught of the devil,
which is busy in some godly exercise. Thus when the unclean spirit sees the
house of thy soul empty, he thinks it prepared for him, and makes no doubt
to enter again into it.

3 He finds it also garnished, even as a house which is adorned, deaked, and
garnished, seems to provoke and inuit guests to come into it: so he that
remoueth not the occasions of sin, does as it were inuit sin to dwell with
him. It is needful therefore, that we do not only expel sin, but avoid
all occasions of sin; Occasio facit furem says the old proverb,
opportunity and occasion makes a thief. Much surely occasion avails both
to virtue and vice; the force whereof is such says Cicero, vi plerumque ex
voluptate tristitiam, ex damno lucrum, ex honesto in honestum parturiat: and
contra: breuiterque rerum naturam permutat, that of pleasure pain, of loss
gain, and of what is honest it brings forth dishonestie, and shortly
alters the nature of things. If thou have expelled the sin of whoredom and
cast it out, cast out also all occasions of whoredom with it, as wanton
company, alluring harlots, filthy and unchaste talking, etc: which are the
occasions of sin, and daemonis supellex says one. If thou have forsaken the
damnable custom of swearing, abandon also the society of profane swearers,
and so of all other sins. Occasions of evil are the Devils baits, and hooks
which he says to catch thee, and to bring thee again into his servitude. Si
ferreus sis, ante igne consistens aliquando dissolueris: proximus periculo diu
tutus no^ eris. If thou wast as hard as iron, the fire will at length dissolve
thee: being so near a neighbor to danger, thou shall not long be safe.
Familiarity saepe peccandi occasione^ dedit, gives occasion of sin: Isido.
lib. 2. solilo. therefore the Apostle, 1. These. 5. wills not only to
abstain from evil, but also from all appearance of evil. Take heed of all
occasions of evil, give no vantage to the enemy, trust not unto thine own
strength, cast out the bondwoman with her son, Genesis 21. Gal. 4. For if thou
cast out sin, and neglect to shun the occasions of sin, Pignus apud
daemonem relinquis, it is as a pledge left in the devils hands, which, he
assures himself thou will return back again to fetch: and then he will
surely hold thee captive. As Pharaoh, bad the Israelite depart to sacrifice
unto their God, but their cattle only they should leave behind: so says this
hellish Pharaoh, go (if you will needs) sacrifice unto God, that is repent
you of your sin, but only occasions of sin leave still with me as a
pledge, leave behind the relikes of your evil customs, the remembrance of
your former delights, etc. Satan little cares for the rest. These are the
ways whereby he reentreth into the house from whence he came. etc. Therefore
we should pray with the Prophet. Psalm. 119. verse. 29. Viam iniquitatis- amoue a
me: Take from me the way of iniquity, or as the Hebrew word (Seker) rather
imports of lying: where S. Ambrose Ser. 4. in Psa. Beati immaculati, well
observes: he says not, take iniquity from me, sed viam iniquitatis, the way
of iniquity. The Prophet prays that not only iniquity may be taken from
him, but also the occasion that leads unto iniquity. Occasio enimiter est
quod ducit ad peccatum: Occasion is the way that leads unto sin.

To conclude. The devil seeing the house of our soul thus sweeped, empty,
and garnished (as I said) that is, disposed and prepared for him, he is
invited hereby to enter again into the same. Then he goes and takes unto
himself seven other spirits worse then him self, etc. O fearful estate,
which if there be in us any feeling, if we have not a dead conscience, if we
be not altogether given over to a reprobate sense, is sufficient to breed in
us an hatred of sin, and chiefly to take heed of a relapse into sin, after
we have escaped out of the snares of the devil, let us never be secure, but
cleave constantly unto the Lord: for if the devil enter again, he will be
more strong, more vigilant to hold fast his possession. He now bandeth
himself, he now fortifieth his Castle, that he be not again cast out. And
even as the knights of Malta, after they were strictly besieged by the army of
the great-Turke Soliman, and brought into extreme danger, did diligently
fortify their walls, erect strong forts, and furnish the same with all
warlike provision, lest they should fall again into the like peril which they
had escaped: so this unclean spirit after he has again recovered the fort of
man's heart, which before he had lost, and from which against his will he was
repelled, is now very wary, that he be not again driven forth, and
therefore by all means possible he labors to fortify his house, with all
his spiritual muniments. And so with his infernal band he enters in, and
dwells there.

But (perhaps) it may be here asked after what manner the devil is said to
dwell in the wicked. This the Apostle Ephesians. 2. briefly shows, when he says,
that this unclean spirit works in the children of disobedience. He dwells
therefore by working in them: but what does he work? The Philosopher says:
Omne agens sibi simile agere: every agent works like it self. He labors
therefore to make a man like himself, that is, proud^, cruel, a liar, false,
envious, unclean, an inuenter of evil, deceitful, a man of blood, yea a very
devil in his life and conversation. But thou will ask, again, how does he
work this? It is certain, that the devil cannot compel, nor enforce any to
wickedness, yet he is able diversely to affect the inferior powers of the
soul, and chiefly the fantasy; that he may stir up the affections and
desire to evil; he imitateth the art of a skillful painter, which deliniateth
all things, that he painteth some times in this fashion, sometimes in that,
not according to the nature of things, but as it best pleases his fancy:
pictoribus atque poetis, quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas. Poets
and Painters, challenge a License to feign. By this art if he would allure thee
with the love of any thing, he obiecteth it unto thine eyes, most fair, and
amiable, when it is nothing less. If he would have thee hate any thing, he
represents it unto thee, most execrable and loathsome. How fair does he
paint gold to the eyes of the covetous man, honor to the proud man, revenge
to the wrathful man, lechery to the loose man? O how hard and cragged does he
make the way of virtue, and of repentance to the impenitent sinner? yea the
very same thing he exhibiteth to thy mind, sometime fair and sometime
deformed at his pleasure, as best he thinks it may serve to work our
destruction.

Thou happily wilt reply that thou never did feel this his working in thy
self. This is, because thou never did resist him, thou never did withstand
his temptations, thou yeeldest unto thy desire, thou never did strive to come
out of his snares. We see a bird that is caught in the snare, as long as he
stands still, is delighted and feeds upon the bait, he finds not the
force of the snare: but when he assaileth to fly away, then he feels the
strength of the ginne, with which he is holden fast, which before he perceived
not. So whosoever boileth with intestiue hatred toward his neighbor, or with
the desire of revenge, or with the fury of fornication, or with the delight of
wrongful gotten good, or with unchaste love, or is caught in any other snare
of the devil: let him but begin to come out of these snares, and to break
these bands of satan, or to subdue his long continued customs of any vice,
and then shall he prove the strength and power of this enemy. Eos pulsare
negligit quot quieto iure possidere se sentit. Greg. He lets them alone
whom he keeps under quiet possession.

So the last state of that man is worse then the first. Here our Savior
teaches how dangerous it is to make a relapse into sin, we are delivered
from the power of darkness, and satan in Baptisine, we are taken out of the
bands, and chains of ignorance and error, through knowledge of the truth, for
it is that which makes us free, Io. 8. Far be it from us (brethren) that
either through hatred of the truth in Doctrine, or through impiety in life and
manners, we should again submit our neck to the devils yoke. For even as in
bodily diseases, when the sick has recovered his former health if afterward
through his own default, he falls again into the same malady, his sickness
is more grievous and dangerous' then at the first, because nature now is
decayed and weakened: so after by the grace of God, and the preaching of his
word we have escaped out of the snares of the devil, if we fall again into
the same sin, our estate shall be more perilous then at first. Sin in his
first and best estate is an cuill, very hurtful and dangerous, the malice
whereof we cannot better behold, then by his contraries, for rectum est iudex
sui obliqui: The straight is the best tryer of the crooked. Omne bonum (says
the Philosopher) continet vel honestum, vel vtile, vet incundum: Every good
contains in it, either what is honest; profitable, or pleasant. Wherefore
virtue is magnum bonum, a great good, because it contains in it whatsoever is
honest, profitable, or pleasant. God is summum bonum, the sovereign good,
because he is sum vtilis, sum honestus, and sum delectabilis. Which 2 in
a most perfect manner are in God. Whereby we may conclude, that seeing sin
separateth a man from these 3. kinds of good, it follows it must needs be a
pernicious and execrable evil, because it makes us which were created to be
capable of the summum bonum, to be altogether unapt for the same. 1. Sin is
opposed to the profitable good, because it brings infinite damage and loss
unto the sinner, for it expels God the sovereign good, from his habitation
of our souls. Not as a more stronger drives out the weaker: but when through
vices and our filthy life we dishonor God, then is God said to be cast out of
our hearts. For as men are wont commonly to say: I will not thrust thee out,
but I will so use thee, that thou shall have little pleasure to stay with me. So
when God sees that we more esteem the dung, husks, and trash of this world,
then we do him, he forsakes his dwelling and departs, being so injuriously
used. To use this familiar example: If thou being married to a beautiful,
honest, and loving wife, descended of honorable parentage, should fix thy
love upon a foul, deformed, and filthy Neger, place her by thee at the higher
end of the table, compel thy wife to serve her as a vile handmaide; may she
not justly complain of thee, and willingly forsake thy company? In like
manner, when we esteem more our own lusts and appetites, and prefer them
before the love of God, following whoredom, envy, malice, blasphemies,
oppression, etc. Should God take any delight to dwell in our hearts? and when
God departs from us, it is the most grievous, and incomparable evil, that
possible may happen unto us, and greatest lost that may be imagined. For as we
see many to insult upon the Widows and fatherless, because for the most part
they are destitute of friends, to succor and defend their cause, and therefore
exposed to all injury and oppression: so the soul that is destitute of Gods
aid and protection lies naked, and open to the malice and fury of the
unclean spirit. This, David's enemies well knew when they said, Psa. 71. God
has forsaken him, let us persecat^ and take him, for there is none to deliver
him. And therefore this princely Prophet, wisely prayed, Psalm. 51. Cast me not
away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me. For even as when
the court remoueth, all the attendants and courteors depart also: so when God
departs from the soul, all blessings, goodness and graces go away with
him. O consider this, ye that forget God, and with a feeling heart consider
now, whether there be any thing so unprofitable to man as is sin, which
depriueth him of the fountain of all goodness, and ouerwhelmeth him with such
a deluge of cuils? O (my brethren) is it not to be wondered at that any
reasonable creature, knowing this (as reason it self teaches us) should be so
easily drawn by the enemy of mankind, to commit (and that without any remorse
of conscience) all wickedness, and uncleanness? O then let us take heed and be
carefully careful how we fall from God, for if we depart from the mildness of
his mercy, we must of necessity fall into the rigor of his justice. Even as a
trauailer, the farther he goes from the East, the nearer he approaches to
the West, and the farther he goes from the South, the nearer he comes to
the North: so the sinner, the farther he departs from Gods mercy, the sooner
he falls into the hands of Gods justice.

2 Sin is also opposite to honesty, and therefore a vile, dishonest, and
shameful evil. For it always brandeth the sinner with a note of infamy,
which is the cause that the wicked doer hides himself, and would be seen of
none, for he knows if his evil deeds be espied, he has lost his honest
reputation, and credit among good men, and with shame and ignomine is pointed
at of all men. Qui male agit edit lucem, he that evil does hates the light,
Io. 3. verse. 20.

3 It is opposed bono delectabil^, to the pleasant and delightsome good: and
therefore it is an evil full of sadness, grief, and vexation of mind, and
brings not only eternal death, but also makes this present life bitter and
unpleasant: for God will not suffer sin to escape his vengeance, it has ever
Gods revenging hand following it. Know (therefore) and behold, that it is an
evil and a bitter thing, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, Iere. 2.
verse. 19. I will not here speak of the eternal punishment, which shall
torment the wicked, but of the horror and secret stripes, wherewith their
conscience in this life tormenteth them. Sin has ever an evil end, and
leaves behind it certain stinges and pricks, which are still whipping wicked
men, and drawing them to desperation. It is like poysonedwine, the force
whereof is found in the end. Sin is like a strong wine, which inebriateth a
man, and bereaueth him of his senses, so that he may be compared unto a brute
beast, Psa. 40.12. It lays before the eyes, a false color and show of
pleasure, as honor, riches, worldly delight, etc. But when sin is
accomplished, it leaves a kind of bitterness, which will not suffer the heart
to be at rest, and the repining conscience is inwardly gnawing and biting. And
even as Job. 1. in the midst of his calamities, never wanted a messenger which
brought him evil news: so his Alastor is never wanting to the wicked, after
the accomplishment of sin, which lays before his eyes, the good he has
lost when he offends God, and the wretched estate into which he is fallen:
and evil conscience is an odious companion, a turbulent tempest, a scourge
which inwardly whippeth the wicked, and counterpoyzeth their pleasures with
bitter Aloes, and still casts Colloquintida into their sauces, and scarce is
the garlic of Egypt tasted, but it brings tears from the eyes. So that
this of Eliphas is true, Job. 25.^2. The wicked man is continually as one that
trauaileth with child, a sound of fear in his ears, etc. O the grievous and
intolerable yoke of satan: O the slavish condition of the servants of sin,
with how great labor do the wicked seek the things they desire, with what
fear do they possess them? with what sorrow do they lose them? as they
that worship the beast, shall have no rest day nor night, Apo. 14. No more
shall they which adore their beastly appetites. Sin it self is a grievous
torment, and punishment of the sinner, as the light of nature told Seneca,
when he said, sceleris in scelere supplicium est. The punishment of sin, is
in sin. All things to a wicked man are seasoned with gall and wormwood: if
they be in prosperity, they are vexed with continual fear of loosing their
felicity, if they be in adversity, in what care and sorrow do they live
which never suffers them to be at rest. O the unhappy, and wretched life,
that is a servant of sin, and a slave to his own lusts. But mark now the
importunity of sin: If a wicked man be little injured of any, see how mad and
discontented in mind he gets him home, he abstaineth from meat and drink,
he cannot sleep nor take rest, he armeth himself and seeks to revenge him.
How much more pleasure, joy, and tranquillity of mind do the servants of God
enjoy, which having received many injuries, are not moved to wrath, they break
not their sleep, they are joyful, they seek not revenge, they give place
unto wrath, they commit their cause into Gods hands, who has said, Vengeance
is mine, and I will repay, Romans 12. For as the devil and the world, miserably
afflicts their followers in this life: so Christ gives perfect peace, joy,
and true delights, unto such as faithfully serve him. The devil commands to
take revenge, God wills to forgive: tell me now which is most painful,
either to forgive or to seek vengeance? Ask the whoremonger in the midst of
the surie of his fornication, (who profuseth his wealth, undertakes many
labors, spends many wakefull nights, with infamy and the detriment of his
good name, with the loss sometime of his life, and without Gods great mercy
of his soul also for ever, and all to serve his filthy lust) whether there be
not greater pain and labor, in serving unchaste love, then in leading an
honest, and chaste life?

Now (brethren) seeing that sin is so unprofitable, so hurtful, so
dishonest, and so full of sorrow, labor, and grief, which make a most
troublesome life Let us (I beseech you) learn hereby to fly from sin as from
a serpent, hate it as a deadly poison, shun the occasions thereof, as a
contagious pestilence: and if at any time through humane frailty we fall into
sin, let us linger no delays, but presently strive by amendment of life, to
come out of the snares of the devil. 2. Tim. 2.26. And study ever to intertain
the fear of God in our hearts, and nourish the same by devout prayer, hearing
of the word, holy meditations, etc.

Here we have seen how evil the state of sin is, but the last state of
that man (says Christ) is worse then the first, 1. in respect of the devil; 2
in regard of the sinner himself; and 3. in respect of God: 1. in regard of
the devil, because now he handles them more cruelly, whom he has caught
again, and more vigilantly watches and observes them then before. Even as a
man that is detained in prison, his keeper seeing him to be an honest man and
of noble birth, does not so strictly keep him, nor so strongly fetter him, as
he does others, whom he mistrusteth: but if he breaks prison and escapes, if
again he be taken, his keeper now looks more narrowly unto him, puts on
him strong yrons, watches him night and day, least he should practice again
to fly. The like does this hellish Iaylor, when the sinner his captive, has
by the grace of God, escaped out of his prison, if he be so unhappy, as
through careless security, to come again under the captivity of the devil,
his last estate (O fearful saying) shall be worse then the first, he puts
now heavier chains upon him, he more carefully watches him, he multiplieth
his temptations, he labors to shut the spiritual doors of the soul, that
godly meditations and divine inspirations (if it be possible) may enter in. If
he sees that familiarity with good men, be an occasion to keep thee from
him, he diligently bestirreth him, to withdraw thee from the society of godly
men, and entiseth thee to sort thy self with wicked company. If he perceive
that coming to Sermons, withholdeth thee from him, he indeauoureth to
withdraw thy love and desire from coming to Church, or else distracteth thy
mind, with a thousand profane thoughts, that the word of God may take no
root in thy heart, but be unto thee, the savor of death, unto death. 2. Cor.
2.16. And this is it our Savior says, he takes to him 7. other spirits worse
then himself.

2 It is worse in regard of the sinner himself, because through custom of
sinning, he comes into an habit of sin, and so the more unapt to receive
any godly motions, and the more hardly converted. As one that for theft, or any
other crime has oftentimes bin cast into prison, at length becomes
shameless impudent, and as the proverb is, perfricuit frontem, he has wiped
away all shame, and cannot blush, so indurate is he in his wicknesse; or as a
garment that with continual use is worn so thin, that it will not hold the
mending: so many have so weakened, and worn their spiritual powers, with long
custom of sinning, that neither Divine inspirations, nor the admonition of the
Preachers may fasten on them any spiritual plaster, to cure and amend the
ruptures of their souls. Valerius says, that the Cretians, when they bitterly
cursed them whom they hated, were wont to use this form of execration, vt mala
consuetudine delectentur: that they might be delighted with some wicked
custom. This seemed but a modest kind of curse, sed essicacissimum vltionis
euentum reperiunt. But the event proves it an effectual kind of revenge,
says he. lib. 7. cap. 2. We see a candle or a firebrand but now put out, will
quickly resume light again with the least touch of the fire, but if it has
bin long extinct, it is not so soon kindled: so the soul that falls into
sin; if straight it takes hold of repentance, it is more easily converted,
and resumeth again the light of grace; but after it falls often into the
same sin, and through custom is inueterate in wickedness, and has quite
lost the heat of devotion, is hardly restored to his former estate. Consider
brethren I beseech you, if a woman that has a long time bin detained in
prison, should there have a child, the child being yet young though in a
strict, filthy and stinking prison, plays, rejoices, and is merry: because
he never knew what liberty is, nor ever proved any other kind of life, but
the mother with a heavy heart says: O my child, if thou know our misery,
and hadest tried my former liberty and selicitie: thou would not rejoice,
but with tears bewail our wretched estate. O sinful man and woman, which art
fast tied with the fetters and chains of vices, and yet in this straight
prison of satan do rejoice, as if all things went well with thee. And what
is the cause hereof? surely because long custom of sin, has now converted
it in alteram naturam, into another nature, which makes thee forget the
heavenly good things, and look only into the present and momentanie
pleasures O that thou did consider what, and how great the things are which
are promised unto us in heaven, surely al earthly things would then seem vile
unto thee, for all earthly substance without godliness is death not life,
captivity not liberty, darkness not light. Prauus vsus vix aboletur, assidua
consuetudo vitium in naturam conuertit, Aug. in solilo. A wicked use is hardly
abolished, a continual custom conuerteth vice into nature. Quo sit imbuta
recens seruabit odorem testa diu. Says the Poet. Horace in Epist. ad Lol.

The Pitcher long will hold the taste,
Of that which first was in it cast.
It is reported of Alexander the great that mighty conqueror of the world,
that albeit in his manners, and gate in going, he resembled his Schoolemaister
Leonides, yet he ever tasted of the vices, with which at first he was seasoned.
Wherefore (brethren) I exhort you for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, who shed his
precious blood for us, that ye will diligently take heed of evil customs,
least your hearts be hardened in sin, and so sin grow into an habit, but
without delay cast of your old sinful conversation, and be renewed in the
spirit of your minds, and betime put on the new man, which after God, is
created in righteousness, and true holiness, Ephe. 4.23. O consider, that in
thy first estate thou did fight against the flesh, the world and the devil:
but if thou still addest sin upon sin, thou prouokest besides these another
enemy, wicked custom, which will wage hostile war against thee, draw thee
after it, and will bring thee into that wretched estate, that thou shall not
feel the malice of sin, but drink in iniquity like wine, and so be the
more hardly converted. Let us fly all occasions, avoid the society of wicked
men, the lilly is hardly preserved unhurt among those thorns. And so in this
a respect, the last state of sin is worse then the first.

3 Thirdly, the last state of sin is worse then the first, in respect of God:
because the farther the sinner departs from God, the oftener he returns like
the dog to his own vomit, and as the Sow that was washed to her wallowing
in the mire. ^. Pet. 2.22. The more God departs from him, and gives them up
to their hearts lust, to a reprobate mind, unto vile affections. Romans 1 verse.
24.28. As the physician gives over the sick, which through his intemperancie
and disordered life, falls many times into a relapse of sickness. Wherefore
the Lord complains against Babel, Ier. 51. We would have cured Babel, but she
could not be healed, forsake her, etc. And even as a trauailer, the more he
goes on his way, the farther he is from the place from whence he came: so the
greater sin and more often, that a man commits, the farther is he still
from God. But mark here the policy of Satan: when he cannot draw a man
(especially such as have bin exercised in godliness) at one pull from God, he
labors to effect this pedetentim and paulatim, by little and little: even as
fevers and other infirmities of the body, are the forerunners of death: so
many infirmities of the soul, go before the committing of many sins in
action. Thou come devoutly daily to prayer: by little and little, thou growest
more cold, at last thou waxest keycolde, and utterly neglectest the duty of
prayer. Thou repayrest zealously to near the word preached he it be every day
in the week, at last thy zeal waxes more cold, and then thou say it is
sufficient to hear a Sermon upon the Sabbath day: in the end thou say to
what purpose is so much preaching, and so by little and little, satan draws
thee to despise Preachers, and contemn the word of God, and by degrees
brings thee to utter destruction. So our Mother Eve, by little and little fell
from God, first she beheld the Tree in the midst of the Garden, that it was a
fair Tree, and pleasant to the eye, then she desired the fruit, next, she
plucked it and did eat, and so transgressed Gods commandment. Genesis 3.6. So
Caine from a little envy, which at first might easily have bin suppressed,
giving place to the devil, his hatred so increased that it grew at last to
murder. Take heed therefore, principiis obsta resist betime, lubricus est
serpens antiquus, whose first suggestions, if they be not resisted totus in
intima cordis dum non sentitur, illabitur. Isidor. The devil is a slipperie
serpent, whose head, that is, his first suggestions, if they be not resisted,
he windeth in his whole body, ere thou be aware. And that he may the sooner
withdraw us from God, he labors first to corrupt and falsify the election
of our will, which one calls amoris and affectionum bilancem the balance of
our love and affections: whereby it comes to pass, that in the estimate of
our love, we so little esteem God, and the heavenly good things: that in our
election we prefer the creature before the creator, and transitory things
before the heavenly. So the Jews, Christ and Barrabas, being put in this
deceitful balance, in their choice Barrabas waighed down Christ. Math. 27.
Because they more esteemed Barrabas then Christ. Thou will say, that the Jews
deserved eternal torments for that they so unjustly did ponderate the
different worthynes of these 2. But if one should demand of thee, whether
thou love Christ or Barrabas? no doubt thou would say Christ: but if thou
make choice of one worse then Barrabas, what will thou say? what if thou more
esteemest sin then Christ? thou take from thy neighbor his substance, thou
betrayest thy soul unto the devil, thou will swear, and forswear, to
increase thy wealth, and for the gaining of one groate, thou forsakest Christ,
do thou not now more esteem thy gain then God? Do thou not love sin,
and the devil more then Christ? and seeing the devil is worse then Barrabas,
and thou love the devil more then Christ, it necessarily follows, that thou
art worse then the Jews. And what is the cause hereof, but the balance of
love or hatred, which is placed in thy will, which satan adulterateth, and
falsifieth in the estimate of this love, and inclines it to the worst? And so
as the sinner through the malice of his will, turns away from God: so God
turns his face from him, which is the greatest of all evils. And even as the
farther one goes from the Sun, the longer is his shadow, (for in the
evening the Sun declining, every thing has the greater shadow) so the
farther a man departs from God, the greater shadows of worldly vanities
follow him: for what are all earthly things, which so greedily we desire but
shadows? as the wicked themselves (but too late) shall confess: Wisd. 5. All
those things are passed away as a shadow. And the farther we plunge our selves
in the love of the world, the farther still we are from God, and therefore the
more difficill our conversion. And even as the Sun, the farther it departs
from any Country, the more cold and barraine it makes it: contrariwise, the
nearer the Sun directs his course to any region, the more warm and
fruitful it is, and the sooner it brings forth fruit: so the nearer our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of righteousness is unto us, and with his
presence and ho^e beams of his grace and holy spirit, collustrateth our
souls, the sooner and more abundantly we fructify, be converted, bring forth
the fruits of piety, to the joyful and blessed harvest of eternal life. But
when Christ the true Son of righteousness departs, he leaves the soul
desolate, barraine, unfruitful, and opens the gate unto all vices. And
therefore the Lord says by his Prophet, Hose. 9.1^. Woe be unto them, when I
depart from them. For as the spirit of God dwelling in our hearts makes the
way of virtue easy and pleasant; so the absence of Gods spirit, (when through
sin we grieve the spirit of God) makes the way of repentance, difficill and
unpleasant. And so in this respect the last state of the sinner is worse then
the first.

Wherefore (brethren) I beseech and exhort you, in the bowels of mercy, of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that ye would ever remember this wholesome caveat of our
Savior, Io. 5.14. Sin, no more, least a worse thing happen unto thee. Take
we heed of often back lyding. Remember Lots wife, Luc. 17. Genesis 19.26. For if
we, after we have escaped from the filthiness of the world, through the
knowledge of the Lord, and of our Savior Jesus Christ, are yet entangled
again therein and overcome, our later end will be worse, then the beginning, 2.
Pet. 2.20. Let us take the present opportunity of repentance, let us not
think to find it more easy hereafter, when all the causes of difficulty are
increased, by adding sin upon sin. When an evil custom has taken a deep
habit in our hearts, when sin by continuance, brings a plea of
prescription: when the devil has more strongly fortified his Castle, which is
our soul, when God which is our light is departed farther from us, when the
powers of our souls, become more weak by receiving of many wounds, and more
insufficient goodness. To conclude, again I exhort you (brethren) that taking
pity upon your selves, whiles yet this life lasts, whiles yet there is time
for mercy, while the the Judge himself calls you to repentance, lovingly
expects you, offers his grace, reaches out his hand to receive you, before
the gate of heaven be shut against you, that ye would in time provide for your
selves: that walking the way of repentance, the hand of the Lord guiding and
directing you, ye may come after this earthly Pilgrimage, into the blessed
Chanaan of eternal felicity, where shall be eternal health, and healthful
eternity, where our joy shall never decrease, nor love ever wax cold, even
that blessedness which the eye has not seen, the care has not heard,
neither has entered into the heart of man, which God has prepared for them
that love him. 1. Cor. 2.9. To whom with the Son and the holy Ghost, 3.
persons in one most glorious Trinity, one God in Unity, might, majesty, be
all honor, praise, power and dominion, now and for ever more, Amen.

FINIS.

