CATHOLIQVE TRADITIONS. OR A TREATISE OF THE BELIEF OF THE CHRISTIANS OF ASIA,
EVROPA, AND AFRICA, in the Principal Controversies of our TIME. IN FAVOR OF
THE LOVERS Of the CATHOLIC Truth, and the Peace of the CHVRCH. Written in
French by Th. A. I. C. And Translated into English, by L. O.

LONDON Printed by W. STANSBY, for HENRY FETHERSTONE, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Rose. 1609.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, HENRY, Prince of Great BRITAIN.
MY GRACIOUS LORD.
GReat Attempts become great Princes. And is there a greater or a more worthy
enterprise, more holy in it self, and more comfortable to the world, then the
re-establishing of peace in the Church, and the refreshing of Christendom,
through the reconcilement of the differences, which ignorance, avarice and
ambition have hatched, and which passion and stomach do as yet maintain? And
is there any Prince more worthy for the sincerity of his life, more capable for
his solid judgment, and rare knowledge in all good sciences, especially in
those that belong to God, and godliness, then that great King your father, the
nurs-father of learning? Who I say, more fit for this great business then He,
as well for his eminent dignity, power, credit and authority amongst the
Christian Princes of the West, as also for the experience which he has in the
managing of the like affairs, having already well nigh pacified those
divisions, which the overmuch scruple of some, and the too too much liberty of
others had brought into the Church of England; unto the which conformity, he
has also most happily reduced the Church of Scotland, to be conjoined and
reunited both in discipline, and ceremonies; that he may attainne to that
mark which he aims at, that is, a holy and strict union, as well in the
religion, as in the state of all the people and Countries under his obedience?
Who I say, can with more hope of good success undertake so excellent a piece
of work, then he, whom the heavens have so richly endowed with such rare
qualities, as I have said, and other perfections truly heroique, and
admirable! And you my renowned Lord, after him, and with him for to second him
in such a goodly and honorable enterprise, seeing that already by reason of
the generosity of your spirit, the happy education of your youth, the imitation
of so rare an example, and that at home, and of your own Father: and above all
the rest, by reason of the bounty and courage of your nature; you are the
second hope of great Britane, and make men expect great and mighty desseignes
at your hands, and such shall be profitable to all Christendom: and (if it
please God) to be one day a principal instrument to tame these damnable
Monsters of wicked factions and pernicious sects, which have almost made a
spoil of the body of Christ his Church; yet not so much doubtless through the
diversity of beleefes in the matter of faith, which is the soul and essence of
religion (for the which we are greatly to praise God) As for the differences of
Ecclesiastical rytes and ceremonies, whereof your highness shall see here a
pattern or plat-forme, established only to show to the world, that in the
three other Clymates, yea even among the blind Pagans and impious Mahometists,
the name of the Son of God is known and called upon, if not with so much
purity, yet surely with more piety (although that their doctrine is not so
subtly expounded) then amongst us: and shall be more and more (God willing)
toward the end of the world, according to the Prophetical and Evangelical
promises; and in the issue to convince and confound those which do empale and
enclose the Church of Jesus Christ, within the circuit of their walls, or
within the limits of one Province, or else within the regions of those people,
who hold one self same opinion, and are obedient to one chief or head above
all other. Jesus Christ is the grand Sovereign, and universal Patriarch of al
his Church: and the holy Ghost says, that it neither has, nor shall have any
other bounds or limits, then the whole compass of the round world: and which
is more, that it shall have his presence and assistance for ever; although (for
the ingratitude of men) not at all times, nor in all places with like glory,
and efficacy. The Sun never cease to shine upon the earth, but not every
day and in every place, with the like brightness. This enterprise of
Reconciliation (my gracious Lord) has been attempted, not once or twice, but
often in ages past, as well by calling of Counsels, as by public
conferences; as for example, that with the Donatists, through the mediation of
Saint Augustine at Carthage, where the end was happy enough, and might in some
sort serve for a pattern in the differences of this age; as also the conference
at Ratisbon, under the authority of the Emperor Charles the fifth, for
Germany: and for France that at Poisi in the reign of Charles the ninth.

And besides these public meetings and conferences, there have been found
learned, judicious and moderate men, not a a few from time to time, who bearing
a great zeal to the peace of the Church, have opened and showed certain
means and ways, every one according to his knowledge and conscience: But
these discoueries of the truth, have found no place in the hearts of them that
were lead with passion; but will (by all possibility) bring forth better
fruit hereafter in their due season; that is to say. When as God being first
ouercomeby our Repentance, Cries and Prayers, shall cause that lamentable
Schism to cease, being one of the greatest Plagues that ever happned or could
happen among Christians. Your Highness shall see by marking that which I have
here compiled out of them and their writings, how the difficulty of
reconciliation for a great part of our controversies, whether it be with the
East or South Churches, or between our selves of the Western Churches, lies
not so much in the things themselves which fall in question, as in the perverse
opinion of the disputants: and that those things wherein we agree, are a
thousand times of more importance, to the glory of God, and our salvation,
then those things wherein we vary and disagree; and shall have far more
reason to love us for those things wherein we agree, then for to hate and
persecute us cruelly for those things, which remain as yet to be avoided from
among us: yea seeing the greater part of our disputations, happen for want of
understanding the state of the controversies in question; or else by reason of
our terms and fashion of speaking: but far more for want of conceiving the
true sense of the holy Scripture; which also some great men of our time have
showed manifestly, in certain points of doctrine, which were judged
irreconcilable: wherein was manifested Gods justice against our sins of
presumption, curiosity, vainglory, envy, avarice and ambition. I say the
more, because Princes and Sovereign Magistrates should bear sole authority,
and by their absolute commandment should testify their good will therein,
and employ the prudent advise of their Ecclesiastical subjects, not the wisest
only, but the best and godliest also, not so much to dispute and win the
victory, as to confer, and amiably to agree: The God of peace will give the
fruit of peace, to his glory and our good. But I know not by what Enchantment
or destiny, Kings for the most part know not their forces, and willingly do
dispoyle themselves of a great part of their own Authority, and many times
perceive it too late. As for the particulars, many do know and see the evil,
but do persuade themselves, that the remedy is most dangerous of all: or else
for fear, will not be singular in opinion, be it never so good, loving rather
to suffer themselves to be carried away with the torrent and stream of
division, and to be of the common fashion, that they may the better follow
their private affairs. Every one does brag and vaunt himself of his faith,
but few or none will practice charity, and what is faith without charity,
more then a tree without fruit? or a body without a soul? I have been here
emboldened to address my self to your Highness, for the reasons above said;
and to the end that under the luster of your name, this little Treatise,
written only for the public utility, might be the more favorably received
and respected of all men, especially of the subjects of the kings Majesty your
father; amongst whom are more learned Divines well practiced in the art of
disputation, in the reading of the Fathers, and in all the Histories of the
Church, then (peradventure) in three or four other as great Countries. Their
writings do testify it, insomuch that we do admire thereat in these parts;
and the English Liturgy gathered according to the model of the Ancients, the
purest of them; in the which through the advice of so many excellent men in
learning and piety, English men and others, has been reserved for reverence
of Antiquity, all which might be left with a good conscience. Also it is very
likely that it shall endure perpetually, and serve for a pattern or example
for those which are not as yet reformed: The praise whereof (next unto God)
shall be to the good and wise Kings of Great Britane; the Predecessors whereof
have received and embraced with the first, the faith of Jesus Christ, and not
with the last, the Reformation which was necessary in the Church: The principal
cause truly, or rather the only cause of this long peace and prosperity,
wherewith God has blessed the Kingdoms of your Island, besides many
benedictions wherewith he has favored your Royal house, and your Highness
in particular, who have after his Majesty the first place in age, in valor,
and dignity, and who for the gracious respect which naturally you do show
unto all men, which through any merit or service do seek the honor of your
favor, will move you (I am assured) to receive this little present, as from
him, who will think himself happy all the days of his life to say, (*)

Your Highness most humble, and most obedient servant, Th. A. J. C.

The Preface.
First, Division of Christian people.
THe university of Christians is divided into six principal parts, Sugil.
Turc. spurc. cap. 22. And other Authors do reckon ten, they put sometimes three
several Nations the which do make but one Church.
which do equally vaunt themselves of the Name, of the Church of God. The East
Church does pretend, that the first rank or seat is due to her without any
contradiction, in regard of her prerogatives and privileges, Respo. Confess.
August. cap. 13.
a Country of great largeness: almost all the Apostolic Seas, and the most
part of the Patriarchs: The majesty of an Empire, which during the space of
more then a thousand years, has withstood Paganism and Mahometisme: The
authority of seven universal Councels, celebrated within her jurisdiction:
The Syrian language, wherein the Son of God pronounced his Oracles: and the
Greek tongue in the which they were registered. In this Church does the
Oecumenicall General.
Patriarcke of Constantinople, preside or govern, It is composed of Grecians
(a Nation acknowledged as a mother by her proper adversaries) Orat. Corn. Epis.
Biton. in council. Trid.
of Syrians, Iberians, Sclauonians, Russians, Muscouites, and others, scattered
into many places of Asia, and Africa: Theuet. Cosm. 1. lib. 18. cap. 13.
al which do call themselves Orthodoxe Cras. Turcogr. lib. 3. in ann.
Catholics, and do not differ or vary among themselves but only in few
Barlaam. de Papae princ. cap. 15
ceremonies.

The Latin, or Catholic Roman Church, might conveniently be placed in the
second place. Her primate is called in Latin A Bridge-maker* Fenest. de
Sacerd. ca. 8.
Pontifex, or more commonly Papa, in English Father.
Pope, a name which all they of the East Church do give unto all their
Priests. This Pope is acknowledged by the Italians, Frenchmen, Spaniards, by
some Germans and Polanders, and withal by some Americans and Indians, which
of late are conquered and converted by the Spaniards. The Roman Catholics do
say and affirm themselves to be very strongly united together, because that
they depend upon one head or chief: Nevertheless, they are not all of one
accord so far as his authority does extend. Some do attribute unto him full
authority over the Church and Councels, and over Kings, and Commonwealths,
others do contradict Panor. de council. Basil.
it. Nevertheless these do tolerate the Pope in his attempts unto the very
execution of them, which is the cause that Christendom is noted to be in
schisms and scandals, and her people in wars and dissentions.

The third Christian nation, is the South or Meridionall Church, which
contains the Nubians, and the Theuet Cos. lib. 4 cap. 2.
Abyssins, subjects of King.
Negus of Ethiop, otherwise called Apostolic.
Prester-Iohn, and many that are scattered in Egypt, Arabia, and Chaldea, which
are called Iacobits or Israelites, because that they are of the lineage or race
of Jacob, otherwise called Israel: But some are of opinion that they take name
of one Jacob an heretic. They are called of some in Greek Cophites, or in
Hebrew Broken or Cut.
Cophtes, because that they use Circumcision. Their Primate makes his
residence in Caire, and is called Patriarcke of Alexandria, his substitute or
Deputy in Ethiop, is called Our father.
Abuna.

The fourth Christian nation, are the Nestorians, accused to hold the heresies
of old Isch-ja a man of God.
Nestor, which are dispersed here and there in Tartaria, Persia, and in the
Kingdoms of the East Vilam. l. 2. cap. 21.
Indies: Their Prelat resideth in Mosal or M. Paul Venet. Hist. Ind. orient.
Seleucie, and is called Sent from God.
Iascelich. The Historiographers do not exactly report the truth, what is, or
in times past has been their belief, which is the reason wherefore we do not
aleadge them very often.

The fifth Nation is that of Armenia, M. Masius in praef. in lib Mosis de parad.
which (peradventure) might be thought to be of the Roman Church, because that
they have offered themselves to her in hate of the Nichol. l. 4. cap. 19.
Grecians, and their Universal.
Catholic, (for so they call their chief head) did submit himself to the
Pope of Rome: but the truth is, that the Roman Church does hold them all for
Alphons. de Castro de haeres. passim.
heretics, although that she does deal more discreetly with them, for to
withdraw them by little and little to her Vilamont. l. 2. cap. 23.
obedience.

The Protestants or reformed Christians, do make the sixth Church of
Christians, they inhabit a great part of Germany, and the Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, Denmark, and Swethia, and have Churches in France, Flanders
and Poland. This reformation attempted and desired by the Albigeans, and
Valdians, was received in Bohemia, in the year 1400. or there abouts, and
afterward in the year of Sleidan de Stat. Rel. lib. 1. c. ^.
1517. established in the said Regions by the doctrine of Luther, Melanchton,
Zuinglius, Bucer, Calvin and others. The reformed have not Primate in common
neither any general Synods, which are the Cyprian de simpl. Cl.
Marks and Bands of Unity: and from thence have proceeded and entered amongst
them, with great scandale, the divisions and names of Hussits, Lutherans,
Caluins and Puritans.

Secondly, Certainty of Christian Religion.
FOrasmuch as we intend to entreat of diverse points of the Evangelical
verity: It seems necessary unto us, before all things, to establish and
show the foundation: The which shall be of more authority if we insert here,
the end of a learned discourse of Gennade, Patriarch of Constantinople,
Gennadius Confession Hist. Eccl. de Constable.
made by him in the presence of Mahomet the second Emperor of the Turks.
Besides these reasons ( says he) there are seven which do altogether assure
us of our faith. The first, because that the Prophets of the Jews, the which
we do receive, have foretold of JESUS and all that which he did, and his
Disciples after him through his power: And in like manner the Oracles of the
Grecians by the permission of GOD, and the Astronomers of Persia and of Greece,
did foretell of him. The second, because the holy Scriptures is altogether
conformable to our Faith; for that those which did write them, had all one
teacher; to wit, the grace of God: for if the same had not been, they had
differed and varied in some point. The third, because that men received this
faith (although new and strange) with great care, among all nations, and in
great dangers: And not only the foolish, but also the wise and prudent: The
Sybils.
and all Diabolicke deceit was perfectly reuersed and overthrown: To wit,
Pagans.
The fourth, because that this faith contains nothing that is impossible, and
which disagreeth with it self: and that there is no corporal thing therein,
but rather spiritual, and it is the way which leads the soul to the love of
God, and to the hope of everlasting life: The fifth, because that those which
have received this faith, and that have lived virtuously according to the love
of Christ, have received great gifts of God, and have wrought many miracles:
the which could not have been done, had not the faith been true. The sixth,
because that all that, which may be objected against it, is easily refuted with
firm arguments. The seventh, because that the Kings of Paganism Countries,
have made Wars against this faith with infinite power and cruelties during
many ages, and have profited nothing at all, but rather the faith has
prevailed so well, insomuch that it does persist until this present, and when
the Lord does come he shall find it. To the same Jesus our Lord and true God
be glory for ever. Amen.

Thirdly, the Subject and end of this Treatise.
IF the Schisms do ruinate Christendom by the advantage that the Infidels
do take, it is nothing less endamaged by the scandal which Christians
themselves do receive the one of the other: the one lives uncertain of that
which he ought to believe, the other persuades himself that he follows the
right way, and animated out of measure against the opinion of the rest, he does
but attend the hour to renew those ancient Furors. If any man speak of a
Council, or to correct and eschew those vicious and scandalous extremities, he
is so soon reproved by those which have the ears of Kings and people. Psalm.
120. 7.
I seek peace (says the Prophet) and when I talk thereof, they are bent to
wars. The saying of Zaga Bishop of Ethiope, and Ambassador of Prester Damian
a Goes de morib. Aethiop.
John is more charitable: It is a miserable thing (says he) that Christian
strangers should be so sharply reproved as enemies, as I have been here:
and other things which concern not the true faith: But it should be far more
convenient to support all Christians, be they Grecians, be they Armenians, be
they Ethiopians, be they of any one of the seven Christian Churches, with
charity and love of CHRIST, and to permit them to live and converse amongst
other christian brethren without any injury, because that we are all Infants
of one Baptism, and do hold truly the true faith: and there is no reason to
dispute so sharply touching ceremonies, but rather that every one should
observe and keep his own, without hating or troubling the other, and not to
be excluded out of the commerce of the Church; if being a stranger in other
Provinces he keep and observe the customs of his own Country. This is the
Discourse of a Moore, Impedit ira animum ne possit cernere verum.
which should make us blush: But seeing that ignorance obscureth the
understanding, and that anger stops the ears, and shuts the eyes of the
men of this world: It rests for the Lovers of peace and truth, to put in
practice the commandment of our Savior, Take heed (says he) of the leaven
of the Mat. 16. 6.
Pharisees: For who can assure himself that this commandment has not more
scope? But, some man will say, what means is there to discern this leaven and
these Pharisees, in so great a conflict of reason? The answer is, that when
the Scriptures, the which all Christians do claim, have not sufficient light,
for to make the truth in the doctrine of controversies, to be apparently
perceived: Yet may a man now a days use that means which S. Ireneus
councelleth Lib. 4. contra haeres.
us, which is, that he have a recourse to the Churches, where the Apostles have
conuersed for to learn the Apostolic tradition. But men are far enough
from taking this way. The one persuades himself that the Apostolic Churches
are perished, the other calls them plain heretics: For it is manifest,
that we must believe the promise of the Son of God, who said to his Apostles,
yea, as well to them as to the College of their successors, Go through the
universal world, behold I am with you until the consumation of the Mat. cap.
vlt. 20,
world. Here is the full But of this Treatise, to make men see by Testimony of
Historiographers, being ocular witnesses, and of unreprovable Authors, that
there are Churches in the Apostolic Sees, and for to show that they are
conformable among themselves, and to the Scripture, in that which is necessary
to salvation. As for ceremonies or curious Questions, it matters not, if every
one of them does make, or believe that which seems him best: That which is
worst of all, is the division, which proceeds of zeal, but with little
charity, and it will not be amiss to recite the moderation which Saint Paul
commands: If you (says he) be otherwise minded, GOD shall reveal even the
same unto Phil cap. 3. 15.
you. As for the rest, this Treatise is not for the learned sort, of whom we
are willing to receive both council and correction wheresoever it shall so
fall out: It is but for to solace those which desire to learn, and have not
the means to read diverse authors, especially the Greek and Latin, Those also
that search discourses garnished and painted out, with all sorts of flowers and
colors, shall not be here satisfied. This subject cannot permit any
rhetorical sentences, and the fashion of the Treatise is far wide from it,
here is but a Collection of diverse passages, Coppies and sentences of authors
word by word, with brief and simple Annotations. The breuity is, to the end
that the simplicity should not be envious, and the simplicity is, because that
it is convenient both to the matter and argument: In like manner because that
which is most plainly spoken, should have lest suspicion and be more
intelligible. I do not doubt that this breuity will give any advantage to the
contentious: But I shall have better means hereafter to satisfy them, God
willing. Let it then suffice thee for this present (Catholic Reader) to have
here a beginning of the knowledge of this subject, a knowledge which will
increase in thee, through the love of the truth. The ancient Bishop Meliton,
(as Eusebius writes) Hist. Eccl. l. 4. cap. 22.
did visit the Churches of the East, for to learn what were the Canonical
Books, and true writings of the Apostles: If thou do read this abridgment,
thou shall imitate without any pain, the holy curiosity of this good man.

A TREATISE OF THE TRADITION AND BELIEF of the Christians of Asia, Europa, and
Africa, in the principal Controversies of our time.
QVESTION. I. Whether Saint Peter had authority over the other Apopostles, or
only the Presidencie; and whether his successors have the same authority?
THE EAST CHVRCH.
NIlus Archbishop of The causes of dissentions Eccl. 5 1.
Thessalonica. The Apostles being in Jerusalem, St. Peter took not upon
himself the Primacy, neither, said he, is it lawful for me to make a Canon
upon the same: But the Apostles and the Priests assembled themselves together
for to consult thereupon, and Saint Peter rejected them not, but he began to
speak, and after him Saint James spoke: and they all did condescend to the
opinion of Saint James, that is to say, Saint Peter himself and the rest of
the Apostles and Priests.

Barlaam, Monachus Graecus. De princip. cap. 2.
I acknowledge that St. Peter was an Universal Pastor and Teacher, but he was
not alone, but also every one of the other Apostles was in honor equal with
him. It is true that our Savior promised the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven
to Saint Peter, the which he declares to be no other thing, then the power to
bind and unbind: But it is manifest, that he gave the same power to the other
Apostles, saying, Whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven. We
do conclude then, that all the Apostles had equal and like honor, in that
which was belonging to the Church, but Saint Peter was preferred, in this holy
dozen, and for that the others were present, he propounded the question, and
peradventure received the honor to be set in the first rank.

Mayor. In 4. Sent. did. 24. qu. 3.
Anacletus says, that the Apostles received with Saint Peter, an equal
Community of honor and authority, but they would that he should be their
Prince. And this saying of Anacletus, is confirmed, by this sign, to wit, that
the Grecians do follow the contradictorie of our conclusion, (that is to say,
of the belief of the Church of Rome) and none ought to say, that so great a
people are in error, a people I say, that have received the faith before the
Romans, and the most part, at the very first foundation or planting of the
Church.

Sacranus. (...) cr. cap 2.
The Muscouites deny that Saint Peter was a true Pope, or a true Bishop of the
sea of Rome: or that he was the only head of the Militant Church: And they
say, that he received not of Jesus Christ full authority: The same they believe
of the Bishop of Rome, the which they maintain to be like other Bishops.

THE SOVTH-CHVRCH.
ALuares. Descript. Aeth. cap. 29.
Prester-Iohn sent to me, to ask wherefore we have divided the Churches of
Antioche and Rome, seeing we profess to be Christians, and seeing that the
Church of Antioche, was in a manner the chiefest, until the Council of Pope
Leo, whom three hundred and eighteen Bishops assisted. I answered as I had
said once before to his greatness, that indeed Antioche, was heretofore the
head of the Church, which Saint Peter governed, and dwelt in it five years,
and in Rome five and twenty years. After that, he inquired whether we do
obey all that which the Pope commanded us; I answered him, that we do, and
that we were obliged thereunto, by the Article of our holy faith, which
confesses one holy Catholic Church. Whereupon he replied, that if the Pope
would usurp so great prerogative, as to use toward them an unlawful
commandment, they would not make any reckoning of it: And if by such means
their Abuna would presume so far, they would burn the Coppie of such
commandment.

Annot. By this discourse it is seen that the Ethiopian Church does hold,
that the Primate of the Church may err, and command unlawful things,
although he do it in the quality of a Primate (for he commands not by any
other authority) and that the Judgment of the Church is good and valuable,
without the advice and consent of the Primate.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH IN THE WEST.
THe Confession of England. Art. 4.
Christ is always present in his Church, and has no need of any Lieuetenant
that should succeed him totally in the Church: neither can any one mortal
man, embrace in his understanding the Catholic Church, that is to say all the
parts of the world, much less to establish a good order, and to administer
and govern it well and duly. The Apostles (as Saint Cyprian says) Simpl.
prael.
were all of an equal authority: And the rest of them had the same authority
as Saint Peter had. It was spoken to them equally: Feed; go through the
Universal world, Preach the Gospel: And as Saint Jerome says Ad Euagr.
All Bishops in-what place soever they be, either in Rome, or in Eugubio, or in
Constantinople, or in Rhegium, are of one self same merit or calling, and of
one self same Priesthood.

THE ROMAN OR LATIN CHVRCH.
POpe Leo. Did. 19. Ita Dominus.
The Lord would that this holy charge should belong in such sort to all the
Apostles, that he has appointed and ordained it in the person of Peter, as
sovereign amongst the other Apostles.

Pope Stephan. Did. eadem enimuero.
Forasmuch as the Roman Church, over the which we do sit and govern, has
been proposed for a mirror and example; all that, whatsoever she does ordain
and command, ought to be for ever inuiolably observed.

Card. Bellarmine. Tom. 2. l. 2. c. 17. and 18.
The Sovereign Bishop is absolutely above the Councels, and cannot subject
himself to their Coactiue sentence. Besides, In praef. de summo Pont.
this point is the most important of all Religion, and to hold the contrary,
is as much as if one would say, that the Church may perish and decay.

ANNOTATION.
THere is three manners of government, that is to say, Monarchy,
Aristocracie, and Democracie. Bodin. Repub. l. 2. c. 1.
Monarchy is, when one alone has power to command. Aristocracie is, when the
lesser part of the people has the Soueraignetie in it self, to give a law to
the rest of the people, be it to all in general, or to some one in particular.
Democracie, when all the people, or the greater part of them, have the
sovereign authority. Presidencie is, when in a State Aristocratique or
Democratique, there is one that has the first rank, and the charge to govern
in the assemblies. Magistracy, or Superintendencie, is when he, that is
President, has jurisdiction over the particulars, for to cause the Laws and
Statutes of the Commonwealth, or Monarche, whereof he is a Subject, to be
observed. Durand. de sacris Eccl. lib. 3. c. 2.
This charge and Jurisdiction is given sometimes for term of life, and
instituted both in Title and Office.. Sometimes for a certain time and in the
form of a Commission: Some man may demand whether Saint Peter had simply the
Primacy, that is to say, the first rank, or place amongst the Apostles, or
whether he had Jurisdiction over every one of them in particular, or whether he
had a Monarchall authority over their company Also whether had he the Primacie
in Divine affairs, and in such sort, that it was not Lawful for his fellows
to give to unto another. The Roman Church does hold that Saint Peter had
authority in divine matters over the company of the Apostles, and that he that
is elected and chosen, to preside or govern in the Church, has the same
authority over it, and is not obliged to follow the greater voice* in giving
his sentence according to the consultations of the Councels. For proof whereof
is aleaged, Thou art Peter and upon this Stone, etc. I will give thee the Keys.
Matthew. 16.
I have prayed for thee, John.
Feed my Sheep, Strengthen thy Brethren: And that the faith of the Romans
was renowned through the Romans 1.
world.

This opinion of the Roman Church, is so particular, that not only the
Catholic and Apostolic Churches of the East, South, and of the North, and
the reformed Churches of the West, but also the rest, that make profession to
believe the Roman Church, cannot approve of this point.

Nevertheless this is the ground and foundation of the others. For when one
makes profession of Christianity, it is necessary that he be resolved to
which he ought to give credit, To wit, whether to the holy Scripture,
expounded by the greater voice of Bishops, and of the Apostolic Seas (which*
is the foundation of the East Churches 2. Respon. Jerem. fine.
:) or to a supreme head, who has assistance of the Bishops of his quarter
(which is the foundation of the Latin Church.)

The Church of Rome, pretends that her Bishop cannot err, in the things
which he pronounces in the quality of the head thereof, although that one
whole Council was of a contrary opinion: But the council of Basil (wherein was
assembled all the Latin Church) did hold the contrary: Yea many Catholic
Roman Doctors do mainetaine it in their writings: Concilium esse supra
Pontificem (says Bellarmine) asserunt omnes haeretici: idem asserunt
Cardinalis Camaracensis, Io. Gerson, Iac. Almaricus, Cusanus, Panormitanus,
Cardinalis Florentinus, Abulensis. Moreover it is the voice of the people, that
it be so, and if one do ask a Roman Catholic wherefore he belieueth; or
does such and such things, he answers presently, that the Church has so
ordained it. In saying so he confesses that the Sovereignty belongs to the
Church. For were not that a heinous crime so to obscure the Majesty of a
Monarch, as to say that the Estates do make Laws and Edicts? And it is
manifest that the Roman Catholics, in so doing, do accuse the Pope and the
Church of Rome of error, to the which they give nevertheless the title of
Mistress of all other Churches: and do confess, that if there be any error in
this, there may be likewise in other opinions: And consequently the Grecians,
and the Reformed Christians, do build upon a far more sure foundation.

As for the places of the holy Scripture alleged by the Latin Church, the
foresaid Apostolic Churches do clearly and manifestly affirms, that those
places before alleged do conclude nothing for a Monarchy: Apoc. 21. 14.
That the Church is founded upon all the Apostles, in like manner as upon Saint
Peter, That our Lord prayed for them all Ioh. 14. 16.
That all had power to bind and unbind, Mat. 18. 18
To Feed, 1. Pet. 5. 1.
and confirm them, Acts 14. 22
And that the faith of the Church of Thessalonica (which is now the faith of
the Greek Church) is spread and scattered into all places, 1. These. 1.
And moreover that the Lord made a promise to the company of the Apostles, more
express then that which he made to S. Peter, in particular: I am (says he)
with you until the end of the world? Mat. 28. 20.
And withal two great Lawyers of that time, viz. Hotman and Ranchin De Statu.
Prim. Eccl.
After many others, have very amply written thereof: Reuis. Council.
From hence therefore the Catholic and Apostolic conclusion is taken, That
the Church (which in her foundation is a Monarchy, because that Jesus Christ
is the King) ought to be governed Aristocratically by her Bishops, 1. Cor. 12.
which are equal in power, although different in charge and degrees, for the
order and policy thereof.

QVESTION. II. Unto what Bishop appertains Presidencie in the Councels, and
whether this Presidencie be a Divine Law or Ecclesiastical?
THE EAST CHVRCH.
THe answer to the Council of Ausburge. Cap. 13.
Forasmuch, as the Church of God, which is with us, is the Princess of all
other Churches: And that she guides the people of God in all knowledge and
grace, and glories in the pure sincerity of the splendore of the Apostolic
Traditions and of the Fathers. And for that also she has born the first
prerogative in the Orthodoxall verity: It is reason that all Christian common
wealths, should celebrate the Divine mysteries as she does.

Nilus Archi-episcopus Thessalonicoensis. De primat. l. 2.
The Latins say that the blessed Apostle Saint Peter was constituted by the
Lord, the Prince of the twelve Apostles, and that he gave into his hands the
Keys of Heaven, against the which the Gates of Hell should never prevail,
that he also prayed that his faith should not fail, and such like things, as
do manifestly show the Primacie of Saint Peter: And they say, that the Pope
was constituted to be his successor, and has received of Saint Peter all the
Primacie, and that he can, all that Peter could in things, concerning faith,
and that it is impossible that he should decline from the truth in matters of
faith: For if he should fail, all matters of faith would run to ruin. But
Honorius Bishop of Rome was an heretic, according to the seventeenth decree
of the sixth Universal Council. It may be then that the Pope might decline
from the truth in matters of faith. Yet grant that he erred in the faith, the
words of the Lord are not in vain. That the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against the Church. Mat. 16. 18
The piety and integrity of Religion, may be firmly preserved in other
Bishops. It is then manifest that it is not peculiar to the Roman Church, to
be founded upon this stone, for that should be hard and grievous, and not far
differing from the Jews baseness, to enclose the Church within Rome. Well
then, Christ has built his Church; but he builded it upon the faith and
doctrine of Peter, and upon those that shall be keepers and obseruers of such a
confession. And if Saint Agathon affirmed, that his Church (to wit that of
Rome) never erred from the truth, it is no wonder, for it is because that
indeed very seldom she falls from the faith. Otherwise how should a man
interpret this place of Scripture: All are gone out of the way: they are al
corrupt* there is none that does good, no not Psalm. 14. 4.
one, Moreover when he says that the Church of Rome is not stayed from the way
of truth, he speaks of the time past, and does not include the time to come:
and that which is to be noted, Agathon spoke that, before the sixth Synod.

Theuet. Cosm. lib. 9
The Patriarch of Jerusalem, as I have seen, did excommunicate out of the body
of their Church, (the which they hold from al antiquity) as well the pope of
Rome, as also all Christian Princes, (to wit, those of the Roman Church)
because that they are separated from the Greek Church, the which received the
Gospel, before the Latin Church.

Villamont. Voyages. l. 2 cap. 22.
The Syrians do boast themselves, to be the first Christians of the world,
because that Saint Peter had his seat seven years in Antioch, before that
ever he went to Rome, which is the reason that the Syrians would never submit
themselves to the Church of Rome.

Theuet. Cosm. l. 10. c. 15.
The Christians of Traprobane and the Islands near thereunto, do not
acknowledge, nor their fathers did never acknowledge, the popes, Cardinals or
prelates of Rome. Also the Nestorians and other Indians do call the Pope a
Bishop vnapproued.

Sacranus. Elucid. c. 2.
The Ruthenians and Moscouites do say, that the Pope is an Heretic, and do
excommunicate him, and his Clergy at such times as they do celebrate the Lords
supper.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
ALuares Cap. 26.
Prester-Iohn calling to remembrance that I had said, that the Church had drawn
these things (that is to say, the ceremonies of the Mass) out of the passion,
he demanded of me what was this Church; and wherefore have we two chief heads
in Christendom, the one at Constantinople in Greece, and the other at Rome in
Italy: unto whom I made answer, that we acknowledged no more then one Head of
the Church, and although Constantinople was the chief in the beginning, yet
the same now was abolished: for that the head of the Church ought to be, where
Saint Peter dwells, because that Jesus Christ told him: Tues Petrus, and
super hanc petram etc. And then, when Saint Peter was in Antioch, the Church
was there, by reason that the chief head was then there resident; the which
being now come to Rome: there, was the Ecclesiastical Judge established, and
so firmly placed, that it remains there until this present. Moreover he told
me then, that I yielded sufficient reason for the Church of Rome; but he asked
me what I could say of the Church of Constantinople, which was planted by St.
Mark, and of that of Greece, whereof Saint John Patriarch of Alexandria was
head.

Annot. The reason of this (great King) is, the very same with the Grecians in
the controversy* against some Cardinals, in these words: Discept Graci and
Caldei.
If that your Roman Church be the chief and mother of the other Churches, by
reason that Saint Peter was her Pastor, it is more reason that Antioch should
obtain these titles, because she first embraced and received his preaching:
from thence it comes, that Antioch is called Theopolis, the city of God; or
else that Church of Jerusalem, which obtained the great and Sovereign
Sacrificer, who preached, and offered himself a Sacrifice therein.

The universal Histories of the Chap. of Ethiop.
Indies made mention, that the Pope sent Ouiedo a Spaniard, to draw the
Abyssins or Aethiopians to acknowledge the Roman Church, but the Emperor
Claudius of Ethiope then reigning, chased him away, and Ouiedo was compelled to
hide himself.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH OF THE WEST.
THE confession of Wittenberg. Cap. 32.
We believe and confess, that the Church ought to expound the Scripture: but
there are diverse opinions concerning the Church, that is to say, where it must
be sought for, and whether her jurisdiction be enclosed within certain limits.
Now we do think according to the holy Scripture, and the holy Fathers, that
the Catholic and Apostolic Church is not tied to any one certain place, to
one nation, or to one sort of people, but that it is in that place, and with
those nations, where the Gospel is sincerely preached.

The confession of the Swizers. Cap. 17.
We do condemn the Donatists, which would enclose the Church in a corner of
Africa, and we approve not the Clergy of Rome, who attribute the name of
Catholic only to the Roman Church.

Annot. The Divines of Tubinge in their letters do call the Patriarch of
Constantinople Oecumenicke, and have sought the Union Acta. Theol Virtemb.
of the East Churches.

THE CATHOLIC ROMAN CHVRCH.
POpe Pelagius. Did. 21. Quamuis.
Although that all the Catholic and Apostolic Churches, established through
the universal world, are a nuptial bed of Christ: Nevertheless, the holy
Roman Church was not preferred before the other Churches, by any constitutions
of councels, but rather obtained the Primacy from the holy words of our Lord.
The Church of Rome is therefore the first Sea of the Apostle Peter, she has no
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing: but in these things the higher her degree
is, the greater is her authority: for the greater have the power to command,
and the lesser are to yield obedience.

ANNOTATION.
SAint Peter ought to be considered four manner of ways: first, in the
quality of an Apostle, sent by God immediately: as such a one that had no
successor. In the second, place as an Apostle simply, having charge to plant
many Churches: in such manner S. Mark and other Evangelists (their
Substitutes, which also are called Apostles) were his Successors. In the third
place, as a Bishop and President in every Church, where he was: that is to
say, in Antioch, Rome, Jerusalem: as Euodias did succeed him in Antioch,
Clement in Rome, S. James the Apostle, and S. Simeon in Jerusalem. Fourthly, S.
Peter is to be considered as Primate in the Catholic Church: in such manner S.
John the Apostle (entirely beloved of the Lord) succeeded him* having out-liued
S. Peter five and twenty, or thirty years: Moreover, that S. John was
preferred before all the Bishops of the world, is apparent by that, that he was
taken for one of the three pillars of the Church, and was one of the twelve
foundations, upon which the ordinary Bishops of cities were constituted. And
withal, Tradition confirms this: for there is no Church in the world which
names not the Apostles before the Bishops: yea the Church of Rome prefers
the Apostles before the Popes. It remains then for us to search, who was the
successor of S. John in the Catholic Primacy, whether Polycarpus was his
successor in Ephesus, or Simeon successor to S. Peter in Jerusalem, or Albinus
of Alexandria successor of S. Mark, successor and chosen of S. Peter, or
Ignatius successor of Euodias, and of S. Peter in Antioch: or Euaristus
successor of Clement, and of Linus, and of S. Peter in Rome.

There are two Churches which have contended herein, more then eight hundred
years, that is to say, that of Constantinople, and that of Rome. The Roman
Church says, that S. Peter has ordained, is from God, that Rome should have
the Primacie and power to command, and that for ever. They of Constantinople
say on the contrary side, that our Lord never spoke any such words, much less
Saint Peter himself, and if any such thing had been, some one of the Apostles
would have written of it, this Article being the foundation of all the
doctrine, and government of the Church. Moreover Saint Peter himself would
have Preached the same, and Saint John who succeeded and out-liued S. Peter,
would not have stayed in Ephesus. Well then, you see that all the Churches
planted by the Apostles not excepting any one, do testify after many ages,
that neither they, nor their fathers never believed nor held, that the Primacie
by divine power, was due to the Church of Rome, but rather that it appertains
to whosoever shall be chosen and elected by the greater part of the Churches:
and that the Bishop of Rome alone ought not to be q believed, much less in his
own proper cause. In like manner many learned men of the Latin Church do
confess, that the reason wherefore Rome is held to have the Primacie in
divine affairs, is an opinion of the vulgar sort. So that rather to
Constantinople appertains the Primacie, seeing it was given her by the
Apostolic Churches, which they gave not then to Rome, being one of the last
seats of Saint Peter, but only in regard of the Imperial seat. Well then,
to make this the more intelligible, it is necessary to know how it happens,
that the City of Rome now a days, pretends that the Primacie is due to her
by divine right. The above mentioned Apostolic Churches do surmise, as
follows, and say.

First, that Saint Peter had the first place among the Apostles, for he was
oftentimes demanded many things by the Lord, and he answered in the name of his
fellows, over whom nevertheless he had no jurisdiction nor authority:
although that some do think, that he resigned it to Saint James, when they
were together at Jerusalem: after that S. James was instituted Bishop, that
is to say, after that he was stayed, that he should make his ordinary
residence there.

Secondly, that Saint John during his life, after the time of S. Peter, had the
first place amongst all the Evangelists and Bishops.

Thirdly, that he never taught that Rome by Divine right, ought to be the
Mistress of the other Churches: if he had, S. Polycarpus his Disciple, and
others his successors in Ephesus had not debated so earnestly and obstinately
against the Roman Church touching the feast of Easter.

Fourthly, that after S. John, the Bishop of Rome obtained by just title, the
first place among the Bishops which were under the Roman Empire: for seeing
that the Citizens of Rome then reigned over the Inhabitants of other Cities:
he had been both proud, audacious and unreasonable, which would have preferred
himself before their Bishop, especially without any ordinance of a Council.

Fifthly, that the churches of Italy, and other their neighbors, through the
laps of time gave to the Bishop of Rome, not only the first place, but also the
superintendancie over the Bishops near them, in particular, for to give his
advice in matters that happened, till a Synod might be had.

Sixthly, that the council of Nice approved the same, and ordained that
Alexandria Alexandria was the greatest City of the Empire after Rome. Joseph.
l. 4. c. 42.
should in like manner, have the ouer-sight of the Churches of Egypt and of
Africa, and that the church of Antioch was the third City Josep. bello Iud.
lib. 3. there was in this City 360. Churches of Christians.
Antioch should ouer-see those of the east. And after a certain time, because
the Imperial seat was transported unto Constantinople, it was ordained that
that Bishop should be ouer-seer of the Greek Churches, and the Bishop of
Jerusalem should be admitted to be one of the five, for Palestina: and those
five were called Patriarchs.

Seventhly, that the Bishop of Rome all this while had the first seat, but yet
without any universal jurisdiction* but rather every one of the foresaid five
Patriarchs, judged or rather gave his advise and opinion, till a Council
might be had, as even to this day they of Constantinople (although that they
call themselves Oecumenicke) are subject to Synodes, but yet of Greece only.

Eighthly, that Maurice Emperor of Constantinople, would have taken away the
primacie from The Grecians do call him Gregory Dialoger.
Gregory Bishop of Rome, and John nestentes. That is to say, the younger.
given it to John Bishop of Constantinople, who for a Mark of his place,
desired to have the Title of a general Oecumenicos.
Bishop: and that Gregory did oppose himself against him, least he should
loose his place, urging, how insolent that Title was, and saying, that John
would usurp Dominion over the other Bishops, (which peradventure was not the
intention of John:) but he on the contrary side, to show that he was contented
with the rank or place of his predecessors, called himself Seruus seruorum
Dei. The servant of the servants of God.

Ninthly, that Phocas having slain Maurice gave to the Bishop of Rome (which
was then Boniface) the first seat and Title of General or Universal Bishop,
and yet without any jurisdiction or Dominion over the other patriarchs: which
notwithstanding, the churches acknowledged him not in that quality.

Tenthly, that Charles the great, King of France, having subdued with arms a
great part of Europe: The city of Rome craved his aid against the Lombards,
who being over come by the same King, the Romans proclaimed him their Emperor.

11 That then the Emperors of the East with the consent of the Patriarchall and
Apostolic Churches took from Rome the primacy, and gave it to the said
Church of Constantinople.

12 That then the Romans seeing that by the Ecclesiastical law they should
loose the primacie, began to say that the primacy belonged as of Divine right
to them, and to their Bishop: and consequently, that the whole Church together
could not take away from them the first rank, because that Rome is the Sea of
S. Peter.

13 That after that they of the East had rightly said, that he is successor of
S. Peter, which is elected, confirmed, and approved by the greatest part of the
Churches, in what place soever he makes his residence, and that imitateth S.
Peter in doctrine and humility. That the Bishops of Rome have brought into
their church many errors, and have innouated many things without and against
the decrees of the councels, withal they have added to the Symbol of Nice of
their private authority, that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Son, even as
from the Father. That although that the universal council has given the
first seat to the bishop of Rome: yet did not they believe that the church
in future time could not take from him this place: especially if the church of
Rome should fall into any error, as they say she is already fallen.

14 That in the mean while the provinces of the Empire of Charles the great,
to wit, France, Italy, Germany and Spain remained under the bishop of
Rome, as being their nearest Patriark, which is the reason that they now go
about to persuade men, that the Primacie appertains unto him by Gods Law, but
this should be no prejudice to other Churches, nor to the truth.

15. That the Bishops of Rome enriched with the gifts and Donations of the
Kings of France, and per adventure believing themselves to be that which was
repated of them, have overthrown both Spiritual and Temporal Monarkes, and
have caused to be received, in places under obedience to them, as well the
Laws of their predecessors the Popes, made by the Church of Rome, as also
those Laws which they themselves from time to time do add thereunto, in
so much that the Churches of the East, South, and North, with good reason have
opposed themselves against these enterprises. The confession and belief of the
Apostolic Churches about this Question here in controversy, is this.

That the first seat (which is by divine Law, so far as is necessary for the
order of Councels, and is meet to show S. Cypr. de simpl. cl.
unity) is by the Ecclesiastical Law, as also the Sea that appertains to
any such Bishop, whom the Catholic Church shall judge to be fit and capable
of such a charge.

QVESTION. III. Whether Miracles are sufficient proofs, that a Christian
Nation ought to be held for a true Church, and without error.
THE EAST CHVRCHES.
MArcus Paulus a Lib. 1. cap. 17. and 18.
Venetian. The Citizens of the City of Tauris, are Mahomets, but there are
some Christians that inhabit there, to wit, Nestorians, and Iacobites. Near to
which Town is a Mountain, which was once removed out of his place; by the
occasion that follows. The Sarrazins willing to scandale the Gospel, said
that it was written: If you have faith as much as a grine of Mustard-seede,
Matt. 17. 20.
you shall say unto this Mountain, remove hence to yonder place, and it shall
remove. Well (said the Sarrazins mocking the Christians) if your says be so
excellent? cause this Mountain to remove out of his place. Then one of the
Christians fervent in faith, spoke to the Mountain with a great confidence,
Get thee hence: The which incontinently, removed in the presence and fight of
all the people.

The very same Author makes mention of a Pillar hanging in the air, which
sustaineth the Vault of a Church in Sammarchan.

In the third Book of his Voyages. cap. 4
Vilimont. Whosoever would see a thing worthy of memory, must go to a little
Town called Sardinale, inhabited by the Christians (of the Church of the
Syrians) where Turks, Sarrazins or Moors cannot dwell, but they die before
the years end.

D^^Kel. M^sc. ad Ferd.
Faber. Not far from the City of Muscouia, there is a great Monastery,
wherein is the Sepulcher of one Sergius an Abbot, which Monastery is very much
frequented of the people: for it was holden very famous for many miracles that
were there wrought, whereof it shall be sufficient to produce one: Which is,
that two blind men were restored to their sight there.

The same Ibidem.
Author. It is a common thing amongst the Muscouits to enchant Serpents with
words, and chase away Devils, and deliver and help them that are possessed.

Thomas Nauigat. de Lopes.
Lopes. The people of Mangalor say that they went very often to the Sepulcher
of S. Thomas, which is in their Country, who wrought among them many miracles.

The Ecclesiastical History of Turcogr. lib. 2. Pach.
Constantinople, makes mention that Arsenius was instituted Bishop by the
Pope, he being then become a member of the Church of Rome, for which cause he
was Excommunicated by the Patriarcke Pachomius, a little after that, he died,
and his soul went with the souls of Arrius and Eutiches heretics, and his
body was found black and swollen, which caused great fear to those that saw
him.

THE MERIDIAN CHVRCH.
ALuares. Cap. 16.
There is a Sepulcher of one of the Sons of King Abram, which they say was a
Priest. Amongst other miracles which they attribute unto him, they say that the
Angels did minister bread and wine unto him when he celebrated.

The same Author. Disc. of Aeth. cap. 17.
They attribute the title of a Saint to a certain King, whose name was
Balibeta, toward whom the people bear such great devotion, that all Ethiope
does run thither, where his body is buried; which they report to work great
miracles.

Idem. Cap. 11.
There is a Monastery called Abba Gariman, retaining this name of one which (as
they report) reigned in Greece: who having forsaken his Kingdom, retired to
this place to do penance for his sins, where he finished his days very
holily: and they report that he at this present does miracles.

THE CATHOLIC ROMAN CHVRCH.
GLoss. Canon. glorios. De reliq. and ven. sanct. tit. 22.
We must enquire of miracles done in the life time, and after death. And to the
end that these may be true miracles, four things are requisite: first, that
they be of God, and not framed by art, or by the devil; for miracles are
wrought by the wicked: secondly, that they be contrary to nature, as that of
the Rod of Moses turned into a Serpent: thirdly, that they be not wrought by
words, but thorough the merits of a man: fourthly, that they be for the
confirmation of the faith.

Annot. Whosoever would know more amply the Miracles of the Latin Church, may
read the Legends and lives of the Saints.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH
THe confession of the Frenchmen. Art. 5.
We believe that the word contained in the Canonical Writings proceeded from
God. And forasmuch as it is the very rule of truth, it follows, that neither
antiquity, nor customs, nor the multitude, nor humane wisdom, neither
judgments, nor visions, nor Miracles ought to be opposed to it.

ANNOTATION.
THe East Churches do believe, that the Roman and Ethiopian Churches do hold
an erroneous and Heretical opinion, although there are Miracles wrought
amongst them: In like manner the Romans do pronounce an Anathema against all
Christians, that have not obeyed them, as well against them of the East and
South, as also the North Church, notwithstanding their Miracles: the Church of
Affricke refuse, nay, scorn to go, and submit or subject themselves either to
the Greek Church, or to the Latin Church, notwithstanding their Miracles: the
Latin church in the foresaid Canon, does confess, that Miracles are wrought
by wicked persons. The reformed Church says, that Miracles, or the brute of
Miracles, ought not to be taken as a Mark of the true church: And which is
more, they believe that they are not given them for confirmation of their
doctrine, because the same is sufficiently proved in the holy Scripture,
although that the truth it self is oftentimes holden in suspicion. If then all
the Sects of Christians do vaunt themselves equally to have Miracles, how can
he that is out of the foresaid churches, and is willing to become a good and a
true christian, resolve himself by considering of their Miracles? Surely if
every Nation do say, that the Miracles which are done amongst other people,
are not assured signs, that the doctrine which they teach is altogether true.

We may herethen make this conclusion, as Catholic, and agreed upon by all in
general, That miracles are no prooffes of Doctrine, neither marks of the true
Church.

QVESTION. IIII. Whether personal succession be a Mark of the true Church.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
BArlaam. De princ. cap. 3.
How absurd is it, and out of reason to say, that every one of the Apostles was
a Pastor and common Teacher of the Universal world, as S. Peter was; and yet
that none of them left any successors, but S Peter only? because that if any
one of the Apostles has left for his successor, either Bishops or Governors
of the Church, wherein any of them finished his days, and yielded up his soul
to God, upon what reason command thou that all should be created by the
Pope? Moreover, if I should affirm now, that the other Apostles have left
successors behind them, amongst whom none was first or last, but all equal and
of one self same order: peradventure you would not believe me, but if I shall
bring you here some unreprovable testimony, you will not be able to withstand
it. It shall be Saint Denis Areopagite in an Epistle which he wrote to
Demophilus a Monk, in these words: Moderate thou then thy desires, thy anger,
thy purposes, as it is convenient, to the end that the holy Ministers may have
authority over thee, and the Priests over them, and the Bishops over the
Priests, and the Apostles over the Bishops, the Successors of the Apostles: for
if any of them have committed any fault in his office, he may be corrected by
them of the same order. This man lived in the time of the Apostles, and knew
exactly the affairs and business of those days, which says, that the
successors of the Apostles, are of one equal order and calling.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
LItourgia Ethiop. Pray for our prince, the prince of our Archbishops, the
Lord Gabriel and the chief of the Church of Alexandria, and for the chief of
our country, our venerable Archbishop Mark, and for the Bishops, priests, and
Deacons of the right faith.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH
COnfessio Heluet. Cap. 18.
The celestial father sent his only son, in whom is the Divine wisdom,
which is powered upon us through his most holy, most pure and most perfect
doctrine: for he has chosen his disciples, which he made Apostles: and they
being gone through the universal world, have gathered together Churches by the
preaching of the Gospel. And afterward they ordained Pastors in all the
Churches of the World, by the commandment of CHRIST, through whose Successors
he has until this present taught and governed the Church.

THE ROMAN CHVRCH.
CArd Bellarmine. De notis. Eccl. cap. 8.
The fifth mark of the Church, is the succession of persons in the Roman
Church, continuing from the time of the Apostles, until now: for that is the
reason that she is called Apostolic. For if the ancient Fathers have esteemed
it so great an argument to prove the true Church, by the continuance of twelve,
or twenty, or forty Bishops; how much more ought we to esteem the infallible
succession of more then 200 Bishops? especially because we see that the other
Apostolic Sees are decayed and failed: that is to say, those of Antioch,
Alexandria, and Jerusalem, wherein, after that those places were taken away from
the Romans by the Persians and Sarrasins (since which time, there are nine
hundred years past) there has been no succession, and if there were any, the
same was very obscure.

ANNOTATION.
Our Savior being now ready to ascend to heaven said to his Apostles: Go
through the universal world, and preach the Gospel unto all Mar. 15. 16
creatures, etc. This commandment was executed, as may appear as well in the
holy scripture, as also in ancient histories, that S. Peter was in Antioch, S.
Andrew in Greece and Moscouia: S. James kept in Judea: S. John went into Asia:
S. Philip into Assyria: S. Thomas into India: S. Matthew into Ethiope: S.
Thaddeus into Armenia: S. Paul, called from heaven, preached in all countries
from Arabia unto Sclauonia. Well then, every one of them left successors, and
until this day there is not any one of those regions, where there are not
Christian Bishops, which plead to have succeeded the Apostles without any
interruption. Bellarmine says, that if there be any succession, it is obscure.
Others do answer him, that it was no more obscure under the Persians and
Sarrasins, then it was in the time of the ancient Bishops of Rome under the
Roman Pagans and persecuters of the Church. The East Churches never cease to
vaunt and brag of their Apostolic seas. The Christians of Africa do exalt
him of Alexandria, and acknowledge no other head. The Abyssines by antiquity
do hold the succession of that sea so certain, that none amongst them can have
the imposition of hands, but by the hands of him that is especially chosen by
the Church, whom they call Abuna, and whom they do believe to have his
succession from S. Peter and S. Mark the Evangelist. Finally if by personal
succession a man pretend to know the true Church, he cannot know what part to
take: And although that the Latin Church only had the succession without
Interruption, that could not be a sure mark, seeing all those nations, which
S. Ireneus writes of, do believe that the Roman Church is not the true Church,
notwithstanding her succession. We might here insert the Catalogue of
universal Bishops according to the Greek Church, proceeding from S. Peter
until the time of Neophytus, which now holds or lately held the Sea at
Constantinople: But we will omit that for brevity sake. This then here shall
be the Catholic conclusion:

That the personal succession of the Church of Rome, or of any other, is not
the make of a true belief.

QVESTION. V. Whether the multitude of Christians or the greatness of
Countries are marks of the true Church.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
VIllamont. L. 2. c. 21.
The Church of the holy Sepulcher in Ireusalem is governed by diverse sorts of
Religious men, some are Roman Catholics, others are Christians, but
Schismatickes, and no adherents or lovers of the Catholic Apostolic Roman
Religion. You have in the first place the Grecians, which are Masters and Lords
of the chief place of the Church. Moreover there are there, a certain people
which multiply, as well in Greece and Asia, as also in Africa. Besides the
Lib. 2. ca. 22
Syrians do very nearely imitate the use, customs, and manners of the
Grecians. Again, the Georgians do observe altogether the ceremonies and
errors of the Grecians in their Sacrament

Louis. Regius. De viciss.
The Empire of the king of Moscouia does extend toward the East almost unto
the kingdom of Persia.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
VIllamont. Lib. 2. c. 24.
The Abyssines are a people of Ethiope, that is to say, a part of Africa, and
the greater part thereof, by reason of their large scope. Their King is by them
called Negus, and in the Persian tongue Prester-Iohn or Catholic, which
Prester-Iohn heretofore dwelt in Tartaria: nevertheless he is yet one of the
greatest Kings of the East, and of the greatest power and might in all
Africa, and his Kingdom does extend from the end of Egypt unto the Indies:
This king has more then forty kingdoms under him.

The Idem l. 2. cap. 22.
Iacobites do inhabit a great part of Asia, and live pell-mell with the
Turks, Persians, and Tartarians: some of them inhabit near the River Nubius,
which is in the confines of Egypt, and hold a good part of Ethiope and of the
higher Indies, insomuch that it was told me, that they occupy very near forty
kingdoms. They call themselves christians of the first conversion, and say,
that they were converted to the faith of Jesus Christ by S. Matthew the
Apostle, before the other nations. They circumcise their children after the
fashion and manner of the Sarrasins.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
BEllarmine. De not. Eccl. l. 4. c. 2.
The fourth mark of the Church, is the greatness or multitude and diversity
of the believers: for the church that is truly Catholic, ought not only to
comprehend all times, but also all places, all nations, and all sorts of
people. And that our Roman church is the true Church, may be proved by this
argument: that is, that before the time of Luther, there was not in the world
any more Religions then these: that is to say, Paganism, Mahometisme, the
Greeks, the Nestorians* the heresies of the Hussites, and the Roman Church.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH
THe Heluetian confession. Cap. 18.
Forasmuch as there is but one God and one Mediator between God and men Jesus
Christ the Messiah, one holy Ghost, one Salvation, one faith, one covenant: it
follows necessarily that there is but one Church: which is the cause that we
call it Catholic, because that it is Universal and spread through all parts of
the world, and extends her self unto all times, not being enclosed within
any time or place. We condemn therefore the Donatists which enclose the Church
in a certain corner of Africa. And we approve not the Clergy of Rome, who
affirm the Roman church, to be the only Catholic Church.

ANNOTATION.
THere are two or three hundredth years past, since that it has been very
hard to judge by the multitude, whether the name of the Catholic Church
appertained to the Greek Church or the Latin Church. The Greek Church had
the Empires of Constantinople and Trebizonde, and the Northern nations, who did
maintain her: But now she is diminished by the oppression of the Turks, as
the Latin is increased by the conquests of the Spaniards, far otherwise then
it was heretofore: For Almanie was half Pagans, and Spain Sarrazins, and this
was at such time as there was division between the Greeks and Latins: So
that if the multitude did give the Name of Catholics, the Grecians should
have had it; and the certain time when they lost this Title is not to be
known. Notwithstanding all this, these two Churches and that of the Iacobites,
do profess themselves to be Catholics, the passages or proofs before
alleged do show that every one of them is extended very wide. Under the name
of Iacobites we will comprehend the Cophites and the Abyssins, and we may add
thereunto the Nestorians: For Masius tells us that these people are rather
differing in name, then in Religion: whose Testimony is reported to be very
true. The reason wherefore they have in Jerusalem diverse Churches and
Oratories, the one near the other, is to the end every nation might use that
language, which he best understands. Bellarmine also seems to account these
three for one: for it is certain that before Luthers time, there were
Cophites, Abyssines, and Iacobites. The rest, the same Masius as it were
discharges of the crime of heresy, which was imputed to them. I am assured
(says he) Praef. in Anaph. Basilij
they are free and exempt from that wicked Doctrine of that infamous heretic
Nestor: For having read a great Volume of their solemn Prayers which they make
to God, I have found nothing that might offend any man of sound opinion in our
Religion: if it be not this, that I suspect them, because that they in many
places call not the Virgin Marie mother of God: But instead of this Title,
they call her the mother of life, and of light.

Here is to be noted, that Villamont Lib. 2. cap. 24.
had some notice that Prester John had sent to the Pope, to submit himself to
the Church of Rome, and Cotion the Jesuit affirms that De sacrifi.
the Patriarch of the Cophites had done the like: But we have now fresher
news, and know that there is no such matter. Well then, if all those people
do make but one Church, the same is as great, or rather greater and ampler
then the Latin Church: and if the multitude be the mark of the true Church, it
must be attributed to them, as the greater number of people. But because it
appears not, that either they, or the Greek Churches, do constitute or
appoint the multitude for a mark of the true Church, and that it does not
appear where that multitude is: moreover, because that those which now are
few in number may exceed the rest hereafter, and that the multitude of the
Latins, is not so great to induce others to turn to their religion, we will
conclude that according to their belief:

The multitude of people, or the greatness or largeness of Regions, are not
marks of the true Church.

QVESTION. VI. Whether the Primate of the Church has any power or authority
over the Temporaltie of Commonweals.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
Jeremy Patriarch of Resp. 1. cap. 16.
Constantinople. We ought to obey all principalities and power, and not only
of good Princes, but also of evil Princes, and to observe inuiolably their
laws: notwithstanding, that we must obey God rather then men. And in another
place, he that resists sovereign power shall be condemned.

Sacranus. Eluc. cap 3.
The Emperors of Greece have had the power and right to hold under their
yoakes the Patriarchs, and all the Clergy, the which they placed and
displaced, when it seemed them best.

Nicholas. Lib. 4. c. 36.
The Patriarchs of Constantinople, Jerusalem, Antioch, and Alexandria,
possess neither towns nor Castles, and entertain no Soldiers or Archers for
their guard: much less do they cloth themselves either with cloth of gold,
velvet, or purple, and have no more Revenues toward their maintenance, habites
and books, then about 200. Ducats by the year. In their habites they differ
nothing from the other people, and they are no more richly clothed then the
simpler sort.

Sacranus. Cap. 3.
The Princes of Russia do hold, that it is lawful for the secular Lords, to
beat and depose their Patriarchs, Bishops, and Priests.

Louis Regius. Viciss. l. 8.
The king of Moscouia surpasses in cruelty and rigor of commanding, all the
Monarchs of the world, and has gotten such authority over all his subjects,
as well Ecclesiastical as secular, that he may dispose at his pleasure of
their lives and goods. They confess publicly that the will of the Prince is
the will of God, and therefore they call him the keeper of the keys of heaven,
and Gods Chamberlain.

THE SOVTH-CHVRCH.
THeuet. Lib. 2. c. 13
The Gerich, that is to say the Emperor of Ethiope, is as the Pope in his
country, and causes all things to pass under his hands, both the temporal
and the most part of the spiritual: Moreover, he bestows benefices upon such
men as are of good life, and learning (I mean the Ecclesiastical) and upon
none else.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
THe confession of Ausburg. Art. 13.
There has been great disputation concerning the authority and power of
Bishops, wherein some have very ill handled both the Ecclesiastical authority,
and the temporal power. From this confusion have sprung and arisen great
wars and stirs, during the time that the popes relying upon the power of
the keys, have not only instituted a new manner of worship, charging men's
consciences by reseruations of cases, and by violent excommunications; but also
they have attempted to transport the kingdoms of the world, and to take the
Empire from the Emperors: But good men, and those that were learned in the
Church, have heretofore reproved these things.

THE ROMAN CHVRCH.
EXtraua. Vnam sanctam. De Mayor. and obed.
Admit that the Grecians, and others say, that the Primacy of the Church was
not given to S. Peter and his Successors, then doubtless they must confess,
that they are not of the flock of Christ, who said, that there is one fould,
and one shepherd. We are taught by the words of the Gospel, that there is
therein two swords, that is to say, the one a spiritual, the other temporal.
For when the Apostles said, Lo, here are two swords, the Lord answered not
that there were too many, but said it is enough. Truly he that denies, that
the temporal sword is not in the power of S. Peter, takes very little regard
to the words of the Lord, who said: Put up thy sword into the sheath: the one
and the other is therefore in the power of the Church, to wit, the spiritual
and the material: and both swords ought to be governed by the Church, the one
by the Priests, the other by the hands of kings and men of war, but according
to the will and permission of the Priests, for the one sword must be under the
other sword.

ANNOTATION.
THe Bishop of Rome was obedient in times past to the Emperors of
Constantinople, but after such time as the City of Rome was taken away from
the Emperors of of the East, and King Charles sur-named the great, had
received from the said Bishop the title of Emperor: He and his successors
grew so much obliged to the same Sea of Rome, that the Popes persuasion joined
with their devotion, has caused that they have given the higher place to them,
which ought, as their predecessors did, to show themselves obedient to the
secular power. Notwithstanding this, when the Latin Monarchs saw their
authority too much abated, they could not suffer this indignity: from thence
arose those disorders which all Europe has seen under the Frederickes,
Henry's, Philip, sur-named the Fair, the factions of the Guelphes and
Gibellines, and such like Tragedies. Our Realm of France has unto this
present maintained some liberties, which were heretofore purloyned and taken
away from Italy, Spain, and England. But now she fostereth and nourishes in
her bosom ungrateful children, who daiely endeavor and seek to receive the
Council of Trent. Besides, if the Emperors of Germany have opposed themselves
against the attempts of Rome, the Grecians have passed far beyond them. The
Pope would have taken away before this time the Title of Emperor from the
Emperor of Greece. The Gretian by the consent of the Apostolic Sea had
transported into the East S. Peter's Chair: and notwithstanding the Anathemes
and inforcements of the Roman Court, the Empire of the East was maintained
many ages, that is to say, until the year 1453. A fatal end, at which time
the prophecy of Daniel should be accomplished: He shall plant the Tabernacles
of his Palace between the Seas in the glorious and holy Mountain, Dan. 12. 45.
yet he shall come to his end, and none shall help him. Until that time, this
Empire was not held but from God, and by the sword: as the Gloss of the Canon
Si Imperator, The Emperor (say some men) has not his authority from the Pope,
but from God only: and the same do I likewise allow of: But where is that
true Emperor? It is he of Constantinople; for the other, that is to say, he of
Germany, is but a maintainer and defender of the Church of Rome.

I must not pass over with silence, how the Romans do open injury to Charles
the great, King of France, saying, that the Pope gave him the Empire of the
West, which is most false and untrue: for Charles obtained it by Arms, and had
conquered and brought the City of Rome it self into subjection, if it had
pleased him, or if they had not willingly yielded themselves unto him. If he
submitted himself to the Pope, it was of courtesy and devotion, and not of any
duty. As for the Christians of the East they have been called Melchites,
that is to say, Royalists or Melech a King.
Imperialists, because that they have never acknowledged none, no not the
greatest man in the World, but the imperial Majesty. In like manner the
Christians of Africa are also Melchites. The ancient Catholic Church was
Melchite more then seven hundred years: for there was never any Council where
the Emperor had not the highest place, or that the Popes of Rome yielded not
their due obedience. The holy Apostles have also been Melchites, yea our
Savior Jesus Christ himself, for he paid tribute as well for himself, as for
S. Peter.

Likewise in the estate of the Israelites, an estate ordained of God, the
Priestly Sovereignty bowed to the secular authority, although that that high
sacrificer had an unlimited jurisdiction, and that he was the representative
Image of the great and eternal Sacrificer Jesus. And as those that rank the
high Priest under Emperors and Kings, are Royalists and Emperialists, in like
manner in our time the reformed Christians have called those of the contrary
opinion Papists: as who would say, subjects of a Priest, for in Greek, Papa
signifies a Priest: a name nevertheless which does not properly belong but to
those that believe, that the Pope has power to judge and depose Kings. By this
which has been spoken, a man may see that the Imperialists are Catholikely
spread through the four quarters of the world, and that their belief in this
point has been from the beginning: therefore he that is a Melchite, is a
Catholic: and whosoever holds a contrary opinion is an Heretic. It is this
heresy, that keeps the kingdom of Navarre under the Spanish yoke. It is
this heresy that brought that frowning fortune into our France, and had been
the ruin of her, if her great and invincible Melech seconded by faithful
Melchites, otherwise called Politicians, had not preserved and defended her,
with the grace and assistance of him, which is the only giver and translater
of Monarchies. It is this Heresy that the most Puissant and mighty King of
Great Britain, indeuoreth to quench and abolish in the hearts of his subjects,
a heresy which for a while lies hid under ashes, but meeting with any proper
matter, will break into a great combustion. Every one may here see, that the
most part of Christians do reject this opinion, yea, the Romans Fr Paul of
Venice in Apology.
themselves, although they suffer the Pope of Rome to maintain it in the
Canons.

We will then conclude according to the general voice, That the Primate of
the Catholic Church, whether he be at Constantinople, or at Rome, or at
Alexandria, has no power or authority over Temporal Commonwealths.

QVESTION. VII. Whether all the doctrine necessary to salvation, may be taken
out of the holy Scripture.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
NIlus Archbishop of De Causis diss. lib. 1.
Thessalonica. This is not then the cause of this difference, and much less
the whole body of the Scripture, as if it were too short, No, it is not
uttered openly and plainly, whereof this question is: for to accuse the
Scripture, is as great a fault, as to accuse God, but God is void of all blame.

Lib. 1. did. 11. b.
Lombard. The Grecians say, that the holy Ghost proceeds only from the
Father: the which they believe (say they) because that the Gospel John 15.
which contains wholly the Faith (that is to say, the doctrine of the faith)
makes mention of the Father only.

The King of Resp. Rohit
Moscouia. If the Gospel had not been written, how could the word of God have
been understood: and if the Apostles had not reduced into writing their
delegation or Commission, how had it been known to the world, that they were
sent to men?

Sacranus. Elucid. err.
The Russians say that the teachers of the Latin Church, are not credible,
because they teach but that they receive from the Greek Doctors, conditionally
that they find nothing therein, contrary to their own opinion.

Annot. The Christians of the East are marvelous jealous of the Traditions and
Ceremonies of the Fathers, nevertheless they hold that the Scripture is
necessary, against those that say that the Church may err. Moreover they hold
the same sufficient and a rule of Faith: and therefore admit not altogether the
Greek and Latin Doctors, but judge of their doctrine: which they could not do
but by examining it by the rule of Scripture.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
A Luares. Cap. 31.
It was demanded of me, whether all those things (that is to say the customs
of the Roman Church) were contained in our Books, and whether they seemed
better unto me, then those which they use. I answered that I found our books
reduced into a better order, then their books were: because that since the
time of the Apostles, we have had always great masters and teachers, which
were never employed in any other vocation, but to compose and gather together
the holy Scriptures, and passages of the Prophets and Apostles, scattered in
many volumes. They replied unto me, that they had fourscore and one books of
the old and new Testament, and asked whether we had more: I answered, that we
had ten times more, drawn and extracted out of the old and new Testament,
enriched with many expositions, wherein was contained very deep doctrine.
Prester-Iohn caused one to tell me, that he was not ignorant of the great
quantity of books which we have; but that he desired very much to know their
names.

Damianus a Goes. De indor. leg. art. 11.
The Abyssins say, that they have all the writings of Moses and the Prophets,
and other books of the old Testament: the four Evangelists, and all the
Epistles of S. Paul, and that they want not any book of the holy Scripture,
whereof they recyted a Catalogue in my presence.

Nevertheless the Bishop Zaga an Ethiopian, seemeeth to count the books of
the Bible otherwise: for he says, that in the new Testament there are five and
thirty: peradventure he comprehends those which Aluars says, that they call
Manda and Abetilis, divided into eight parts: but the same Abyssins do
believe, that the holy Scripture is sufficient for salvation without those: for
they deny not the name of true Christians, to those that have not those
books, and therefore they hold them not to be of equal authority with the
other.

The same Author says, that the Abyssins believe not that there is any power,
whether Council, or whatsoever able to make laws, which bind the conscience,
much less such doctrine as is not grounded upon the Scripture.

Annot. The Ethiopians are of the opinion of the Reformed, if they mean those
foure-score and one books which are in the Volume of the Bible: for the same
number is to be found if one reckon the Epistle of Jeremy for one book by it
self, and if one do separate the Histories which are not found but in Greek,
added to the books of Daniel and Hester. Moreover it is to be noted, that the
Abyssins do limite that which they hold for the word of God, within the number
of four score and one books (against the opinion of the word not written) and
they demand if the fashion and manner of celebrating the Mass is to be found
in the holy Scripture. Aluares a Roman Catholic answers them clean besides
the matter: saying, that the Roman Church has Doctors and Teachers, which
have a doctrine far greater and more perfect, then that of the old and new
Testament. The Reformed Church subscribe not willingly to this Article, for
they make a contrary Article, as hereafter follows.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH
THe confession of the French Church. Art. 5.
We do believe that the word which is contained in these books, proceeds from
God, of whom it takes his authority, and not of men. And forasmuch as it is
the rule of all truth and verity, containing all that is necessary for the
service of God and our salvation, it is not lawful for men, neither for the
Angels themselves to add, diminish, or change it.

THE CATHOLIC ROMAN CHVRCH.
I. Mayor. In 4. Sent. d. 24. q. 2.
It is to be noted, that we do hold many things to be divine Law, which are
not expressly contained in the Divine law (to wit in the holy Scripture) neither
may they evidently be deduced from thence: As for example, not to ordain a
woman to be Priest, or the institution of any one order. In like manner, we
read not in the new Testament (and much less in the old) that the sovereign
Bishopric was granted to the Successors of S. Peter: yet notwithstanding,
we hold, the sovereign Bishopric is by Divine law.

The council of Trent. 4. Sess. decret. 1.
The Council seeing, that this verity is contained partly in written bookss,
and partly in Traditions not written, does receive and honor with equal
affection, piety, and devotion, as well all the books of the old and new
Testament, as also all Traditions which appertain as well to faith as to good
manners.

ANNOTATION.
FIrst, the Roman Catholics (especially) when they would serve their turns
with the sayings of the Fathers against the Protestants, do not distinguish
the doctrine of faith, from Ecclesiastical policy, which the Grecians call
(...). The Protestants do believe that all matters of Faith may be
sufficiently taken out of the holy Scripture: And that, that which belongs to
Policy, Ceremony, and Circumstances, has been let go by Tradition not
written; such Tradition which may be changed by the Catholic Church, that is
to say, by the mutual consent and good will of all Christian people; in like
manner by the particular Churches, under the consent and good liking of the
Catholic Church. In sum, that the Scripture is the rule of the faith of the
Catholic Church, as the Catholic Church is the rule of the members thereof,
in that which concerns Policy or outward worship.

Secondly, the foresaid Mayor is deceived in saying, that the Scripture
prohibiteth not, to ordain women Prests: the prohibition is in Saint Paul, 1.
Tim. 2. 11.
as for the orders or inferior offices of Priesthood, 1. Cor. 14. 34.
they are of mere Policy. And as touching the sovereignty of the Bishop or
Pope of Rome, it is certain that the Scripture makes no mention of it, also
Tradition of the Catholic Churches does contradict it. It is objected that
the Scripture makes no mention of the perpetual virginity of the Mother of
our Savior. Whereunto some men answer, that it Smith apud P. Vermil. Martyrem
de caelib.
may be gathered out of the Scripture, and that whereas the holy virgin is
called blessed among all women, if she had not been always a virgin, other
virgins should have excelled her in blessedness* He that marries does well
(says Saint 1. Cor. 7. 38.
Paul) but he that marries not, does better: well then, those that have done
best shall be most blessed in heaven. Now if any man will restrain her
felicity in regard that she bore our Savior, he must give an account of that
restraint.

Thirdly, the Cardinal of Contra Tillenum.
Perron says that the holy Scripture is sufficient to salvation, because it
does send us back unto the Church, and the Church teaches that which
particularly is wanting in the Scripture: But if that were so, the holy
Scripture should be manifestly imperfect and insufficient: for if the
Scripture teaches us not, where is the head, (as Mayor avouches) how may one
know by it the body of the Church? And for to descant upon the comparison of
the same Cardinal, if the King should say to one, my Chancellor shall tell
you the rest, and then many should arise for to speak; unto whom should he
hearken? whom should be believe to be the true Chancellor? Our Savior never
said, that the Church should continue in Italy or in France; and that it should
fail in other Countries. Moreover, it is certain, that our Savior knew all
things, yet not as a bare man, but by participation of the heavenly wisdom:
nevertheless he revealed not all things to his Apostles. And the Apostles knew
things which were not lawful for them to declare: but they might happily
declare far more to their Disciples, then they have written, to wit, many
discourses, miracles, and other particularities of the life and doctrine of the
Lord, which got them a far more* great and perfect knowledge in Divinity.
Moreover there have been very many profitable things for the government of the
Church, which were not written, but are come to their successors by Tradition.
But as concerning that which is properly belonging to faith, and necessary as
well for the Church in general, as for the particulars thereof, the Catholic
Church believes, That the holy Scripture is sufficient to salvation.

QVESTION. VIII. Whether all the Books contained in the Volume of the Bible,
have an absolute and equal authority.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
DAmascenus the greatest Doctor amongst the Greeks. De fide orth. ca. 204.
The (...), that is to say, the book replenished with all sorts of virtues,
and the wisdom of Solomon, the which being written in Hebrew by the Father of
Sirac, was translated into Greek by his Nephew, which although they be as the
rest of the books, very elegant, yet are they not numbered with the others,
because that they were not contained in the Arc.

Annot. Although that Saint John Damascene be an ancient Author, and that those
Christians of the East, do to this day follow his doctrine, in that point of
the distinction of the Canonical books, from the Apocryphal, or less
authentical. Yet the Grecians have not had since that any Council which made
a new Canon.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
THe South Church. The Egyptians and Ethiopians do follow altogether the Canon
of the Hebrews, and receive not as truly Canonical, the books of Wisdom,
Judith, and Maccabees, and others: they of those Countries have hereby given us
this advise. If any man can show that this testimonial is false, he ought to
be believed.

Villamont Lib. 2. c. 23.
says that he could not discover what books they held authentical, and that
he thought they were in Hebrew. It is well known that the Abyssins do retain
very much of the old law, and therefore one ought not to think it strange, if
those that call themselves Israelites, do conform themselves to the ancient
Church of Israel.

THE REFORMED CHVRCHES IN THE WEST.
THe Confession of the French Church, Art. 4.
after the account of the books according to the Canon of the Hebrews. We
acknowledge these books to be Canonical, and a certain rule of our faith,
not so much for the consent of the Church, as by the testimony of the holy
Ghost, which made us to discern them from the other Ecclesiastical; upon
which (although that they be profitable) none ought to ground any Article of
Faith.

The confession of Wittenberg. Cap. 30.
We do call holy Scripture, the Canonical books of the old and new Testament,
such as the Authority whereof was never called in question in the Church.

Annot. If any ancient or modern writers have doubted of the authority of some
Canonical books, their doubt ought not to be imputed unto the whole body of
the Church.

THE CATHOLIC ROMAN CHVRCH.
THe Council of Trent, Sess. 4 doc. 1
having accounted amongst the other ancient Canonical books, those which
otherwise some do call the second Canonical, to wit Judith, Wisdom, and the
Maccabees, says thus: If there be any one that will not receive for good and
Canonical these books all whole and entire, which have been accustomed to be
read in the Roman Catholic Church, let him be accursed.

ANNOTATION.
THe foresaid people of the East and South, and the reformed of the West say,
that our Savior and his Apostles after him, have received for holy Scripture,
and perfectly authentical, but only those books which were and have been
since in the Canon of the Hebrews: wherein the books of the Maccabees,
Wisdom, and the third and fourth book of Esdras are not contained. That the
Authors of these books were not as the Prophets inspired of God, who
confirmed their doctrine with Miracles: this is the cause why the Church in
that time received the one into the Canonical authority and not the other.
That the Catholic Church (much less the Roman) cannot make new Articles of
Faith. To affirm, that the Ancient Church knew not nor taught the verity in
that behalf, and that the Church has had since new revelations, is an absurd
thing. In fine, that they first which numbered these Deutero-canonicall or
Ecclesiastical with the Prophetical, intended not to equalize them, but
rather thought good to put them in the Volume of the holy Bible, because that
there are good precepts in them, and Histories whereby one may see the estate
of the Church, after the time of the Prophees, until the coming of the
Redeemer. The Council of Trent does hold likewise for Apocrypha, and in
suspect the 4. book of Esdras, although it be in the volume of the Bible. There
are also learned men of great account in the Catholic Roman Church, as
Cardinal Caietane, Nicholas de Lyra, and others, which hold not the books of
Maccabees for authentical books. And the general voice is, that

The books of Wisdom, Syrach, the third and fourth of Esdras, the Maccabees
and others (although that they may perhaps call them Canonical) have not
equal authority with the books of the Prophets and Apostles.

QVESTION. IX. Whether the Latin Translation be of the same authority with
the Original Hebrew and Greek, written by the Prophets and Apostles.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
NIcholas. Lib. 4. c 36.
The christians of the East say, that the Popes of Rome (whom they hold for
heretics together with their Sectaries) have wholly corrupted, and changed the
Gospel, and other books of our Religion: in taking away and adding that which
seemed to them most fit, to serve their insatiable covetousness.

The King of Moscouia. See the answer to Rohite.
The Chapters which thou cytest out of Apostolical epistles and Gospels, agree
not with ours. Here Lasicius, mark that which follows. The writings of the
Apostles are otherwise distinguished by the Russians then by us: for in their
language there is in S. Matthew 116. chapters, the most part of them so little,
that there is sometimes but three little verses therein, according as the sense
of the discourse requires: and a little after he says, that all that was done
by one Cyrillus a Priest, of the Church of Constantinople, which they do obey,
who understood the Sclauonian tongue. Aug. Epist. ad Eras.
Eugub. says, that the Grecians hold the translation of the seventy
Interpreters, which almost quite through differs from the latin Translation.

Aluares Cap. 31.
says, that Prester-Iohn asked him, how many of the Prophets had foretold the
coming of Jesus Christ. I answered (says he) that there was not any one
amongst them, which made not some mention of his coming. Afterward he asked
him how many books S. Paul had written: who answered, one book divided into
many epistles.

Annot. This discourse shows, that the Churches of Ethiope have never seen
the Latin Bible of the Church of Rome, and regarded not to approve it, if they
found it differing from the Hebrew.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH IN THE WEST.
THe confession of the Swizers. Cap. 1.
We do receive only that Interpretation of the Scriptures for Orthodoxal and
lawful, which is taken out of the Scripture it self, expounded according to
the true sense and meaning of the language wherein they were written.

Whitaker. De Sacr. Scrip. contr. 1.
We Englishmen do hold, that the Latin translation of the Church of Rome is
in very many places miserably corrupted and falsified, and that it is not
authentical: and that the Hebrewe and Greek edition is sincere Scripture.

THE ROMAN OCCIDENTAL CHVRCH.
THe council of Trent. Sess. 4. decr. 2.
The Council considering that no small profit would redound to the Church, if
of many Latin editions of the holy Scriptures one were known to be
Authenticke, does ordain and declare that the same vulgar edition be held for
such, and that none be so bold to reject it, upon what pretense soever.

ANNOTATION.
THe Author of the vulgar Latin translation is not known: The Roman
Catholics say, that it is the labor of S. Jerome. The Reformed Churches do
think that S. Jerome was not the Author thereof. Nevertheless the Council
of Trent does authorize it. Cardinal Bellarmine affirms, that that
Translation is true, and that the original is corrupted: But there are many
Roman Vatable, Arias Mont. Aug Eugub. and others.
Catholics, which do hold the Catholic belief, and have made new
Translations, and consequently corrected the vulgar. Those of the East Churches
hold, that only the Greek Originals, written by the Apostles are
authentical. And as touching the books of the old Testament, they allow of
the Translation which is called the Translation of the seventy, or of
Ptolomeus. Nevertheless, they hold it not for a certainty, that those be
altogether the translation of the seventy, which carry that name. It is thought
that the Apostles did use the Translation of the said seventy, the which
nevertheless was not altogether comformable with the Hebrew: but if they have
approved it, then it follows, that there was not any error, in that they
have alleged it: Moreover the Hebrew text is preferred before all other
Translations.

The Latins do object, that it is not reasonable to receive the Hebrew Bible
of the Jews. The Greeks do answer, that our Savior and his Apostles had
the Hebrew Bible, and that they left the same to their successors, from whom
those of this present time have received it from hand to hand, and not from the
unbelieving Jews, and therefore the vulgar translation was taken from the
Hebrew. It follows therefore, that the Hebrew was then in the Church: or else
that the Roman Church has taken it from the Jews.

Masius Praf. in Mosem. Barcepha.
says that the Syrians hold for authentical the Syrian translation, of one
Theodorus: peradventure they intend not to prefer or equalize it with the
original Hebrew; and that the Grecians, the Moscouites, the Abyssines, and the
Armenians, would attribute each one of them, to the translation used in their
Church, as much as the Latins do attribute to theirs: which would be but so
many particular opinions, each one of them being rejected by the other: and
therefore the Catholic and assured opinion is,

That the Latin translation of the Roman Church, or any other, has not equal
authority with the original Hebrew and Greek of the Prophets and Apostles.

QVESTION. X. Whether the Traditions of the Latin Church are Catholic, and
whether all Christian Nations are obliged to observe them.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
NIcolas. Lib. 4. 36.
The Grecians say, that they were the first Nations that were converted to the
faith of Jesus Christ, and that in consideration and regard thereof they are
the men, that truly and purely hold the Traditions of the Primitive Church, as
it was preached and taught unto them by the Apostles.

Jeremy Oecumenicall Patriarch writes thus to the Protestants of Germany. 1.
Resp. in Conclus.
Let these things suffice you (most dear brethren) which (as you see) do best
of all accord and agree with the Scriptures, unto us divinely given according
to the interpretation and exposition of the most wise and holy Fathers inspired
by God. For we are not permitted to trust upon our own particular
interpretation, or to understand or teach: but only that which agrees with the
holy Councels and Doctors of the Church: for fear that being once drawn or
led out of the way of the Evangelical doctrine, and the path of true
wisdom and understanding, we do err, and that our judgment be transported
as an other Proteus, one while to one fashion of belief, another while to
another. Well, some of you will demand (peradventure) by what means may a man
attain to this? That shall he do by the aid and assistance of God, if he do
attempt nothing, and follow but that which has been ordained by the Apostles,
and holy Councels. For he that does well and constantly continue within these
limits, shall march the very same pace, and be of the very same faith and
Communion with us.

Sacranus. De Rel. Ruth. ca. 2.
The Moscouites deny that the Church of Rome is the chief head of all other
Churches, saying also, that the Sayings, Statutes, Writings, Canons, and
Determinatio^s of the Councels of the Church of Rome are nothing: and that all
Councels after the seven first Councels, are not truly Catholic; because
that they were holden without their consent and The Latins do reckon 18.
Bellar. tom. 2. lib. 1. cap. 5.
approbation.

THE CHVRCH OF THE SOVTH.
ALuares. Cap. 26.
Again it was demanded of me, what number of Bishops were at the Council of
Nicei whereunto I answered, three hundred and eighteen. Moreover they asked
me, wherefore we do not observe the Statutes and Articles of that holy
Council, seeing it was therein ordained, that Priests should mary. I answered,
that of all that, which was there ordained, there was now nothing observed, but
only the great Symbol or Creed. They put me also in mind of many other
things, which were broken and violated by Pope Leo, Aluares a Roman Catholic
accuses the Council of Nice of heresy, in the presence of Prester John.
and they prayed me to recite them: But I excused my self, saying that I knew
them not: although that in my judgment, if that he infringed any, they were
such as sauoured of some heresy: and that he had approved and caused to be
observed those, which he knew to be holy and necessary.

The same Aluares. Cap. 27.
Prester John asked me whether we had a book divided into eight parts, which
was composed by the Apostles assembled at Jerusalem, which they call Manda and
Abetilis, the contents whereof was by them observed: but I answered him, that I
never knew any such, because it was not to be found in our Countries.

Zaga-zabo an Ethiopian Bishop. Dam. a Goes de leg. Ind.
Neither our Patriarch, nor our Bishops do believe, that either of themselves
or in Council, they may make any laws, unto which any man should be bound,
upon pain of mortal sin.

THE REFORMED CHVRCHE IN THE WEST.
THe confession of the Swizers. Cap. 2.
S. Peter the Apostle says, that the holy Scriptures are not of any private
interpretation: and therefore we approve not all interpretations, neither
receive as a lawful exposition that which is called the opinion of the Church
of Rome.

We do not contemn the exposition of the Fathers, which do agree with the
holy Scriptures: we reject all humane Traditions, although never so well
adorned with fine Titles, if being conferred with the holy Scripture they do
differ and vary.

Zanchius. H Zancl ij Fides.
We do judge that those Traditions must be retained and observed in the
Churches, which do manifestly appear to be of the Apostles observed ever in
all the Churches, although that there is no such commandment in the Scripture.

It is not the part of a Christian man, Jdem Author.
and one that fears God, to reject that, which is proved to have bin received
by the consent of all Churches: to reject that (I say) without just and
necessary cause: but if he attempt any such matter, it must be debated in a
general Council.

THE CATHOLIC ROMAN CHVRCH.
THe Council of Trent. Sess. 4. dec. 1
The Council considering that all Doctrine and Discipline is contained in
Books written, and Traditions not written, following the example of the
Catholic Fathers, and good interpreters of the faith, does receive and honor
with equal affection and piety, all the books of the old and new Testament:
and in like manner the Traditions which do appertain as well to faith, as to
good manners, as having been spoken either by the mouth of Jesus Christ, or
else by the holy Ghost, and always kept in the Catholic Church (Roman) by
continual succession.

ANNOTATION.
THere is no part of Christendom that hold not themselves to have the best
form of government. The three principal (that is to say) the Grecians,
Romans, and Abissins or Aethiopians do claim their Traditions from the
Apostles, notwithstanding that they are found either to be different or
contrary: but in Histories their Original is to be seen, especially the
Traditions of the Grecians and Latins. As touching those of the Abissins or
Aethiopians, it is harder to find out the Authors: Nevertheless they have
received some of the Greeks and Latins in the time of Justinian the Emperor,
as hereafter shall be said: But the most part of their ceremonies are taken
from the law of Scal. de emen. temp. in Ephesians. Eccl. Eth.
Moses. The Reformed Christians The confession of Beza. part. 7
say, that if ceremonies must be, it is more convenient to observe those which
God has in times past ordained, then to receive any Paganism superstition.

That which brought most novelties into the Latin Church, is the authority
which is given to one alone: for every Pope would leave some remembrance of
faith: from hence do proceed so many canonized saints, and fashions to honor
them, feasts, pilgrimages, Religions, or orders of monks and friars, and such
like blind devotion, wherein the Latins have surpassed all people: who accuse
the foresaid Latins of presumption, because they would make to pass for
Catholic, those customs which were never ordained by the seven universal
Councels. They of the East Church require the observation of those of the
general Councels, but not of any particular. The Reformed Christians do
protest, that they dispute not against Catholic customs, Melanchton ad Lang.
but against abuse and superstition: or if any thing displeases them, it is
the multitude of ceremonies, rather then any one of them considered in
particular. It is true, that in rejecting those that have been brought only
in by the Church of Rome, they have not spared the Catholic ceremonies. De
concilijs.
Luther thought that all Christian nations would reform themselves, the one
after the other, and also that, that which seemed to be a particular attempt,
would be corroborated and confirmed by a Catholic approbation. Howsoever it
be, the learned and greatest men amongst them do protest to submit themselves
to a general and free Council. The Frenchmen likewise who have of late time
begun, and had less means given them to errect or institute such an estate and
form of Church, as is to be seen in other Countries, have nevertheless
protested in like manner in the conference at Poissy, that it would be easier
for them to fall into accord in ceremonies, if the differences in doctrine were
once appeased. So it is, that the contempt of Catholic Government does get
the said Reformed Christians an evil opinion among other Christians. And that
produces two effects, the one, that the said Protestants considering
ceremonies, but as outward shows, (and the Roman Catholics Matthew.
historiogr. 1. 6 disc. 5.
do confess that ceremonies have justly that name) do condemn the customs
of other nations, without discerning those that are Catholic from other more
particular; or that are profitable and tolerable from those that are evil and
naught. And the other seeing themselves despised and contemned without reason,
persuade themselves that it is all one, when one reprehendeth them in a matter
concerning faith. Saint Paul says, that such ceremonies have appearance of
holiness, in that they spare not the body, and have no regard to cloth or feed
the same: but he said not, that they should abandon all Ceremonies, rather
(said he) he that eats does well, and he that eats not, does likewise well:
much less has he approved that one should rent asunder, or condemn the
Catholic Church.

The other effect of condemning the Catholic Church is, that a man cannot
(now a days) read the writings of the ancient Fathers, nor the Histories of
the Apostolic Churches, no not the holy Scripture it self, without finding
very many ceremonies and fashions of speaking not used amongst the Protestants
of France: from whence it happens that many do change their belief, being
offended at the contemning of Councels, as it is seen by their writings and
conuersations: and on the other side they of the Roman Church which do rely
too much upon outward ceremonies, are more and more confirmed in their opinion,
presuming that they follow and ymitate in all things the holy Scriptures and
the Fathers: nay the most learned and those that approve not in all points the
Roman Church, do not think it in any wise reasonable to prefer the advice
or opinion of some particular and new writers, before the judgment of ancient
Councels, in that which concerns the Policy of the Church. Here it is to be
marked, that the modern Chronicles in writing the Ecclesiastical History,
do cause the readers very often to err. They write the names of the ancient
Bishops of Romein Capital letters, naming them alone, and recounting their
acts and lives, and they gather their laws, ordinances, and decrees, and make
no mention of the Canons which the other Bishops have made in their Churches:
from thence grew the opinion, that the said Bishops of Rome were Monarchs of
all the world, as the Emperors have been in temporal matters of their Empire:
and that such Laws, Traditions, and Decrees (which were but only for the
Church of Rome) were laws given to the Catholic Church, which is not so. For
it has been but of very late years, that France, Spain, Germany and England
have received them, that is to say, three or four hundredth years since: as for
other nations they have not received and approved the same as yet, but have
invented others. In fine the reformed Christians Daneus in lib. de haere.
say, that the estate of the Church has been tolerable, during the five first
ages, and they approve not Aerius, and such like, which in times past troubled
the Church in rejecting the Ecclesiastical customs: and from thence it
follows, that the Customs received during those first ages, are not those
which have brought, or do nourish the Schism in Christendom, and therefore
all nations do auowe,

That Catholic Traditions ought to be received, if the inestimable good of
peace and agreement might thereupon ensue: always provided, that you
comprehend not under the name of Catholic, those which only belong to the
Greek Church, or the Latin, or the Abyssin, Ethiopian, Armenian, or any other
particular Churches.

QVESTION. XI. Whether the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the son,
or from the Father only.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
THe second answer to the confession of Ausburg. De processione Spiritus
sancti.
You see how many absurdities do arise on every side, if it be concluded that
the holy Ghost does proceed from the Father, and from the Son. Hold not an
evil opinion in the name of the Lord. For if the Latins, the Church of Rome
and others, do bring approved witnesses, as it seems likely to them, that is
to say Augustine, Ambrose, and Jerome, we likewise can produce far more, and
more worthy of credit. All which have pronounced that the holy Ghost proceeds
from the Father only, and have prohibited upon pain of a grievous Anathema,
to hold any other belief.

THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHVRCH.
THe confession of faith by the Council of Trent. Sess. 3. decret. 1.
We believe in the holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life, which proceeds
from the Father and the Son, which is worshipped and glorified, together with
the Father and the Son, who spoke by the Prophets.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
SAint Seuerus Patriarch of Alexandria. Formul. Bapt.
I believe in one holy Ghost living, which gives life unto all, who proceeds
from the Father and the Son.

The King of Aethiope. Epist. of David.
In the name of God the Father Almighty Creator of all things, visible and
invisible: In the name of God the Son Jesus Christ, which is one with the
Father, light of lights: In the name of the holy Ghost, God living which
proceeds from the Father, I am King, etc.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
THe English Confession. We believe that the holy Ghost which is the third
person in the holy Trinity, is very God, not made nor created, nor begotten,
but proceeding from the one and from the other: to wit, from the Father and the
Son, in a manner unknown and unspeakable of men.

ANNOTATION.
LOmbard surnamed Master by the School Doctors of the Latin Church Li. 1.
did. 1.
says as follows, touching the differences between the Grecians and the
Latins in this question. The Grecians say that the holy Ghost proceeds from
the Father only, and not from the Son: which they hold, because that the truth
in the Gospel, which contains wholly the faith, speaking of the procession of
the holy Ghost, makes mention only of the Father, and also that in the
principallest Councels which were celebrated with them, their Symbols or Credes
have been so fortified by the Anathemaes added, that it is not lawful for any
man to teach any thing touching the Trinity otherwise then is therein
contained: in which Symbol or Creed, the holy Ghost is fayd to proceed from
the Father, and not from the Son: And therefore (say they) all those are
Anathema, that do affirm that he proceeds from the Son: and a little
after. We do conclude that the Grecians do accord with the Latins in the
matter it self, although that they differ in words.

Behold here the opinion of the Master of sentences, who to show that there is
no difference between the Greeks and the Latins in that point, does only
report the sayings and sentences of the ancient Grecians, who say: that the
holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son. But that has not
satisfied his followers, which think that the modern Gretians hold not the
belief of the ancient: besides some of the Latin Doctors do confess, that
they understand not well the intention and meaning of the Grecians, others do
call them Heretics and Schismatikes. The reformed Churches do leave this
question with the same irresolution.

We reject (says Tilenus) the error, or as others term it, the
Logomamachie, strife about words.
(...) of the modern Grecians. This difference has been the cause, or at
least wise the pretext of the Schism betwixt the East Churches and the West.
The East Churches who would transport the Primacie to Constantinople,
pretending that the Pope of Rome abuses the Church, do take occasion to
accuse the Pope upon this Article (that Pope, was Nicholas the first, by the
report of Bellarmine, who alleges De Christo l. 2. c. 21.
Anthoninus or Adrianus as some will have it) because that he had been so
bold as to add of his own authority to the Symbol of Nice, that the holy
Ghost proceeds from the son: and because (peradventure) he has not
expounded it fully, they of the East have accused the Latins of constituting
two principles: and the Latins laying the fault upon them, do impute unto
them blasphemy, saying, that they did derogate from the Divinity of the Son
of God. Lombard and others say, that the difference is in words, and not in the
matter it self. Peradventure the Grecians do deny the procession of the holy
Ghost to be from the son in one consideration, and the Latins do affirm it
in another: for to know if it be so, we are constrained to enter into very
curious considerations of Divinity. It is therefore necessary to mark, that
the son is considered three manner of ways:

First as being the Divine essence, and the very same essence with the Father:
hoc sensu filius non spirat: for the actions are of the persons, and not of the
essence considered apart.

Secondly, the Son is to be considered as a Son, and that formally; So the
Son produces not the holy Ghost; for he which is produced, so far as he
is produced, produces not.

In the third place the Son is to be considered as a person: and that is it
which S. Austen regarded, when he said, that the Son has from the father,
not only to be son, but also to be, or his being: that is to say, to be a
distinct person, not to be simply the Divine essence: for the Son has the
same of Bellar. de Christo lib. 2. cap. 19.
himself, and the person begets not the essence, but the essence begets
the person: and if the son produce not in this manner (that is to say) as a
person, then the holy Ghost proceeds not from the Son in any wise: for as it
has been said, the holy Ghost proceeds not from the Son, either as an
essence, or as a Son.

Well then, if the Grecians say not that he (to wit the holy Ghost) proceeds
from the essence of the Son, being simply taken, neither from the Son as a
Son, the Latins should not take occasion to condemn them, seeing that they
say the same.

But because the Grecians say, and that according to the Gospel, that the holy
Ghost proceeds from the Father: it is manifest, that they deny not the
procession of the holy Ghost to be from the Son, because he proceeds not
from him, either as an essence, or as a Son: for if that were so, they should
deny in like manner his procession to be from the father: for the father
produced not the holy Ghost as an essence simply (for the essence produces
not:) neither as a father, for if he had produced him as a father, the holy
Ghost should be then his son.

The Grecians do hold, that the holy Ghost proceeds from the father in such
a sort as he cannot be said to proceed from the son. And they have reason
to say so, because the holy Ghost is in the person, and from the person of the
Son, the which the father has begotten as a son: and the father begot not
a Son, which had not the holy Ghost, and his productiue grace and fertility:
Likewise the father is the cause (the Greek Doctors do use this word (...)) of
the holy Ghost, both as a person primo and per se, and as a father per filium.
But the Son inspireth not as a son, primo and per se, neither in producing
another person, which should produce the holy Ghost. This observation remains
obscure, if it be taken without distinction, that the holy Ghost proceeds
from the Father and from the Son: also the Grecians should seem to speak
more properly then the Latins. The ancient Doctors confess that the holy
Ghost proceeds from the father proprie: as he speaks more properly, which
says, the King commands, then he that says, the King goes: for the
commandment proceeds from the King, as a King, but the King goes as he is a
man. If then the Son be an inspirer, the Father is the cause, even as a
father. But because that the Grecians do absolutely deny that the holy Ghost
proceeds from the Son, denying thereby that his person is an inspirer: a
man must take heed least he fall into a (...): for if by the word proceed,
they understand to have his original or beginning, they say not ill,
considering the Father alone is the beginning. The Divines do confess as
much, when they call the Son Principium quasi Secundarium. This word
Secundarium destroieth the name of Principium, and the word quasi, shows that
it is to speak improperly. Yet here one cannot speak properly enough.
Therefore you may see that the holy Ghost is said to proceed from the Father
alone in diverse sorts, the which the Churches of the East do regard. But they
regard not the reasons, wherefore he may be said to proceed from the Son: as
also it is very hard to express how the person of the Son is an inspirer
without considering him either as an essence simply, or as begotten, for in
this person is considered but the essence, and the relation, as those school
divines affirm; the which relation has the place of form from, which the
action ought to proceed.

It is likewise very hard to say, how the Father inspireth as a person, without
inspiring neither as a Father nor as an Essence: Nevertheless we must so say,
seeing the son of God himself has said and taught so, as his beloved
Disciple Saint John testifies unto us, which heard it of himself: But because
he has not said that the holy Ghost proceeds from himself, the Churches of
the East will not say so: but do consider the Father as Father, and the Son
as Son, and they say with their great Doctor Saint Damascenus: Orth. fid. li.
1. ca. 13.
(...), the Father alone is the cause and beginning as well of the Son as of
the holy Ghost.

That which moves the Latins to be so obstinate, and to say that the holy
Ghost proceeds from the person of the Son, is because they fear that
otherwise men would feign or imagine inequallitie in the persons: And if the
Father did not communicate to the Son the inspiratiue power, he communicated
not unto him all, that is in him: but he communicated unto him all, except the
constitutiue property of his person. Nevertheless the truth is, that the
Grecians confess constantly the equality of the persons, and they say that the
Father did communicate all to the son: but they seem to deny that that
production is the action of the Son, because that the Son does not inspire,
but the person already begotten and resident in himself: and they say
moreover, that there is (...) Damasc. ibid.
that is, that the inspiration is one and the very self same action of them
both, the which nevertheless onght to be attributed to the Father alone,
because that he alone is the beginning. The Latins do confess all this, that
is to say, that there is one self same inspiratiue virtue, and consequently
one self same inspiration which proceeds from the Father, yea even in that,
that it is the action of the Son, and that the Father and the Son do
inspire because they are both one, for the essence is the foundation of the
power, although that it is the Persons that do produce it. It is as if one
would search to know, whether the light which shines sometimes in the night
time, does proceed only from the Sun, or else, as well from the Sun, as
from the Moon A man should not do amiss to maintain both the one and the
other, I speak this, yet not comparing the most holy mysteries with creatures,
as some for want of a more solid discourse are wont, and would make men believe
so. I say this only, that there may be found Logomachies as well in the one,
as in the other. The conclusion according to the intention of all the Churches
seems to be, that,

The Father as a person produces the holy Ghost, and as a Father begot the
Son, who through the inspiratiue virtue communicated, produces also the holy
Ghost: in such sort that the holy Ghost is said to proceed from the Son, if
one consider the action of the Son simply, but if one have regard to the
beginning of the same, he proceeds from the Father only.

QVESTION. XII. Whether that the faith (which God gives) be a sure and
certain confidence of salvation.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
Jeremy. 1. Resp. Ier. Patr. cap. 4.
Let us approach to him which is without sin, entering into repentance with
assurance. Let us come to Jesus, which is most merciful, with full confidence,
not having an ill conscience, or doubting any thing: for he that doubts
cannot approach with assurance. Item, Cap. 13.
We beg first the peace of our consciences, and the salvation of our souls.
Peace is a thing most profitable, or rather a virtue which is altogether
necessary, for it is impossible that the troubled spirit should have access
unto God.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
SAint Seuerus Alexandrinus. For. de Bapt.
Let us approach with a pure heart, and confidence of faith, and let us
persevere in the confession of our hope without declining: for he that promised
us is faithful.

Litourgie Aethiop. Let this Bread and this Cup be effectual unto us all, that
shall receive it with Faith unspotted, Charity unfeigned, perfect Patience,
firm Hope, and Confidence.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
THe confession of Bohemia. Cap. 5.
The repentant are taught to confess their sins before those that have care
of their souls, and to receive of them absolution with confidence to enjoy
without doubt the remission of their sins.

The confession of Wittemberg. Cap. 14. de conf.
Seeing God has promised us his mercy freely for his sons sake: he requires
in that regard, that we should abandon the doubtfulnesse of our flesh: and
conceive a most certain confidence in his mercy, and to the end that might
be, he has placed our salvation not in the merits of our righteousness which
is imperfect, but in the merits of his son Jesus Christ. Item, wherefore we
do account that those which do command us to doubt of the grace of God, do
not only fight against the true belief of the Catholic Church; but also do
provide very ill for their souls health.

THE ROMAN CHVRCH.
THe Council of Trent. Sess. 6. cap. 9.
Albeit it is necessary to believe that sins are not pardoned, nor never
shall be pardoned, but freely through the mercy of God, for the love of Jesus
Christ: Nevertheless it must be held that sins are not pardoned, nor never
have been par-pardoned to any, which vaunteth himself of his belief and
certainty of the remission of his sins, and reposeth himself only upon that:
although perhaps he be an utter heretic: and that in our time this vain hope,
being far from all piety is preached with a great force against the
Catholic (Roman) Church. And we ought not to be assured, that it must
needs be; that those which are truly justified without doubting any thing,
do rely upon themselves, that they are justified and that none can be
absolved of his sins and justified but he that believes for a certainty
that he is absolved and justified: and a little after: for none can know by the
certainty of faith* without all question of falsehood, that he has obtained
the grace and favor of God.

ANNOTATION.
THe Council of Trent says, that confidence is a vain opinion, a
presumption, a vice, remote from all piety, and consequently the way to
damnation. The reformed on the contrary side, do maintain that confidence is
a Theological virtue, and that faith whereof the Gospel makes mention so
often: and is not hurtful, but rather above all things necessary to
salvation: and that he that repents, ought to be assured that he is absolved
before God, especially then, when he receaueth the Sacraments, the seals of
the remission of sins, and at such time, (say the Greeks) as one is
possessed with the affection of him that said, I have hated iniquity, that is
to say at such time, as sin reigns no more in that man, although it does
remain in him. Every one sees that this point is of importance: for if the
sayings of the Protestants be true, it goes very hard with the Roman
Catholics: because that they follow the doctrine of the said Council, albeit
not all, and cast far from them this hope as vain and deceitful, and in so
doing cannot be saved. On the other side, the reformed do run in hazard if
they do persuade themselves, that this confidence comes of divine
inspiration, which in the decree of the Council is a vice far void from all
piety. But because that this is not a place to debate upon the reasons which
are alleged on the one side, and on the other, it shall suffice to advertise
you, that out of the passages before mentioned, is gathered, that the Churches
of the East and South, and many of the Catholic Church of Rome, do hold with
the Reformed, contrary to the Council of Trent,

That the faith which God gives to the repentant, is a firm assurance of
salvation: and consequently, that whosoever has this assurance, has the faith
which God gives.

QVESTION. XIII. Whether a man may attain faith or confidence by his free
will, or do works proceeding from faith, and such as are profitable unto
salvation by the same.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
Jeremy. 1. Resp. c. 18
It is of us to choose and will, but it is of God to perform and bring it to
effect. And beeause that which is most excellent is of him: S. Paul attributes
all unto him, imitating therein the custom of men. As when we see a house
built, we atttribute all to the chief builder: yet nevertheless all is not
done by him, but by the workmen, and by the owner that provided the stuff:
but we attribute all unto him, because he has laid the foundation, and is the
chiefeth builder. In like manner is it here, for so says S. Paul also: It is
not in him that wills, neither in him that runs: which saying preuenteth
two mischiefs, the one that no man exalt himself, for grant says he, that
thou runnest, or that thou do endeavor, yet think not, that which is well
done is thine, for if thou art not inspired from above, all is in vain. It is
nevertheless confessed, that thou shall attain unto the end of that which
thou desire, because that thou runnest, and because thou labourest: For he
said not simply that we run in vain, but that we run in vain, if we
think that all is of us, and make not God the principal party for God would
not, that all should be from him, least he should seem to crown us for no
service, neither that all should be of our selves, least we should happen to
fall into a foolish opinion of our selves: for if we be proud of the least part
thereof because it is in us, how much more should we be, if we had all in our
selves?

Item, in recyting of S. Idem
Chrysostom. To the end that the greatness of his benefits exalt the not,
behold how he does humble thee: that is (says he) by giving grace through
faith. On the contrary side, to the end that free will have no prejudice, he
has also added that which is of us: And again he has taken it away: for the
same (says he) is not of us: nay faith it self is not of our selves. For if
he had not called us, how could we have believed? It is the gift of God

The Anaphor. of the Cophites. Anaph. D. Basil.
And therefore, O Lord, we thy unprofitable servants, and miserable strangers,
whom thou have vouchsafed to make administrators of thy holy mysteries; not by
reason of our righteousness, for we have done no good on the earth, etc.

Liturgia Ethiop. Give us thy holy spirit, to the end that with a pure heart,
perfect love, and firm hope, we may be bold with confidence, and without
fear to pronounce that prayer which thy dearly beloved Son has taught his
holy Apostles.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe Council of Trent. Ses. 6. can. 4
If any one say that the freewill of a man, being moved and stirred by God,
does not cooperate at all, in assenting to God, which moved and called it; to
the end that he dispose and prepare himself to obtain the grace of
justification, and that he cannot consent if he would, nay rather that he does
nothing at all, as a thing without a soul, and that he is only a patient and
no agent, let him be accursed.

Item. Can. 5.
If any one say, that the freewill of a man has been so lost and razed out
after the fall of Adam, that it is a thing without a name, or rather a name
without a thing: and to conclude, That it is a fiction that Satan has brought
into the Church, let him be accursed.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH
THe confession of the Saxons. Art. 4.
Those men that were well instructed, have always distinguished outward
discipline, from the regeneration of the spirit, which is the beginning of
eternal life: and have taught that in man there is such a freedom of will, to
rule the external motions of the body, that those which are not regenerate,
may in some fashion accomplish that discipline, which is, an external
obedience according to the law. But a man cannot deliver himself from sin,
and from eternal death by his natural strength. For this deliverance and
conversion of man to God, is wrought by the Son of God, which does quicken us
through his holy spirit: and the will having once received the holy spirit, is
never after idle or void.

The confession of Ausburg. Art. 18.
Touching freewill, the Churches do teach, that man's will has some liberty to
work civil righteousness, and to choose that which is conformeable unto reason:
But it has not the power to work spiritual righteousness, which is the
righteousness of God. We confess that all men have freewill, which have the
judgment of reason: nevertheless not such, as that they are sufficient of
themselves, either to begin without God, or to end without him, in that which
concerns God, but only in the works of this present life, as well good as
badde.

ANNOTATION.
SOme men do think that the difference touching free will consists all in
words, which may be granted, because that the Roman Catholics do not hold
any thing to be in a man that is regenerated, which the protestants do not
confess with them, that is, that it proceeds either in all, or in part from
free will. But the difference is in this, that the Protestants do think it
necessary that a man should have an assured faith, the which (say they)
proceeds in no wise from free will, nor by consequent from the works that
do proceed from this faith: for if it proceed totally from God, it follows,
that the effects ought to be imputed to him only. If the Latins would
confess that God gives this confidence, they should approve the opinion of
the Protestants; and indeed many do so, and therein are true Catholics. The
Churches of Asia and Africa, which affirm, that it is necessary to salvation,
to have this confidence: do also confess, that it comes from God, and
therefore beg it of him, and consequently deny therein free will, as the
Protestants do, and are contrary to the Latins, although that they do not
debate with them about it, and (though they know it not) agree with the
Protestants: those Protestants (I say) which believe that the Grecians do
contrary them, as much or more then the Latins: and so it is certain that the
fault is for want of understanding the matter.

Now to comprehend well this thing, a man must mark the propositions of the
Patriarch Jeremy, and explane them, to the end he may gather his meaning by
his own discourse.

First he says, that a man has power or ability to choose the good as well as
the evil. These terms are strange to the Resp. 2. Ierem. de l. arb.
Protestants. Nevertheless they are true, because that he speaks of the
soul, which is the inward man, and the cheifest part of a man (for so he
expounds himself.) This soul is of it self apt to judge and choose the good
(that is to say, that good which belongs to moral virtue:) but the body
which is the souls instrument, does suggest unto it without ceasing those
objects, which have appearance of good, in such sort that the soul cannot
resist but very hardly; even as a ship, which of it self is apt to be
conducted any way, is oftentimes carried by the wind against the will of the
Pilot.

Secondly, Jeremy says, that a man attempteth, and that God effects. The
Protestants do confess the same likewise, saying, that a man may by his
free will do a civil work of The foresaid confession of Ausburg.
justice, and such as is commanded by God: But because that of it self it
profits nothing to salvation, the same Jeremy adds, that God effects, by
bestowing that which is his own, that is to say, faith.

Thirdly. Nevertheless the Protestants say, that all proceeds from God: The
same Author says so also, and in the very same terms, and shows that the
moral work is but as the matter: even a matter unprofitable, to the which God
gives a form, that is to say, faith. Even as an Householder which would build,
provides the matter, but the Master workman makes the house or building, in
such sort that all the commodity of inhabiting, which is the use of the house,
is attributed to him that builded it.

Fourthly, Jeremy says, that God does cooperate. It is necessary here to
mark, that two causes may concur to one effect. Reason leads a man to a
work of justice, the holy Ghost does likewise drive him: And a man fortified
with special grace, executes it better, then if he were carried alone by
natural reason: Nevertheless all is attributed to God, because that the soul
being illuminated, employeth her natural faculties to a good end, the which it
would never do without God: and for this cause S. Paul says, that it is not in
him that wills, nor that runs: wherein he teaches, that a man may will
and run, but because that in running he erreth, S. Paul adds to it, that
God must needs give his mercy, which he does, when he purifieth the heart
through faith; faith (I say) which not only makes the Moral works good,
which proceed of reason, but also brings forth a far greater number, and
makes the righteousness of the faithful to exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees: for a man loves God according to that proportion, that
he believes in him; and a man does good works according to that measure,
that he loves him; and it cannot be otherwise: for in all our willingness
the principal part, or all proceeds from inspiration, and in this
consideration it is said, that God gives the will and the deed.

5. When a man speaks of faith, it is necessary to distinguish it: for the
want of this, is the cause of the strife about words. The Latins never speak
but of that faith, which Bellarmine defines thus: Catech. cap. 11. Faith is a
Theological virtue, whose office is to illuminate the understanding, and to
raise it up to a firm belief of all that, which God has revealed unto us by
the means of his Church, although it be a hard thing, and far passing
natural reason.

6. The Council of Trent says, that this faith depends partly upon free
will, that is to say, in as much as a man disposes himself to receive it, and
may reject it, when it is offered him. The Protestants do call this faith
historical, and do confess that a man may further himself in receiving of it.
For the authority of the Church may move a man to believe that the Gospel is
a true history: likewise the testimony of the Apostles, who are unreprovable
Authors, and the predictions of the Prophets and the Sybils: yet so that all
this would be weak, if God should not illuminate the understanding to believe
firmly. The Protestants do confess also that one may reject this faith, and
fall into despair for this faith has her seat in the understanding (as the
Roman Catholics say very well) but in such sort that the understanding
draws not the will to accept and rest in it seeing that by this faith a man is
not assured, whether any (...) be given to himself, but only he believes
that it is (...) to some men, in such sort that if he loves God, it is of a
(...) proportionable to this faith. He loves him as the Author of nature, and
as a benefactor to them that please him. If he keep in some sort his
commandments, it is more formidine paenae, then virtutis amore: rather of
service fear then of filial love. It is impossible for a man to love him
withal his heart, whom he mistrusteth.

6. This is the cause that the Church of the East and South; together with the
reformed Church of the West (and that against the Council of Trent) do hold
that a man must have confidence and assurance. The confession of Saxony says
as follows: De remiss. art. 3.
Faith signifies not only to know the history as the devils themselves do,
which believe and tremble but also signifies to embrace all the Articles of
the faith, and amongst the rest this also: I believe the forgiveness of
sins, and do believe that they are forgiven, not only unto others, but also
unto me.

7. Behold here the true knot of the question of free will. The Protestants
affirm that this faith of assurance, depends not at all upon free will: this
is not to say, that it is not a man, which believes and which wills, but
that he believes not, nor wills not, if God of his extraordinary and
especial grace would not, that a man believed and were willing. Moreover this
is not to say, that naturally the actual understanding cannot believe all that
which is credible, and that the will naturally accepts not all, that which
the judgment proposes to be good: but man is said not to help himself by
his free will to receive this faith, because that nature does not show to the
judgment of man any reason, whereby he might conclude that God loves him,
and would feign be favorable and merciful unto him, as Jeremy very learnedly
says in his second answer: all that which is proved by arguments, is examined
very profoundly by earnest inquiry or search: but the simplicity of faith is
more firm then the demonstrations which reason does devise. Moreover, man
cannot reject this faith when it is offered him, because that God has so
ordered, that a man judges and believes without any precedent debating. And
withal, a man cannot have a will to reject it at such time as it is in the
understanding because that the will naturally and necessarily, but freely (for
otherwise it should be no will) yields it self to that which the judgment
esteems to be good and profitable. The Protestants in the confession of
Saxony and Ausburg, and others do confess also, that it may be imputed to
the understanding, by reason of other succeeding objects, as the cause that
vice reigns in man; for man has his free will to evil, and God has not
promised salvation to them which sin willingly and notoriously.

8. As touching the Christians of the South, although that this question is not
found handled in their writings, yet they speak very sufficiently. They say
that assurance of faith is a gift of God, and therefore they beg it at his
hands, and they confess that a man cannot do any good in the world, to wit,
by his free will. Moreover the Council of Trent confesses, that this Sess. 6.
9.
faith proceeds not at all from free will: Every man ( says the Council)
when he has regard to himself, and to his own indignity and indisposition,
may have some fear and doubt of Gods grace: seeing a man cannot know by any
certainety of faith, that he has obtained the grace of God. Out of this
confession of the Council a man may conclude, that if God gives this
confidence (as the Apostolic Churches do believe against the said Council)
then it is a supernatural gift, and depends no way on freewill.

9. But the Reformed stay not on so fair a way, They say that we cannot do
any good works through free will: They would say, in as much as these works
proceed of faith: for in that they proceed from natural all reason (which is
no less in the faithful then in the unfaithful) the free will does cooperate
also, nevertheless they are not therefore truly good, that is to say,
rewardable: but they are, in that they proceed of faith, or that they are
addressed to a true end through faith: and therefore the Catholic Church
believes,

That God gives a kind of faith, called confidence, which proceeds not in
any wise from free will, nor by consequent works considered as effects of this
faith.

QVESTION. XIIII.
Whether a man receives remission of sins by a confident faith, without the
works of the law.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
Jeremy. 2. Resp. de just.
The one has need of the other, that is to say, grace of the works, and the
works of grace: as the light of the sight, and the sight of the light: as the
soul of the body, and the body of the soul. Seeing then that both the one and
the otherdoth avail to salvation, without doubt a man ought to have them both:
a true faith with works, and the works of virtue through faith; and a man ought
to believe without doubting, for doubt and perplexity in faith, is no faith:
for that which is proved by arguments, though once received, is examined more
profoundly by searching: But the simplicity of faith is more firm then the
demonstrations of reason: and those things which are believed without art, are
more strong then those that are artificial, without all comparison. For if one
sound the depth of Faith, she is tossed to and fro; but if she be considered in
her simple disposition, she remains steadfast. It being then most certain,
and not to be doubted, that a man must believe without Doubting, It remains
here only, that we must with all our might seek and find in some fashion,
what that is? because that we ought to apply our selves to obtain salvation:
for faith without works, and works without faith, are equally rejected of God.

The book called Dioptra. Tur^ogr. curs. in ann.
Thou did descend (O Lord) thou have taken flesh to save all men, preserve me
by thy grace, I beseech thee: for if thou should preserve me by my works,
the same should not be reputed grace. For thou (my Lord Jesus Christ) have
said: he that believes in me shall live, and shall never see death. Let
faith be imputed to me in stead of works for to justify me: but let that
faith suffice me for all. It is faith that will absolve me, it is faith that
will justify me, it is faith that will make me partaker of eternal glory,
for God requires noe other thing but compunction and mourning.

THE CHVRCH OF THE SOVTH.
ANaphor. Cophit. Anaph. D. Basil.
Lord which art praised by Angels and Archangels, called holy of the Seraphins,
which sit upon the Cherubines, and art praised without ceasing by their
voices, formed by the divine word; which would also be honored by a Priestly
function, even by us which dwell on the earth, not for that thou have any need
of our worship or service, but for to make us partakers of thy holiness;
support us O Lord, (I say) which approach to thy holy altar, and disdain not
us thy servants (which do stand before thee) for the blot of sin, wherewith
we are spotted, for thou which art our maker, know and see what thy
creature is, for no man borne of a woman shall be justified in thy sight.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
THe confession of Ausburg. Cap. 4.
When the Gospel does reprehend our sins, the astonished hearts ought to
hold for a certainty, that the remission of sins and justification through
faith are given us freely thorough Jesus Christ, which was made a sacrifice for
us, and has apeased his father: Albeit then the Gospel requires repentance,
yet neuerthesse to the end that the remission of our sins might be certain,
it teaches us, that it is given freely, and that it depends not upon
condition of our worthiness, and is not given in confideration of any
precedent works, neither of any ensuing worthiness or dignity. For remission
should become uncertain, if we should hold it not to be given, but after
such time as it was merited by precedent works, or else by some notable
repentance.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe Council of Trent, Sess. 6. ca. 8.
when the Apostle says, that man is justified by faith, and that freely, those
words ought to be understood in that sense, that the Catholic Church has
always held and expounded them, that is to say, that we are justified by
faith, because that faith is the beginning of the salvation of mankind, the
foundation and root of our justification, without the which it is impossible to
please God, and to come into the company of the sons of God. And that we are
freely justified by reason that there is no other thing that goes before
justification (be it faith, or good works) which meriteth the grace of
Justification. For if it be of grace, it is not of works: otherwise (as the
same Apostle says) grace were no grace. Item, Can. 12.
If any man say that justifying faith is nothing else, but the trust which one
has on the mercy of God, which pardons sins for the love of Jesus Christ:
or that this trust is the only thing through which we are justified, let him
be accursed. Can. 13.
If any man say, that to obtain remission of sins, It is only necessary
that a man believe assuredly, and never to make any doubt, notwithstanding his
own infirmity and indisposition, that his sins are pardoned him, let him be
accursed.

ANNOTATION.
TIme (says Malancthon) De pace ad Lang.
has mollified the controversy touching justification; for the learned agree
in many things, which in the beginning they had in great disputation: all do
now confess and mainetaine that faith is needful, that is to say, confidence
in Christ, for the remission of sins: of the which faith or confidence the
School men made no mention. Melancthon did suppose, that there were very many
men in the Church of Rome, whom they counted learned, that were not of the
opinion of the Council of Trent: but confessed with the Churches of the East
and South, and with the Reformed Church, that a man both may, and ought to have
assurance and confidence. Nevertheless the Reformed cease not to debate upon
this point of justification, as also upon that of free will, not only against
the Latins, but also against the Grecians. Respon. Resp. Ierem.
The Author of a certain discourse called Examen pacifique says, That these
are but striuings about words invented to trouble the Church, because that one
takes this word Justification, in one sense, and another in another sense: one
takes the word Faith in one sense, and another in another sense. In such sort
that both the one and the other say true, being taken according to their
meaning, although that they differ in words. We have said in the question
precedent, that the Latins and the Reformed agree upon the point of free will,
if all the Latins would confess, that the Faith of the Elect is a full
assurance; we say the very same in this point of Justification: but to show
where the difference is, we ought not to use the word Faith or Justification,
without distinguishing of what faith, or what justification we speak

The Council of Trent says four things, First, that faith (that is to say,
that which is without confidence, which the Protestants call historical, for
the Council acknowledges none other) is the beginning of man's salvation: and
that this faith comes from God. The Protestants do acknowledge both the one
and the other: to wit, that it is necessary first that one believe that the
Gospel is a true history, and then that one cannot believe perfecty, and as
he ought, without the grace of God, as the same Council says.

Secondly, that this historical faith, is the beginning and root of
Justification, that is to say, that it brings forth good works which God
does approve, and for which God justifies a man, that is to say, he holds
and declares him just. The Protestants say that this faith may bring forth a
certain inherent justice, through the which a man is Danaus Eth. Christ.
justified, Secondum quid, that is in a sort, but not absolutely, for a man
that does one good work, does a thousand bad works, which do make him
unjust: so that the same man is good and bad, just and unjust, approved of God,
and condemned of God again. God were unjust if he should not hold himiust whom
he himself has justified; well then he justifies men according to civil
righteousness, in giving this historical faith, and in stirring up in them
charity, such as it is, that is, proportionable to this faith. One cannot
(says Bellarmine) De Crana lib. 64.
love God himself, as the Author of nature, if it be not by the help of
special grace. And so there is no difference in this point.

In the third place the Council says, that through this historical faith a
man is not absolved of his former sins. The Protestants do confess as much,
and add withal, that no more is he through good works, which proceed from
thence, which (say they) are not good, but for humane societies sake.

In the fourth place the Council says, that Saint Paul and S. James, speaking
of this faith in the example which they allege of Abraham: the which (says
the Council) was justified, that is to say, found just, in that he believed
God; but plainly justified, that is to say, held just of all, when he effected
the commandment of God. The Churches of the East do approve this opinion, but
it is not needful to debate much, touching the intention and meaning of S.
Paul. The Scripture may receive diverse expositions and al orthodox. It is
certain that Abraham was justified in that he believed: and more just in that
he laid his hands to the work.

But there are two conclusions wherein the Apostolic Churches, and the
Reformed Church are contrary in the said Council. The first is that the said
Council does hold that through the works which proceed of this historical
faith a man obtains (others say a man meriteth) that God should pardon his
former sins, in imputing unto them, that do those good works, the merit of
the passion of our Savior. The Protestants on the contrary side say, that such
works proceeding from such historical faith serve not to salvation. Hereunto
the Churches of the East do agree, who say that the works which proceed from
a true faith, are truly good: and they call this faith Confidence, which ought
to be noted, to the end that none should doubt the truth of the history, for
they declare sufficiently, that they mean, that it is not needful that a
repentant man should doubt of his salvation. That is also seen more plainly
in that, that they of the East have written before, to the Protestants of
Germany, who press very hard this point of Confidence, wherein they of the
East do approve and confirm their saying.

The second difference is in that the Protestants say, that a man is absolved
(they call it justified) at that instant, that he receives this confidence by
divine inspiration, and that without any consideration of precedent works
(otherwise grace should be no grace) as also without consideration of any
future works: for it happens sometimes (as it did to the good thief) that a
man shall have no time to do good works: and if the faith of confidence
suffices as soon as it is in fused, yea and suffices as an isntrumental
cause to put a man in possession of the passion of the Lord, which is the
formal cause of absolution, it follows, that during all the term of a man's
life, he need not seek any other instrumental cause of this application. For
when our Savior healed the sick, he said not unto them, love thou me?
although it was necessary that they should have loved him, but he said to them
beleeuest thou? for by this belief they were healed. And that the Churches of
the East do believe, that this confidence puts a man in possession of the
grace of God, they show in that which their Patriarch says, that his
confidence unites things separated, and that distrust does dis-vnite and
separate them: for what union can there be with God without remission of
sins? Moreover the Grecians confess that God inspireth this confidence: If
it be so, it follows, that at that very instant a man obtains pardon:
otherwise God should be the Author of deceitful and vain confidence. But
some will then demand, to what end serve good works? The Grecians and the
Protestants with one consent do answer, that without them one cannot be
saved: and if there be no good works, a man falls from the absolution
already received: and look how much force confidence has to put a man in
possession of the merit of the passion of the Lord, so much evil works have
(that is to say, so long as they remain and reign in the soul) to break the
union that faith had contracted. In like manner good works are causes, sine
quibus non, of this justification, or else may be said to be causes per
accidens: Neither the Christian Churches of this time, nor the fathers, nor the
holy Scripture, do set down the order of every one of these causes, according
to the terms of Philosophers, neither is it necessary: It suffices that every
one have faith, and that every one give himself to good works, and that he know
that both the one and the other is necessary. The difference between the
foresaid people, and the Protestants is: that the Protestants seeing that the
Latins do not attribute enough to faith, or rather do not acknowledge this
faith of confidence, to the which they attribute so much, cannot endure to have
this faith disgraced: And other Christians hearing of the commendations of this
faith, do persuade themselves, that it makes to the prejudice of good works;
for which cause they cannot by any means hold their peace.

Well then, because that we have said, that evil works cause men to fall
from justification, that is to say, from absolution (which is the belief
received, without any contradiction, in all times, and by all Christian people)
It may be objected, that amongst the Protestants there are some found (for all
do not so, as is to be seen in the confessions of Ausburg, Bohemia, Saxony,
and Wirtenberg) which say, that he that has this justifying faith cannot fall.
From whence it follows according to their sayings, that he which believes
himself to be justified, may give himself to all wickedness.

To this may be answered, that those which hold this proposition, either do
not explane themselves well, or else their explication is not well understood.

For they say not simply that every one ought to believe that he is justified,
but only he that is repentant ought so to believe. Also that repentance
(whereof every one may judge in his own soul) shows, whether his faith be a
justifying faith. And that he that shall say, I will do evil, is not at all
repentant: for these are quite contrary.

Moreover those which are said to hold this opinion, say ordinarily that none
ought to commit sin, in hope to repent: for none can or ought to promise
himself, that God will give him time and means to accomplish it: Those which
do haunt their Sermons, can bear witness if this be not an ordinary lesson.
Well then, what is this but to say that none can have this confidence at such
time as vice and sin does reign in him? And if one cannot have it, is not
this as much as to say, that if one had it, he may loose it, in giving himself
to wickedness? But behold here how their saying is true: forsooth because
confidence of faith does coutaine in it Historical faith which remains in
him, in whom vice does reign, as the Council of Trent also says: And this
faith, if he be elected will move him to repentance, which ends not in
despair, as in the reprobate, but in a full confidence, and all by the
assistance of God. The Catholic conclusion is:

That a man receives remission of his sins at the very instant that the
assurance of faith is infused into his soul, and that without any
consideration of former or future works.

QVESTION. XV. Whether a man meriteth properly everlasting life by his good
works.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
Jeremy Patriarch Oecumenicke. 2. Resp.
When we praise good works, we do not pretend to exalt our selves by them, or
to put our trust in them: for we should then sin very much in so doing: But
we desire that men would give themselves thereunto, as to things that are
especially necessary to salvation, and the which every one is bound to exercise
according to his power, following the commandment of God. But if we trust in
that great and incomprehensible mercy of God, and his only grace, in such
sort that we do hope for salvation remaining unfruitful and ungrateful: that
must not be by no means; for it will bring us no profit at all. As for the
rest, let us judge of that which is in us (although that there is not any thing
that is perfect) Nevertheless the same does profit and makes known what it
is which we have in our souls, to wit, that we are charitable and obedient to
the commandment of God, and that we pretend not to be carried into heaven, as
people amassed, and without understanding, negligent and idle, the which
certainly we can never obtain, if we do not conioine our own power and
endeavors, with the grace and mercy of God, for in sticking fast to sin, we
are justly to be esteemed fools and senseless, as cleaving to those things
that can help us nothing, and which having no being in themselves, are
nothing, the which we ought above all things to hate and eschew: because that
they do provoke Gods wrath against us, and do draw us back far from him.
Therefore when we are even at the point to offend God, let us prostrate our
selves before the judgment seat of Christ, which is very terrible, whereon he
shall sit in a high and glorious place, as a just judge, before whom shall
appear all creatures beholding his glory and majesty, for to render an
account of all their words and actions.

The King of Moscouia. His answer to Rohite a minister.
As concerning that which thou writest of Jesus Christ the mediator, and of his
only name through the which we are saved, and of the remission of sins and
life everlasting, we believe the very same.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
ANaphor. Cophit. Anaph. D. Seuerl.
Forasmuch (O Lord) as we are thy poor servants, strangers and unprofitable,
whom thou have vouchsafed to make administrators of the holy mysteries, and of
the passion of thy Christ: not for our justice, for we have not done any good
upon the earth: but for thy mercy and clemency, which thou have abundantly
powered upon us: we do now approach with confidence to touch thy holy Alar. And
we which have offered the figure of the body and blood of thy Christ, do adore
and most humbly pray thee that thy holy spirit do come upon us and upon these
gifts, which we have offered, and that thou would sanctify them.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
THe Confession of Saxonia. Art. 9. de Pram.
Everlasting life (says Saint Paul) is a gift of God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord: and those which are reconciled or justified, are likewise Coheires with
the Son of God for his sake, and not for their own merits: in like manner
those that repent are accounted just by faith, by the only means of the Son
of God, and are quickened through him, and for the love of him, as also
eternal life is given them for his sake, and not for their merits. And we must
not doubt that the Son of God has only merited for us a preparation to
eternal life, to the end that afterward we might merit by our good works.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe Council of Trent. Sess. 6. 32.
If any man say, that the good works of a justified man are the gifts of God
only, and that they are not as good merits of him that is justified, or that
the same man that is justified does not truly merit the increase of the grace
of God, life everlasting, the possession and seazon of eternal life, provided
that he die in grace, and also the augmentation of glory for the good works
which he has done through the grace of God, and the merit of Jesus Christ, of
whom he is a living member, Anathema.

ANNOTATION.
THis question may seem to be a (...), because of the ambiguity of the word
Merit, which in the writings of the Fathers signifies to Obtain, as the
confession of Bohemia does well note, in the which sense the Protestants of
Ausburge Confess. art. 4.
have made no scruple to use it. But because that the Council says that a man
does truly merit, we must confess that it speaks of a merit which the
Protestants admit not of. And even so Cardinal Bellarmine shows, when he
says thus. Some men do imagine that there is but one satisfaction, to wit
that of Christ, and that we do not properly satisfy: but that we do some
things, in consideration whereof God does apply unto us the satisfaction of
Christ: that is to say, that our good works are but conditions, without the
which the satisfaction of Christ should not be applied unto us, or at the most,
but a disposition; so says Michael Bauius, the which opinion seems unto me
erroneous: for the holy Scripture and the Fathers, ordinarily do call our
works, satisfactions, and redemptions of sins. Moreover, if a man may by his
good works merit De Condigno, Life Everlasting, wherefore may he not
satisfy for temporal pain which is less? From this discourse of Bellarmine
may be gathered two things. The first is, that in the Roman Catholic Church,
there are some which hold the opinion of the Protestants. The other is, that
the Council by these words, To merit truly everlasting life, does mean
that one may merit it, De condigno, and not that works are only causes, Sine
quibus non, or only dispositions.

The Protestants do oppose themselves against that very strongly and firmly,
and do maintain that merit taken after the meaning of Bellarmine,
presupposes a man has been profitable to him of whom he meriteth: but men
even when they are most perfect are unprofitable servants (to wit to God, and
not to themselves or to their neighbors) as our Savior says. God does excel
both men and Angels from all eternity, and in perfect beatitude. And if he had
appointed to bring them all to naught, even as he created them of nothing, he
should not be unjust: If he do a deed of mercy in eternizing them, it is
because he does it according to his promise, freely and not of merit. For if
a man by his good works has not obliged God to promise, he obliges him not
neither to effect the same. If a beggar by asking alms does get ten crowns,
no man will say that he merited them de Condigno: no although the giver had
made him a promise. Well then, to pray to God and to fast, is to beg his
mercy.

As touching the Churches of the East, they use not the word Merit, but use
the word (...), that is to say, to obtain or to carry away a recompense, which
is a phrase of Scripture. Therefore good works are recompenceable, that is to
say, they dispose or make a man fit to receive a recompense, but yet as a
gratuitie. The same Churches do hold also that opinion which Bellarmine
condemns, that is to say, that good works are causes sine quibus non:
without the which (says their answer) one cannot obtain salvation.

Moreover the benefit of good works is recyted: vice is neither decent nor
profitable, and nothing else but the deprivation of al goodness. Good works do
show what we are, to wit, whether we be in grace. In fine, good works are the
cause of our salvation (but by accident) seeing that the omission of good
works, and the commission of evil, do strange a man much from God.

As touching the Christians of the South, there has not been any disputations
among them touching this question, but they agree with us therein. They call
themselves unprofitable servants, and confess that they have not done any good
in the world. It would be a great injury to the pure simplicity of those
Christians, if one should suspect them to hide a dissembling soul under those
words.

It is to be noted, that the Council of Trent does make two sorts of
recompense, that is to say, everlasting life, and diverse degrees of beatitude.
As concerning life everlasting, one would think it were thus by searching the
cause, to wit, that God loves himself perfectly, because that he is the lover
of perfect goodness and Justice. And that the person of his Son, which is
the very same essence with the Father, has taken in personal union, the son
of the Virgin, who consequently is perfectly loved, that is to say, he has
perfect righteousness, the which the Diety has communicated unto him:
Therefore it cannot be but that God gave to this humanity all the felicity
whereof it was capable. Well then, this love and felicity should not be
perfect, if it did not extend to the mystical body of this Emmanuel, God and
man, that is to say, to all them that are one with him, as he is one with the
Father. In like manner all those that are of that body, are capable of that
felicity by reason of the love that God bears to them in his Son: yea when
they have not the means to do any good works: as it is seen in little
children; which if they be saved (as it is confessed) it is only for the union
which they have with the son of God, whose righteousness is recompensed in
them. Then if this righteousness of Christ be sufficient to make them happy: it
follows, that the same is also sufficient to make those happy, which are
grownein years, who by the very same means have eternal life, that is to say,
by reason of his perfect righteousness.

But as God loves his son, being a man in regard of his actions that are
perfectly good, by reason whereof God has given him a name above all names: In
like manner loves he those which God has given him, by reason of their good
works, although imperfect: and therefore in consideration and according to the
proportion of them, he recompenceth them with sundry degrees of felicity: Not
that their works were the cause of everlasting life, which was not absolutely
promised, but to those which have perfect righteousness The Catholic
conclusion in this Question is,

That a man meriteth not properly eternal life by his good works, although
that they be worthy of reward, that is to say, that they make a man fit to
receive a recompense through the grace of God.

QVESTION. XVI. Whether that there be a fire of Purgatory, or other torment,
where the souls are purified or punished, and whether the prayers of the
living do help to deliver them.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
NIcholas. Lib. 4. 36.
The Grecians do deny purgatory, affirming that the prayers of the living do
nothing profit the dead.

Villamont. Lib. 2. c. 21.
The Grecians do deny purgatory: but you make them amassed, if you ask them
this question; seeing that they believe not that there is a purgatory,
wherefore then do they pray for the forgiveness of their offenses? They
answer, that it is to the end God would put them in a more glorious place,
and that they are in Mansions where the Angels visit them often.

Sacranus. Cap. 2.
The Moscouites affirm, that there is no purgatory: but that there is only
two receptacles, or places of receipt for souls, that is to say, heaven and
hell,

The book of a Grecian touching purgatory, says De purgigne apud Nilum.
thus: We have not received by Tradition from our Teachers, that there is any
fire of purgatory, or any temporal punishment besides, and we know that the
Church of the East does believe so.

The same Author. Our Lord in the Gospel according to S. Luke, teaching what
shall be the condition both of the one and the other, says that Lazarus as
soon as he was dead, was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom: and that the
soul of the rich man, as soon as he was dead, was carried into hell, and
there tormented. And also by the bosom of Abraham he signifies the final
estate of the beloved of God in blessed rest: and by hell and torments, final
damnation and eternal pain. And has left no other place between both,
having any temporal pain; and says, that there is but one bottomless pit,
beyond the which none can pass, which seperateth the one from the other, and
ordained an extreme and utter contrariety between them.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
ALuares. Cap. 5.
Being arrived in the Church, they lay not the body within the grave: but lay it
near to it without singing any part of any service for the dead, nor any of
the Psalms of David, much less those of Job: whereupon I desiring to know
what they said, they answered me, that they sang, that is to say, they
pronounced aloud the Gospel of S. John entirely.

Annot. By this it appears, that the Churches of the South believe not that
there is a purgatory, because they themselves do not make prayers at the
burying of their dead. Damianus a Goes reports by hearsay, that they bury
their dead with Cross and prayers: but Aluares who dwelt many years in that
place, denies it. Peradventure the same Damianus took the lecture of the
Gospel for a prayer.

David Emperor of Ethiope. The letter of David.
We have caused a Church to be built in honor of the most holy Trinity, where
the bones of our deceased fathers are buried, who enioyes (as we hope) eternal
felicity.

Annot. Our Princes of the Latin Church which believe that there is a
Purgatory, are wont to say, speaking of their deceased parents: God have mercy
on their souls.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH
THe confession of the Swizers. We believe that the faithful are transported
to Jesus Christ straight after corporal death: and that they have no need of
the prayers and suffrages of the living. We believe also that the wicked are
straightway cast into hell, from whence they cannot come forth. And that same
which some men teach touching the fire of purgatory, is contrary to Christian
faith, I believe the forgiveness of sins, and the all-sufficient purgation made
by Jesus Christ, and his word: Verily, verily I say unto you, that whosoever
hears my words, and believes in him that sent me, has everlasting life,
and shall not come into judgment, but passes from death to life.

THE ROMAN CHVRCH.
THe Council of Trent. Sess. 9.
Forasmuch as the holy Catholic Church, guided by the holy Ghost, has taught
according to the holy Scriptures, and the ancient Traditions of the Fathers in
the holy Councels, and lastly, in that holy universal Council, that there is
a purgatory, and that the souls which are there detained, are helped by the
prayers of the faithful, and principally by the acceptable sacrifice of the
Altar: The holy Council does command the Bishops, that they take pains, and
study diligently, that the good and holy doctrine of Purgatory, which the holy
fathers and Councels have delivered, be received, held, taught and preached
every where.

ANNOTATION.
THis point here has no difficulty: for as touching the prayers which they
make in the East for the dead, we will entreat in that question, where it
shall be debated whether it be lawful to pray for the Saints which are in
heaven. Only it is to be noted, that the Councelle of Trent does feign that
the holy Scriptures do warrant Purgatory: which the Churches of the East do
deny: And if the true Interpretations of Scripture ought to be taken out of
the Apostolic Churches which have retained it from hand to hand from their
Fathers: it follows, that those places of Scripture, which the Church of Rome
does allege to prove Purgatory, are wrested by them to another sense, as the
Grecians have showed in their Apology, in the Council of Basil. And the
Author of the Treatise of the fire of Purgatory before alleged, does prove it
very slenderly. Moreover many Roman Catholic Doctors, and of very good
estimation do confess, that Purgatory cannot be proved by the Scripture.
Amongst the rest Alphonsus de Castro avouches, not only that it is not proved
by the Scripture, but also that the Fathers do seldom make mention of it,
especially the Greek Fathers: From thence (says he) it comes that even
until this present time the Grecians do deny Purgatory. The Catholic
Conclusion thererefore here is this:

That there is no fire of Purgatory, nor any other torment, where souls are
purged and punished, and that prayers serve not to deliver them, but rather are
superfluous and unprofitable 1. Match. 11
if that they be made to that intention.

QVESTION. XVII. Whether the Pope or any other can give Indulgences or Pardons
to deliver men from temporal punishment.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
Jeremy Patriarch Gener. 1. Resp.
All these things ought to be done freely, for Gods cause, and not for any hope
of gain, considering that there is nothing more agreeable to God then that.

Sacranus. Elucid. c. 2
The Moscouites do condemn Orders, Blessings, Priesthood, Prayers, Fastings,
Indulgences, Iubiles, and Ecclesiastical offices, and all that which the
Church (to wit of Rome) does dispense with by the authority of the Keys. In
like manner they mock at the obedience and authority Ecclesiastical, and
yield no more to excommunication then to Indulgences.

THE CHVRCH OF THE SOVTH.
ZAga-Zabo Bishop of Abyssin. Dam. a Goes de leg. Ind.
It is likewise the office of the Patriarch to denounce excommunication against
the obstinate, the observation whereof is so straight, that they let him that
is obstinate die for hunger. They give nor grant no Indulgences.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
COnfess. Sax. Art. 17.
In times past those that did penance (to the end that it might be perceived
that they desired Pardon with all their heart, and to the end that their
example should profit others) were not received upon a sudden, but the
absolution was deferred: for certain days, to the end that they might be
seen to ask it publickely. Afterward superstition increased so much, that
fasting was ordained, and abstinence from women many years. These
wil-worshippes being too much augmented, the Bishops again released them.

The relaxation of such customs were called Indulgences. The Monks do not
consider the History of these things, if they imagine that they make
satisfaction for eternal pain, or the pain of Purgatory, and others of this
life, or do add, that satisfactions were ordained by the Church, to the end
that these pains should be qualified. Well, we say that this application of
Indulgences, by the which the Pope applies the merits of the Saints, is
invented at his pleasure.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe Council of Trent. Sess. 9. de Indul.
Forasmuch as the power to confer Indulgences, has been given by Jesus
Christ to the Church, and has been used in very ancient time, with the like
power as it was divinely given: The holy Council teaches and commands,
that the usage of these Indulgences which are very necessary for Christian
people, and approved by the Authority of the holy Councels, ought to be
received in the Church.

ANNOTATION.
THe Protestants say that the custom in times past was, to appoint to
repentant sinners a certain term, during which by their good works, they
might give the Church testimony of their repentance. The same is as yet
practiced in the East and South Churches.

Jeremy Patriarcke of Constantinople, discourses hereupon as follows.
Satisfactions are profitable, if they be imposed as a medicine by the spiritual
ministers, that is to say, for those that are Proud, Covetous, Gluttonous,
Incontinent, Envious, Quarrelous, or given to such like vices: Who if they
would convert and repent, ought to submit themselves to the rules made
according to the advice of the holy Fathers. But if those satisfactions be
translated to the gain and profit of those that give them, and not to the true
end, which is to provide for the salvation of the Soul, and to heal each
sin, which is the intention, for the which they were instituted: In that
fashion we do reject them, and do say that they were ordained in vain, which
cannot by any means be denied. And we do pronounce remission of sins, with
some punishment adjoined for many considerations.

First to the end, that a man for voluntary affliction, might escape the
inevitable pain of an other life. Bring forth fruits worthy of Repentance,
says S. John, Every tree that bears not good fruit shall be cut down, and
thrown into the fire, to wit, Everlasting. For God is not so much pleased with
any thing, as with affliction, and therefore S. Gregory says, Tears are
recompensed with mercy.

Secondly, to the end that the inclination of the flesh to voluptuousness,
which is the cause of vice, should be taken away.

Thirdly, to the end that that punishment should be a stay to the soul, to the
end it fall not into such like sin, or worse.

Fourthly, to the end that a man should accustom himself to take pains, for
virtue is gotten with travail.

Fifthly, to the end that a man might be assured, whether he perfectly hates
evil. Nevertheless we do leave all these things in those that depart: For we
do count that it is sufficient, if in him that repents, there be a true
conversion. Therefore we do pronounce remission of sins according to the
power of him that said, If you remit sins, they shall be Pardoned. We believe
that by the same means the punishment is pardoned, for assurance whereof, we
do give the divine gift of the Eucharist. For repentance has his seat in the
soul of the sinner, but not to undergo punishment, is in the hands of God,
which for this cause has really by his own humanity, given remission, as to
the thief who did but desire of the Lord, that he would remember him when he
came to his Kingdom. See here the Doctrine of the Churches of the East
touching satisfaction. The Protestants do proceed more compendiously, they
are content that in regard of unknown sins, every one do apply according to
his discretion, the saying of S. John, Bring forth fruits worthy of repentance.
As concerning sins known by the most part of the Church, satisfaction
suffices not unless it make a reparation or public acknowledgment, in asking
pardon of God, and the Church for the scandale: and if the offense be known
but to a few, the same acknowledgement is made in their Consistories. Those
that refuse do remain suspended or excommunicated, until that they do obey,
and they give no Indulgence. There is also apappointed to the repentant a time
of suspension from the Sacraments, more or less, according to the fault; as
well for a punishment, as also to the end that the Church may see, whether such
repentance be true or fained by the fruits thereof. The ancient Church imposed
punishments, and sometimes so hard, that they were constrained to release the
rigor of them, and that relaxation was called Indulgence. The Churches of the
South do release or mittigate nothing at all, and also reject Indulgences in
what sort soever they are taken: for this evil proceeds from appointing
punishments so hard, that they are constrained afterward to revoke them. But
if satisfaction do consist in doing good works: It is very il done to
dispense with men, for doing all the good that is possible for them to do. The
people of the East and of the South allow not of this abuse, but they condemn
rather the opinion of the Roman Church, which ordain satisfactions to avoid
certain pains of Purgatory, and teach, that by Indulgences the said pains
are escaped, without performing or making of any satisfaction: yea as if by
Indulgences a man might be delivered from the obligation whereby he is bound to
God, to do all that is possible to obtain pardon of him. Also the Apostolic
Churches do believe, that there is neither Pope nor any other person, which by
Indulgences can deliver men from the punishments that God inflicteth: which if
it be so, that Indulgences do not deliver a man from temporal punishments of
this life, as poverty, sickness, and death it self, how can they deliver
him from the pains of Purgatory? For there is the same reason for the one as
for the other. It follows upon the premises, that the Church cannot dispense
with times and works lawfully ordained for proof and disproofe, but may well
release for just and reasonable causes the custom of confessing secret sins,
and may pronounce remission without any confessing, as they of the East
Churches do to this day by their Synchoreses, as we will relate in his due
place. We will then make this Catholic conclusion, that

The Pope cannot by his Indulgences deliver aniy from those temporal
punishments which God inflicts: neither ought he to dispense with the doing of
al those works of repentance that are possible.

QVESTION. XVIII. Whether the soul of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
descended into hell, and whether it vscended into heaven the very sameday of
his passion.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
RItual of the Syrians. Rit. Seueri.
The side of the Lord was pierced thorough with a Lance, and thence issued
water and blood, a sacrifice for all the world, his body was buried and his
soul came back from hell, and was united to his body.

Moses the son of Cephas Bishop of Beth-raman. De Parad. part. 1.
John has written of corporal Paradise in the prayer, whose Title is,
Wherefore this tree is called the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and
would teach as much as our Savior Jesus Christ said, Thou shall be this day
with me in Paradise: for there he proves by many arguments that Paradise was
corporal.

The Liturgy of Saint Basil. Thou have appeared in the last days unto us,
which sat in darkness, and that by thy only Son, which gave himself to
death for our salvation, and by reason of our sins descended into hell by his
Cross and Passion.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
DAmianus a Goes. De Indor. legate. art. 5.
The Aethiopians believe that Christ descended afterward into hell, and having
rased and broken the gates thereof, he came back into life the third day with
great triumph over his enemies and over death, and that after that, he
returned into heaven, from whence he came, and that by his admirable ascension.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
Cardinal Bellarmine. Tom. 1. lib. 4. 5.
DVRAND affirms that the soul of Christ descended into hell not according to
his substance, but by some effects, that is to say, as it did illuminate and
beatifie the holy Fathers which were in Lymbo, Calvin has taught some such
like thing touching the descent of Christ unto the souls of the holy Fathers,
by his efficacy or virtue, and not by his essence.

Idem, It contradicts the holy Scripture and the Fathers, to say that Christ
returned from hell the first day.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
LAsicius Polonus. Theol. Mosco. cap. 12.
It is the belief of the Bohemians, that Jesus Christ descended into hell in
his soul separated from his body, to triumph over Satan. The Sybilles do
derive this word Ades, which signifies hell, of the word Adam, by reason that
Adam descended. This place seems to be els-where then in heaven.

Vrsinus. Catech. Vrsin.
We must believe that which is certain, to wit, that Christ descended into
hell in that fashion as we have said (in suffering in his soul) but if any one
can defend that he descended in any other fashion, it is well, but as for me I
cannot believe it.

ANNOTATION.
THe ancient Catholic Church believed, that the souls of the Fathers in the
old Testament went to a place called in Hebrew Scheol, in Greek Ades, in
English Hell. And all Christians for the most part do believe, that the
Apostles have taught so likewise, seeing that there is not any one particular
man known, that should be the author of this opinion. And although that this
Article was not in the beginning in the Creed of the Apostles (as it is not in
the Creed of Nice) nevertheless having been received without contradiction,
the same does argue that the belief was such before time. And which is more,
the Scripture of the old Testament makes no mention in any place, that the
souls should ascend into heaven, but very often it makes mention of Scheol,
or Hell, and to descend. I will descend into Scheol, with sorrow for my son,
said that good man Jacob: and to descend signifies to go to some low place.
It is true that the word Scheol signifies sometimes a grave, but the Catholic
Church takes it here for Hell: for the Greek translator approved by the
Apostles, takes it so, as also Saint Luke in this sentence of the Psalms,
cited by S. Peter, Thou will not leave my soul in Hell.

For to understand well this question, you must note first, that it does not
appertain to salvation, to know whether the souls of the Fathers were above
or below, provided always that one do not call the holy Scripture into
doubt, which it is not done by and by, although a man do not always attain
to the true sense of it.

Secondly, there are two places that the most learned divines, yea, the
ancient, and now a days the Latins and the Protestants can hardly agree off*
So that in so doing, some proceed in one fashion, others in another. The
Creed says that our Lord descended into hell, and our Lord said, This day
shall thou be with me in Paradise. Some men will ask, Objection.
how ascended he into Paradise seeing he descended into hell. The greater voice
of the Roman Catholics Catech. Council. de desc.
and of the Protestants is, Lasic. Theol. Mosc.
that Hell was Paradise, when our Savior was there, but there are many learned
men of the Catholic Romans, as In 3. sent. dis^. 22. quest. 3.
Durand, and the learned In Apol. cap. de desc.
Picus, which thinking it absurd to say that Paradise was in Hell, have thought
fit otherwise to agree upon it: And have written that the soul of the Lord
went really unto the true Paradise, and descended not into Hell, but by
efficacy or virtue. On the other side, amongst the Protestants, Calvin and
Beozo, have thought more to the purpose, to refer this word Hell to the
torments that our Savior suffered; to the end, that that which the Scripture
says (that our Savior went to Paradise) should be believed without running to
any false or forged Exposition.

Also there are learned men amongst the Latins and the Protestants, which do
decline from the common opinion herein, because that it seems very absurd
unto them.

Nevertheless, because that none of the three is received without
contradiction, it shows that there is difficulty in them all. For to say
that the Lord descended not into Hell, but by his efficacy or virtue, is to
wrest that place of Scripture, Thou will not leave my soul in Hell.

To say that Hell, whereof mention is made in the Creed, is the torments which
the Lord suffered upon the Cross: is an Exposition altogether unknown to the
Ancients, and against the intention and meaning of those which added that
clause to the Creed, and those Protestants themselves for whom this serves,
are ready to receive one more proper, as is to be seen in that sentence
before alleged of Vrsinus. As for the rest, one may give many Expositions;
and all Orthodoxall of one self same place of Scripture, when one is not
assured of the intent and meaning of the Author, so is it likewise in the
Creed.

But about these difficulties, the Apostolic Churches in the East do furnish
us with a fourth Exposition, and that most ancient of all: They hold with S.
Chrysostom a very true Catholic teacher, that the souls of the Fathers were
in Ades (the Latins call that place Infernum and Lymbus: but improperly) and
that our Savior descended thither: And that he was the very same day in
Paradise, and that Paradise is no other place, but the same which the thief
conceived and meant, for if our Savior had spoken of one place, and the Thief
had conceived and meant another, his understanding had been deceived. Now the
Thief meant no other Paradise but that earthly Paradise: for he could not
know what Paradise it was, but by the Scripture of the old Testament, which
speaks not of any other Paradise. It follows then, that our Savior was that
same day in that Paradise, and his soul was not left in hell. It is there
also, whether the Fathers were conducted, whereof some rose with the Lord, and
were seen in Jerusalem.

It is in this Paradise (say they) that Henoch and Elias were placed in their
bodies, and peradventure Moses, who appeared at the transfiguration of our
Savior Jesus Christ: and all the Fathers were rapt up into heaven, some in
their bodies when our Savior ascended, the other only in soul, when he rose
from the dead as the same Saint Chrysostom says, Sermon. de desc.
And this opinion is not only held by the Apostolic Churches of the East, as
we have understood by themselves: But it is very true by all likelihoode, that
the Christians of Afric do consent thereunto: for they are Cophites, and of
the same faith and Religion as the Cophites, Syrians, and Assyrians are: for in
all the Churches, the said book of Moses Bar-cepha, Masius proef in Com.
Moses Barce-pha de parad.
touching the Paradise before alleged, and the Author which he alleges, who
do confirm the same exposition, are very much approved. Now this shall be
for the Catholic Reader to follow and approve, that is to say, either of the
foresaid three opinions, or else that of the Churches of the East and South,
which is,

That the souls of the Fathers were in hell, called in Hebrew Scheol, and in
Greek (...), and that the soul of our Savior Jesus Christ descended thither,
yet was not left there, but the same day ascended into heaven

QVESTION. XIX. Whether all Infants, I mean those of the Elect* aying without
Baptism are damned: and whether it be permitted to the Lay people to baptize.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
Jeremy. 1. Resp. conf
In Baptism, the matter, is the water. The form, the words of the Priest, to
wit, these: This servant of God is baptized in the name of the Father, of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost. The isntrumental cause is the Priest, although
we do not condemn altogether, that which is done by one that is no Priest in
time of necessity.

Johannes Faber. De Rel. Mosc.
In Russia no man is thought sufficient to exercise the office of Baptizing, if
he be not a Priest, what necessity soever do happen.

Theuet. The Moscouites baptize not at all but within their Churches, unless
it be because they are very far from any Church.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
ALuares of the Ethiopians. Cap. 5.
They minister Baptism to their male children, when they are forty days
old, and to the female when they are threescore days old: the infants not
arriving to that age die without Baptism. The which thing being come to my
knowledge, I could not detain my self from publishing in many places, the
great fault and error which was committed against the Gospel, where it is
written: That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and that which is borne of
the spirit is spirit. Whereunto they answered me, that for that matter, the
faith of the mother sufficed, together with the communion which she received
being with Idem. cap. 5
child. They baptize not in Fonts as we do, but in the Porch of the Church,
with a pot full of water, and that the fortieth day.

Theuet. Cosm. l. 4. 2
The King of Maitachasi received the Gospel at the persuasion of King
Cephalian, which was a Christian, and established in his Churches eight
Bishops, a notable company of Priests, and other Ministers: there was also
established an Alcaide or Ismiel, that is to say, in their language a Priest
above all the other Priests: which within six days preached a thousand
heresies. Amongst the rest, that if a woman be delivered, and the child die, it
was deprived of eternal be atitude; and on the contrary side, it was decreede
by a Synod holden at Quiticoi, that if a woman being ready to be delivered,
came to receive the Sacrament, after their usage, law, and faith, and that
afterward her child should be borne dead, by this Sacrament only the child
was baptized, and freede from punishment and damnation.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe Council of Trent. Sess. 6. c. 4.
Translation into the estate of grace cannot be, without the water of
regeneration, or a firm purpose to be baptized.

The Canon Praeter. Did. 32.
If peradventure there be no Catholic to be found, it is better and more
religious to receive Baptism of an Heretic, then to perish eternally.

The Canon Mulier. De Consecr. did. 4.
That women presume not to baptize, if it be not in case of necessity.

The Canon Romanus. Ibidem.
The Roman Bishop takes it not to be the man that baptizeth, but the spirit
of God, although he that baptizeth be a Pagan.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
THe confession of the Swizers. Cap. 20.
We do teach, that Baptism ought not to be administered by women: for S. Paul
forbiddes them Ecclesiastical offices.

The confession of Ausburg. Art. 9. de Bapt.
Touching baptism, the Church does teach, that it is necessary to salvation,
as being a ceremony instituted by Jesus Christ.

The answer of the Divines of Wirtenberg to the Grecians. Resp. ad 1. Resp.
We do rejoice that there are many points of agreement between us and your
holiness, and amongst other things that you hold, that it must not be
permitted to any, to presume to take upon him the office of Teaching in the
Church, and to administer the Sacraments, which notwithstanding, in case of
necessity the Laickes may baptize.

ANNOTATION.
THe Protestants in France do hold, that the Infants of the faithful, dying
without baptism, are nevertheless saved. This word Faithful seems to be
restrained to the Elect: for there are wicked Christians, against whom God
denounces Exodus 20.
that he will punish the iniquity of the fathers upon the children: Moreover
it may happen that the parents may be Gods Elect, and nevertheless (as all men
are subject to err) they may be negligent to procure Baptism for their
Infants. Now it may be Calvin Inst. l. 14. c. 5. 22.
doubted, whether this fault be any prejudice to the Infants. These
considerations perhaps have moved Christian people to incline to this belief,
that the Church ought to hasten Baptism, because they know not who be the
children of the Elect, and that one cannot err in providing for the salvation
of these Infants by baptizing them, by reason that in Baptism (a token or
sign ordained by the Lord) the invocation of the holy Trinity is used, and the
pardon of original sin is asked for him that is baptized, wherein we must
believe that God hears his Church.

The churches always are carried away some with more care others with less.
The Latin Church falls into an extremity, and believes the perdition of
children not baptized, in so much that she permits not only the Laickes,
but also women to baptize, yea Pagans and heretics: wherein she has a
particular opinion, and that which the other Churches approve not; to show that
they have a better hope of the salvation of the same Infants: And above all the
rest, the Church of Aethiope which believes, that they are sanctified in the
wombes of their Mothers. The Grecians do permit the Laickes to baptize, but
they think not the same to be true baptism. And indeed the Moscouites, who
are united to the Church of Greece, permit not the ministration of baptism to
any, but unto Priests, and that within the Temple; or at least wise, that was
the place in times past: for Faber has written so, about a hundred years
ago: peradventure both they and the Greeks were then of this opinion: and
also now a days they rebaptize them, that are baptized by the Laickes. The
Protestants of Germany do permit the Laickes to baptize: nevertheless they
confess that the children of the elect are saved without baptism, as it was
concluded by them at Wirtenberg, in the year one thousand five hundred thirty
six. The Church of England imployeth all the diligence that may be possible.

Thus says the Can. 69.
Canon: If any Minister being advertised of any sickness and danger of death,
or finding any Infant within his Parish not baptized, refuse to baptize them,
or do delay in such sort, that being able to come in time where the Infant is,
and to baptize him, and the same Infant happen to die without baptism by his
fault; the same Minister shall be suspended for three months, and shall not
receive the favor of absolution, until he acknowledge his fault.

From that which has been said, a man may draw this conclusion as Catholic
and Orthodoxall.

That Baptism is the ordinary means for Infants to obtain salvation, yet
nevertheless God saves extraordinarily the Infants of the Elect, which have
not neglected baptism, and that the Church which knows not the Elect, ought
to hasten by all good means the baptism of their Infants.

QVESTION. XX. Whether confirmation be a Sacrament, that is to say, a Ceremony
commanded by God, and whether it does appertain only to Bishops.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
SAcranus. Eluic. c. p. 2.
The Russians say, that there is no Sacrament of confirmation, and therefore
they receive it not, and ordain their Priests without it.

Vilamont. L. 2. ca. 22.
The Grecians deny the Sacraments of confirmation, and of extreme unction.

Gagninus. De Rut. relig.
The Moscouites abhor this Sacrament of confirmation, which they prove to be
damnable, because in all the Councels, especially that of Nice, it has been
said, I confesle one Baptism: and if there be but one Baptism, there is also
but one unction: and the Priest and the Bishop have the self same authority
and virtue to dispense, as well with the one as with the other.

Theuet. Cos. lib. 19. cap. 12.
They also differ from our Roman Church, in that they reject the Sacrament of
confirmation, as a superfluous thing, because (say they) he which was anointed
by the Priest in holy Baptism, ought not to come under the hands of the
Bishops: seeing that therein the authority of the Bishop and of the Priest
is alike.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
THe confession of Zaga-zabo Bishop of Aethiop. Dam a. Goes
Moreover it is to be understood, that with us confirmation and Chrisme, or the
oil of extreme unction, are not holden for Sacraments, neither are they in
use, as I see they are here in the Roman Church.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH
THe confession of Wirtemberg. Cap. 31.
We do not doubt but that the Apostles in the beginning of the Gospel
revealed, and confirmed at the Feastiuall day of Pentecost, have given by the
impositition of hands the admirable gift of the holy Ghost, to those which
believed in Christ, to the end that they should speak in diverse languages. But
of a personal and temporal act of the Apostles, there ought not to be a
general and perpetual Sacrament in the Church without the commandment of
God. And it is a horrible thing to hear it reported, that the Sacrament of
confirmation which the Bishops Suffragans have accustomed to minister to
infants, excels in dignity the Sacrament of Baptism. For there are some
which fear not to affirm the same. As it is a thing (say they) done by the
greatest, that is to say, by the Bishops, and cannot be done by the meaner
sort of Priests: so ought it to be held in greater honor and estimation.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe Council of Trent. Sess. 7. 2.
If any say that those which attribute any virtue to the holy ointment of
confirmation do injury to the holy Ghost, Anathema. If any say that the
ordinary Minister of holy confirmation is not a Bishop only, but also a
Priest, Anathema.

ANNOTATION.
THe Apostolic Churches of the East, North and South, do use oil after
Baptism.

Socolouius thinks that this is the Sacrament of confirmation. We follow here
a contrary opinion, first because that his Authors before alleged, and others
deny it. Secondly, Zaga a Bishop of Aethiop says plainly, that there is no
oil amongst them, that is held for a Sacrament. Thirdly, the foresaid Churches
do not hold the use of oil in Baptism by the institution and commandment of
God, but by the ordinance of the Church, which (say they) has invented many
things: (so speaks the Patriarch Jeremy; touching the unction) Fourthly, the
Tradition amongst those people was to permit the Bishops only, to administer
the said oil of Baptism. Fifthly, They administer this oil, only to show that
in Baptism the Infant receives grace to bear the name of a Christian, a name
which comes from Christ, which signifies anointed: that is it also, which as
Jeremy declares, always is called unction, A mystery: we will speak of
this word, in his place. To end, the Church of Rome, does both the one and the
other, they use oil in Baptism as the other Apostolic Churches: but besides
in particular, they make it a Sacrament. Moreover if they will have unction to
be a Sacrament a part, it follows then upon that that, the foresaid Churches
have Baptism well nigh in the same simplicity or purity wherein it was
ordained by our Savior: for they add not any thing, neither salt nor spittle.
As for the rest, the Protestants Constit. Angl. can. 60 and Call. instit. li. 4.
ca. 19. 4.
do approve confirmation by the imposition of hands, as is to be seen in the
Constitutions of England, but yet as a ceremony, not calling it a Sacrament.
To conclude, the Council of Trent, which was very near wholly composed of
Italians and Spaniards, does excommunicate all the Apostolic Churches for
these two Articles: first because they hold not, besides the unction in
Baptism, a Sacrament of the unction of confirmation: Secondly, because they
say, that although it were a Sacrament, yet the Priest might administer it as
well as the Bishop: but he that will believe the Catholic Church,
notwithstanding the Anathema of the Latin Church, will say,

That the oil may be as well applied by the Priest, as by the Bishop in
Baptism, and that it is no Sacrament, that is to say, a ceremony commanded
by God, or by the Church, besides Baptism.

QVESTION. XXI. Whether particular confession stand by divine law, and whether
it be necessary to confess every sin by the Ecclesiastical law.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
THe answer of the Church of the East to the Divines of Tubinge. Resp. 1.
We say that he that confesses, receaueth perfect remission of his sins, if
he do confess them all, and the circumstances thereof, as far as he can
remember. Nevertheless the sins which a man leaves unconfessed, either by
forgetfulness, or because he is ashamed to utter them, we beseech our merciful
God; that he would pardon them together with the rest, and we hope that a man
receives also pardon for such sins.

Panorm. Did. 5. c. in paen.
The Grecians admit not confession, saying that it is not by Divine law.

Gagninus. De Rel. Mosc.
The meaner sort say, that confession does appertain to Lords, and that it is
sufficient for them to believe in God, and in his son Jesus Christ, and in
the holy Ghost.

Scarga. De Russ.
The Russians stand not any more upon the state of Confession, for their Popes
or Priests being soyled with sins, without making any other confession, then
that which they make once a year, do approach to celebrate divine service.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
VIlamont. Lib. 2. c. 21
The lacobites never confess their sins to any man but to God only, and
that in secret.

Aluares. Cap. 37.
The custom of the Priests of that Country, is not to keep secret that which
was declared unto them in confession: (the Author speaks of a Portingall
which dwelt thirty years in Aethiope.) Because he cannot do a better work,
then to open the secrets of the thoughts to him, to whom all things are known.

Annot. Out of this discourse of Aluares, may be gathered, that if the Abyssins
do confess themselves; it is not by recyting of all their sins, and above
all the rest of sins punishable, for that were dangerous for them that
confessed.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
THe confession of Ausburg. cap 11.
Seeing then that confession is the cause that absolution is given in secret,
and that the custom of confessing in particular causes, that an
acknowledgement of the power of the Keys, and of remission of sins is kept
and maintained among the people. Moreover seeing that this auricular confession
profits much to forwarne and teach men, we do retain it for these causes
diligently in our Churches: yet in such wise, that we teach, that the recyting
of sins is not by Divine Law, and none ought to charge men's consciences with
the rehearsing of them.

The Synod at Sandomir in Poland. Ann. 1570. art. 2.
No man shall be admitted to the Communion, if first he has not been examined
and absolved by the Minister, or by some of his fellows. In that examination
the rudest are apposed and taught, and in the end absolved.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe Council of Trent. Sess. 4. c. 5.
The Lord has instituted an intier confession of sins, and by Divine Law it
is necessary for all those which are fallen after baptism. It is most certain
that Priests cannot exercise their judgment without having knowledge of the
matter in hand, and that they cannot keep and observe equity and justice, in
injoyning penance or punishment, if men declare their sins only in general,
and not in special. From hence a man may gather, that the penitents must
declare in their confessions all the mortal sins, which they know in their
consciences, after such time as they have diligently examined them, although
that they were secret and hid, and committed only against the two last
commandments of the Decalogue: which wound sometimes their hearts more deep,
and are more dangerous then those which they commit publickely. But because
that all mortal sins, and every sin according to desert, does make men
the children of wrath, it is necessary to ask pardon of all, by open and
penitent confession.

ANNOTATION.
ALl Christians do confess that the Lord gave to the Apostles, and to their
Successors, unto the end of the world, the charge of bynding and loosing, to
remit and to retain sins: that is to say, to denounce against the wicked and
impenitent, that they are in the estate of perdition, and to the penitent and
repentant, that they are in the estate of grace: In such sort, that whatsoever
the Ministers of the Church, which have this office, do open or shut with the
keye which was given them, that is to say, according to the truth of the word
of God, is confirmed and ratified in them. Some man peradventure will ask,
whether it be suffcient to preach it in general, or it be commanded to
certify every one in particular. The Catholic Church answers that our
Savior meant, that it should be done in the best form, by following his
example, Thy sins are forgiven thee, said he to the particulars. If one
consider well what is practiced in the greatest part of the world, he shall
find a conformity in doctrine and belief, but some diversity in the form
and manner of proceeding.

The Iacobites confess not their sins, but only to God, as many Authors
affirm: The same is also true of some nations, above all the rest of those who
have their Metropolitan in Caramit, as Boterus says, for that Church extends
into many parts of the world: The Iacobites (who come out of Egypt) do report
that particular confession is in use amongst those, which are called there
Iacobites and Cophites. The Protestants in France confess their known
sins, either in the Church or in their Consistories, and there receive
absolution: and their doctrine declares, that it is very good for the easing
of a troubled conscience, to confess sins particularly: but none can learn
when and how the same is practiced. The Reformed Protestants of Germany,
Poland, and Bohemia have established an order to confess their sins, and to
receive absolution: But without naming their faults. They of the East are not
far from this form of proceeding: for they say, that the numbering of sins
which they require, is not by any divine law, but rather they confess, that
they hold it otherwise: for the commandment of the Church binds not in foro
conscientiae, unless it be in case of scandal: but it is no scandal to
conceal an unknown offense. But the said Churches of the East do more: that
is, they hold that a man is not bound to confess that which he is ashamed to
declare: which is to open a door to the proceedings of the foresaid Reformed:
for if a man be ashamed of all, it follows that he is not bound to confess
any.

Moreover, if Shame does dispense, wherefore do not other considerations of
more importance do the same likewise: as the danger to be diuulged, and
afterward punished by the Magistrate, or dishonored for ever? But to show how
the Churches of the East do proceed in pronouncing absolution without any
confession made, we are advertised, that the Popes, that is to say, the
Priests, do it in particular: But because that in that Church of the East,
there is a Patriarch which governs, it seems unto them (having regard unto
all the Churches, to whom the keys were given) that if he declares that
absolution, it is more authenticke, and gives more consolation to the
conscience: to content the curious reader, we will insert here the form or
manner of a Synchorisme translated out of Greek.

Theophanes by Gods mercy, Archbishop of Constantinople, new Rome, and
Oecumenique Patriarch.

Our mediocrity That is to say, purity. Cuiac. ad lib. 6. Gramm.
by the grace, gift and power of the holy and living spirit, which our Savior
Jesus Christ has given to his Divine Disciples, and the holy Apostles, for to
bind and loose the sins of men, saying, receive the holy Ghost: to whom you
remit sins, they shall be remitted, and whose sins you shall retain, they
shall be retained: and those that you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven
likewise, and those you loose in earth shall be loosed in heaven. We having by
a successiue descent received from them this Divine grace, do absolve N.
aspirituall son of the same, in all things wherein he has erred or sinned,
as a man, and offended God in word, deed, or thought, and in all his senses,
if he be under the curse of the Bishop or Priest, or of his father or mother:
or if he be fallen into any of his own sins, having sworn by an oath, and
not performed it, or if he has transgressed as a man in other sins, and
has confessed them to his spiritual fathers, and has received of them the
Canon exactly; of all those things and others whereby he is bound, we do
unbind and loose him by the power and grace of the most adored and holy Spirit,
and also of all things which he has left unconfessed, whether they be by
forgetfulness, or Shame. All which be pardoned him of the most merciful God,
which is blessed eternally, Amen.

The Latins, otherwise called the Roman Catholics, say that our Savior
commanded every one to confess particularly every sin, and all the
circumstances thereof, to employ all possible diligence to remember them, and
that he that confesses not all those memorable sins, cannot be saved. If
their opinion be true, the Apostolic Churches of the East, South, North, and
the Reformed or Protestants in the West are damned; and the gates of hell shall
prevail against the Catholic Church. He that list, let him believe them: so
many there be, that do hold with one consent,

That our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ has not commanded any particular
confession by numbering our sins, but that it is an ordinance of the Church:
which nevertheless constrains no man to confess those sins which he is
ashamed to declare.

QVESTION. XXII. Whether the Bread and Wine in the holy Sacrament are changed
into the body and blood of the Lord.
THE EAST CHVRCHES.
THe answer of the Patriarch Jeremy. Cap. 10.
The tenth Chapter does treat of the Lords Supper: yet not amply, but (if we
may so say) obscurely. For amongst you, men understand many things touching the
same, the which agree in no wise with us. The Catholic Church therefore
believes that the bread after the sanctification is changed into the body of
Christ, and the wine into his blood by the holy Ghost: provided that the bread
be leauened, not without leaven. For the Lord in that night in which he was
betrayed, having taken bread, and given thanks, broke it, and said, Take eat,
this is (said he), not bread without leaven, or the figure of my body, but) my
body and my blood. Nevertheless at that time, the flesh of the Lord which he
carried about him, was not given to the Apostles to eat, nor his blood to
drink, nor now in the divine celebration of those mysteries, as if the body of
the Lord descended from heaven: for it were a blasphemy to say so: but both
then and now by the invocation and grace of the Almighty Spirit, the beginner
or Author of this mystery, the bread is converted and changed into the body of
the Lord, and the wine into his blood. And in another place he says thus: And
from thence it comes, that the Mass or Lump of bread is broken in pieces,
and it is not offered entyer or whole: which figureth the passion of our
Savior. And at the time that this bread is offered, it is Common Bread,
offered only to God, but afterward it is made extraordinary bread, and is
changed in deed: but if we would by reasons, causes, and effects, debate
and resolve thereof, we should need a thousand tongues, and yet they would not
be sufficient. But our Savior has commanded to do this in remembrance of
him.

And a little after, he says, that the Church is signified in mysteries, and
not as in Symboles; but as the members depend on the heart, and as the boughs
on the root of the plant: and (as the Lord said) in that fashion, that the
branch is in the stock of the vine. For here is not only a Communion of name,
or a similitude of Analogy, but the identitie of the things themselves. For
the body and blood of the Lord are true mysteries, which are not changed into
any humane body, but we are changed into them: for the better things have ever
the pre-eminence. Even as Iron being united with fire becomes fire, but the
fire never becomes Iron. And even as when the Iron is glowing hot, we see not
the Iron, but only the fire, the properties of the Iron not being apparent:
even so also if a man might see the Church of God, as it is united to him, and
participates of his body, he should see nothing else but the only body of our
Savior, by reason whereof Saint Paul writes, Ye are the body of Christ.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
LIturgia Ethiopica. O our Lord Jesus Christ, whose substance was not created,
but art the pure word; thou art the Son of the Father, thou art the bread of
life descending from heaven, who would come in the figure of a Lamb without
spot, for the redemption of the world: Now, O thou lover of mankind, we do
most humbly beseech thy bounty, praying thee that thou would show the light
of thy countenance upon this bread, and upon this portable Altar; bless,
sanctify, purify, and translate this bread into thy spotless flesh, and this
wine into thy precious blood, and let it be made an ardent and an acceptable
sacrifice, and the salvation of our souls and bodies, for thou art our King.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe Council of Trent. Sess 3. c. 4.
Forasmuch as our Lord and redeemer Jesus Christ has said, that it was his
true body, which he offered under the form of bread: for this cause the Church
of God has always had the same persuasion: and this holy Council does again
declare it, that through the consecration of bread and wine, all the substance
of the bread is converted into the substance of Christ our Lord, and all the
substance of the wine into the substance of his blood. And this conversion has
the Catholic Church conveniently and properly called Transubstantiation.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
THe Confession of Wittenberg. Cap. 19.
We believe that the Eucharist is a Sacrament instituted by Jesus Christ
himself, and the use thereof was recommended to the Church, unto the end of
the world. But because that the substance thereof is one thing, and the use
another, we will speak in order of them both.

Touching the substance of the Eucharist, we believe and teach, that the true
body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ is distributed in the Eucharist, and
do reject those that say that the bread and wine in the Eucharist are but
signs of the body and blood of Christ being absent. We do also believe, that
the Almighty power of God is so great, that he may either bring to nothing
the substance of the bread, or change it into the body and blood of Christ: but
it cannot be proved by the manifest word of God, that God exercises in the
Eucharist any such absolute power; and it appears that no such matter was
known to the ancient Church. But as when he speaks of the City of
Jerusalem, portrayed upon a brick, this same is Jerusalem, it was not
necessary that the brick should be changed into the City of Jerusalem: In
like manner when he speaks of the bread; this is my body, It is not necessary
that the substance of the bread should be changed into the substance of the
body of Christ: But it suffices for the verity of the Sacrament, that the
body of Christ be truly present with the bread: yea rather the verity of the
Sacrament requires, that the true bread remain with the true presence of God.
For even as for the truth of the Sacrament of Baptism, it is necessary that in
the use thereof, the water should be and remain true water: In like manner it
is necessary in the Lords Supper, that the bread in the use thereof be and
remain true bread; because that if the substance of the bread were changed,
the verity of the Sacrament remained not in his true nature.

The Confession of England. Art. 12.
We say that the bread and the wine are sacred and celestial mysteries, and
that by them Jesus Christ the true bread of life eternal, is offered unto them
that are present, that do receive his body and blood through faith:
Nevertheless we say not, that we believe that the nature of the bread and wine
are wholly changed and reduced to nothing.

Liturgia Gall. Let us lift up our spirits and our hearts, where Jesus Christ
is in the glory of the father, and from whence we look for our redemption. And
let us not dwell upon these earthly and corruptible Elements, which we see with
our eyes, and touch with our hands, to seek for it there, as though it were
enclosed in the bread or wine. For then our souls shall be fit to be nourished
and revived by his substance, when they shall be elevated above all terrestiall
things, to obtain heaven, and to enter into the kingdom of GOD where he
dwells.

The Confession of the French men. Art. 36.
We do confess that the holy Supper of the Lord is a testimony unto us, of the
unity which we have with Christ Jesus, because that he is not only dead and
risen again for us: but also nourishes and feeds us truly with his flesh
and blood, to the end that we should be one with him, and that his life should
be our life. And albeit that he be in heaven, until such time that he shall come
to judge the world; yet nevertheless we believe that through the secret and
incomprehensible power of his spirit, he nourishes and quickens us by the
substance of his body and blood.

ANNOTATION.
ALl Christian nations do with one consent agree, that the bread and wine of
the holy Sacrament are converted into the body and blood of the Lord. It is
true which Alphon. de Castro says, that the Armenians have heretofore
otherwise believed, but he shows not, whether it was their ancient manner,
or whether any particular man brought it in amongst them. As touching the
Abyssins, there is mention made oftentimes of transmutation in their Liturgy,
which they refer to the Apostles, according to the subscription thereof. But
the Berth. tabu. geog. de Abyss. after many others.
Historiographers do say, that the said Abyssins were not Christians so long
ago as they make us believe. They report themselves to have received the
Christian faith, by the Eunuch of Queen Candace, and by Saint Matthew, and
Saint Philip: But it is thought in these parts, that in the fifteenth year of
Justinian Emperor of Constantinople, Adad King of the Auxumites made a vow to
become a Christian, if he got the victory against the King of the Omerites;
which having obtained, he sent Ambassadors to the Emperor Justinian, to have
Bishops sent to him, which being come thither, converted his people to the
faith. Both opinions may be true, that is to say, that Adad would have received
the faith, and yet not after the form of the other Ethiopians, but rather
after the East Church. In like manner the French men received the faith under
king Clouis, the which faith notwithstanding, was in France three hundred
years before. Likewise Great Britain is said, to have received the Gospel by
Joseph of Arimathea: Yet nevertheless the Romans do brag that they
converted the English men five hundred years after. Howsoever it be, the
Liturgy of the Ethiopians came unto them from the Sea of Alexandria, as
appears by the Greek names which are inserted therein. Aluares says, that
they have another so brief, that it was no sooner begun, but it presently
ended: One might doubt whether this were not the auncientest. If we had the
books which the said Aluares says that they have in great number, one might
know whether they differ. But howsoever it be, it appears not, that this
belief of Transmutation was received in any place of the world as a new thing.
Now a days it is a question whether the Fathers have believed it, or whether
it be slipped in by little and little. If the Latins and Greeks do allege
proofs out of the Fathers: the Protestants do think them to be Hyperbolicall
terms, for to lift or move men's souls to the worshipping of the Sacrament.
If the Protestants do bring on the contrary side other proofs: some will
answer them that the Fathers did keep close that belief, for fear of giving
occasion to the Pagans to mock them. We will leave these difficulties: the
Fathers are not in the world now to resolve us: But the Churches scattered
through the universal world, are as yet to bear witness of the Tradition in
this point as well as in others, and to declare and explane their meaning to
those that understand it not. Well then, seeing that the bread and wine in the
Sacrament are changed, we must examine their discourse to find who does swerve
from the Catholic faith.

There are four things in a true body, First the matter, Secondly the
accidents and essential properties, Thirdly the form, which the Philosophers
hold to give life or being to a thing, Fourthly the hidden properties which
depend upon the form.

As touching the accidents and essential properties of the body of the Lord,
all do confess that they are not in the Sacrament: but rather the accidents
and properties of the bread.

As concerning the matter of the said body: the Latins do believe that it is
inuisibly contained under the accidents of bread, and that the matter of the
bread becomes nothing: but the belief of the Churches of the East and South
seems to be quite contrary to that. First the Patriarch Jeremy absolutely
says, that the flesh of our Savior which he carried, was not given to his
Apostles to eat. From whence it follows, that they did eat some other
matter, which nevertheless was also the body of Christ. Moreover he
expounds it, saying, that it is as Iron or Wood burnt, which is called fire,
because that the fire surmounteth or overcomes: and the matter of the Iron is
not reduced to nothing. As concerning the third, he says in like manner, that
those that do communicate the Sacrament, are changed into the body of Christ,
and that the Church is the true body of Christ: Nevertheless every one
confesses, that the matter of humane bodies is not reduced or brought to
nothing. Likewise one may see that the Church is called the true body of
Christ, or else if the bread be called the true body of Christ: this word True,
is put as opposite, (even as the same Author does expound it) to the bare
similitude, figure, or proportion, and not as referred to the identitie of the
matter. The Churches of the South say the very same: they do pray in their
Liturgy or service, that God would change the bread and wine of the
Sacrament, as he changed the water into wine in Cana: for the matter of the
water was not reduced to nothing, to give place to other wine created a new,
but the water lost his form, and that matter which was before water, received
the internal form, and all the qualities and properties of wine. These
considerations and many others, the which would be too tedious to recite, do
make some Latin writers (and amongst the rest Durandus) to believe, that the
bread loses his form, and not his matter, no more then the accidents and
properties thereof. It is also to be noted, what the foresaid Jeremy says
against consubstantiation, that there is not two things in the holy Sacrament,
to wit, the bread and the body of Christ: but one only, to wit, the body of
Christ, giving to note thereby, that that matter which remains is no more the
matter of bread, but the matter of the body of Christ: as in the miracle of
Cana, that matter which was then the matter of water, when it had the form of
water, was the matter of wine, when it had the form of wine. And which is more,
there was no change wherein the matter continued not the same. And if one well
weigh the sayings of the Fathers, who believed some miracle to be in the
Sacrament, he shall find that they do accord herein: also they say, that the
substance of our flesh is augmented by the Eucharist, and that there be two
sorts of the flesh of Christ. We must then observe, how they conceive that the
bread is changed into the body of Christ. It seems that they would only have
it a matter, (be it that it loosed his form, as Durandus says, or loosed it
not) which should receive the form of the body of Christ, and the hidden
properties which do proceed from that form: and that that form being joined
to the matter, it is no more bread, neither the matter of bread; but it is the
body of Christ; and the matter of the body of Christ: for as the Philosophers
say, forma dat esse rei. Some will say it is a dangerous curiosity to sound
these mysteries: but I answer that of two inconveniences, the lesser is to be
chosen, and that it is a most dangerous carelessness to leave the Church in
division, and to cause Christians to be wounded and slain, for want of
teaching, that the difference is not so great as it is imagined. Moreover, the
learned men of the Church of Rome have a thousand times more curiously searched
this point, and have left themselves nothing to say, in such sort that that
will suffice to make up a peace, which they have searched out by debate amongst
themselves. This then may likely be gathered out of the Liturgy of Christian
people, that the bread takes the form of the body of the Lord, which (for the
matter and accidents thereof) is but only in heaven: or that it receives the
hidden properties of the form of the body of Christ, although that this form
be not without his matter. These faculties and properties serve (as the said
Jeremy notes) to sanctify a man, and to make him capable of everlasting
life. If it be demanded what this form is? The Prince of Philosophers
answers, that man's understanding is as fitly disposed for the knowledge of
natural things, as the eyes of an Owl to behold the brightness of the sun.
And that learned Fernelius begins his book of Physic thus: When the
Spirit is free and unbound, seeing the naked and clear substances of things,
it enjoys a most perfect and clear knowledge, but whilst it is wrapped
within the body, it remains in extreme ignorance.

The Philosophers and Physicians seeing in nature sundry admirable effects,
have judged that they could not proceed from the matter which is one in all
things, but have been constrained to confess that the form or essence, was
the beginning and foundation of those effects. But if they acknowledged man's
understanding, unfit to judge of those forms: much less can Divines determine
this effect, which they confess to proceed of the body of Jesus Christ. Also
that which we do attribute to the Christians of the East and South, touching
the form of the body of the Lord coming upon the matter of the bread, we
cannot determine that their belief is such, for they resolve upon nothing,
saying, That a thousand heads are not able to express it: which is nothing
else but to signify, that the Sacrament may be said to be the true body of
our Lord Jesus Christ, although it be granted, that the matter of the body of
Christ is only in heaven. For it suffices for a change, even in things
praeexistent, that there be an identitie of form, or else of qualities and
hidden virtues.

As for the Protestants, though they hold not the belief of the same people,
yet they have not written against them, but much against the Latins, who do
constitute accidents without a subject, one matter in many places, a body
without his essential properties, one God and man living in the host or bread,
who hears not, sees not, feels not, nor tastes not, which is (say the
Protestants) an opinion contrary to the holy Scripture, and never entered into
the imaginations or hearts of the ancient Fathers, or of the Divines of the
East and South Churches, who never yielded or gave place to the Latins, either
in quickenesse of spirit or in curiosity: and who have had no want of
heretics to give them occasion, to exercise themselves in these difficulties,
whereinto some one amongst so many learned men as they have had, in so many
ages, and such as have written so many volumes, must have necessarily fallen,
if that they believed that the body of the Lord is materially in the host or
bread

Now we must see how far the belief of the Protestants differs from those
of the East and other people: which to perform we must enter into the
consideration of secret or hidden faculties and proprieties. There are two
sorts of opinions, touching supernatural operations: some think that God
works immediately in the place where the thing is, from whence it seems that
the effect proceeds: even as when the water of the poole of Siloe being
moved or stirred by the Angel, did seem to heal, they say that God healed
of himself and by himself, even then after the touching of the water. Others
do believe that this supernatural faculty is given to the things themselves,
so that the said water receives of God such a virtue, as some medicines or
salues have in some diseases. For it is as easy for God to give those
properties to a form, as it was for him to give them to those that have them
ever since the creation of the world. Nevertheless, this is not thus done by
the devils, who cannot create essences or beings, neither indue them with
admirable faculties, so that the devils do work the like by illusions.

Behold here then the difference: The foresaid Christians do believe that the
matter of bread receives the form of the body of the Lord, or that the form
of bread obtains the hidden properties thereof, or that there is some
spiritual thing which has the place of form in that matter, and that
thereupon depends the Mystical union, whereof S. Paul speaks. But the
Protestants, whom some call Caluinists, do hold, that the body of the Lord is
only in heaven, together with his quickening form and virtue, and that a
substance proceeds from Confess. of Coyer.
him, and is applied to the souls of men by the virtue of the holy Ghost, and
that immediately: which certainly is a very slender disputation, and of small
estimation, in comparison of the report which is made of it: considering that
all do confess, that the bread is really the communion of the body of Christ,
as S. Paul says. Also these words, This is my body, being referred to the
whole, should be spoken without figure, but referred to that which one sees,
that is to say, to the accidents, and to the matter through the accidents, they
are figurative. This consideration has caused that those who are called
Caluinists and Lutherans, and some Grecians in Poland, have treated of some
means of agreement, imagining that the difference is not in re, but in modo
rei. This union has been hitherto hindered by two opinions, which fall into
extremities: Brentius, Smidlin, and others, for the better proving of the
real, yea material presence, have had recourse to vbiquitie: And on the other
side (as Iurguieius finds fault) there are some who speak in such sort of
the receiving of the Sacrament, that they have destroyed by their contrary
terms, that which they thought to have built up, saying, that the faithful
under the old Testament received Jesus Christ, as they receive him now a days:
from whence it should follow, that if there be any mystical union made, it
should be wrought only by the Divinity, as in times past, and not by the
humanity, whereof the holy Scripture always bears witness, that it has life
in it self, and that it quickens. Others say also, that a man does
participate of the body of the Lord without the Sacrament, in the same manner
as with the Sacrament: So that one receives but the sign at the most. These
men seem not to speak properly, for one is not said to receive that, which he
has ordinarily. See here the diverse terms that are used. But the truth is,
that Vbiquitie is rejected in the body by the Lutherans, and the real
communicating with the substance of the body of Christ, is confessed by the
others in the body, as it was resolved in the Synods at Rochell in France, and
at Torun in Poland.

We will bring in here two similitudes, by the which amongst others,
Protestants do cause their meaning to be understood, and do show that the
communion which they believe, is real, and nevertheless has no absurdity in
it. The body of the Sun (says Calvin) is only in heaven, notwithstanding
the light thereof is here upon earth. Therefore many do hold that light is a
substance, otherwise it should not be found out of his proper subject. Moreover
the Philosopher says, that Sol and homo generant hominem: Wherefore then
should not the Sun of righteousness have power to regenerate a man, though
his body be not on earth? The Adamant stone (says Beza) draws Iron,
communicating it self with the Iron, through an admirable virtue, without
mingling his matter therewith: In like manner the body of the Lord unites it
self with a man's soul, though the matter of his body be no where else but in
heaven. Hereupon that is to be noted, which Gilbertus a learned Physician
observed, that is to say, that the form of the Adamant is carried out of the
limits of his own matter, and is found in the Load-stones subject, and not in
the air between both. It may be said likewise, that the body of the Lord does
communicate it self from heaven without extension, multiplication, or any
mixture of matter. If a man hold himself firmly to these similitudes, he
shall never set his imagination or thoughts upon the place of Realitie: for
these effects of nature are real and true.

To conclude, a man may see by that which has been spoken, that the Churches
of the East and those of the South do not approve this last opinion, neither
that of the Lutherans: withal, as it seems, they hold not that of the
Latins, touching the real eating of the matter of the body of the Lord:
neither the absurdities that follow thereupon; for they do openly deny that
the Apostles did eat the flesh, that our Savior Jesus Christ did carry about
him. This then is their saying or opinion:

That the body of the Lord, as touching the matter and accidents, is only in
heaven, yet notwithstanding the bread and wine in the Sacrament are changed
into the body and blood of the Lord, in such a fashion as none can utter or
comprehend; in like manner as the faithful, which receive it, are said to be
changed into the true body of Christ.

QVESTION. XXIII. Whether the change of the signs be made through these words
Hoc est enim corpus meum, or whether it be by prayers.
THE EAST CHVRCHES.
Mark Bishop of Ephesus, in a Treatise expressly made upon this point, shows,
that the bread and wine in the Liturgy are not consecrated, neither changed
through these words, This is my body, but rather by prayers, and supplications.

Socolouius. Censura Orient. Eccles. cap. 10.
The greatest part of the Grecians are of this opinion, that the signs are
consecrated by prayers, and not through the words of Christ only.

Scarga. De vno. p. 3
The Russians imagine that the body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ on
the Altar are not made only through the words of God, (that is to say, by the
pronuntiation of these words, Hoc est enim corpus meum) but also through the
prayers of the Priests.

THE SOVTH CHVRCHES.
LIturgia Aethiop. Translate O Lord this bread into thy true body, and this
wine into thy true blood. Bless, sanctify, and purify this bread, and
transport it into thy flesh without spot, and this wine into thy precious
blood, and let them be made an ardent and acceptable sacrifice, a remedy and
saving health both of our souls and bodies.

THE REFORMED CHVRCHES.
LIturg. Gal. And as our Lord Jesus Christ not only offered unto thee (O God)
upon the Cross his body and his blood for the remission of our sins, but
also would communicate them unto us as nourishment unto eternal life:
vouchsafe us this grace, that with true sincerity of heart, and an ardent
zeal, we may receive from him so great a benefit, that is, that we through
steadfast faith may enjoy his body and blood, and that from him all entirely.

Beza. Confess. 7. art.
The conjunction of the thing signified with the signs, depends upon the
only ordinance and promise of God, although it be not local, nor in any
natural manner. These men on the contrary side (that is to say the Latins)
will by the virtue of three or four words have the bread to be changed into
the body, and the wine into the blood of Jesus Christ, which would be plain
sorcerie.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe Council of Trent. Sess. 3. ca. 3.
The true body of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his true blood, together with his
soul and his divinity are under the form of bread and wine; but his body is
under the form of bread, by the force and virtue of the words.

ANNOTATION.
IN the Liturgy of the Churches of the East and South, there are three
principal parts, as we have been instructed by those of that Country.

The first consists in the history or narration of the institution of the
holy Sacrament: at that time (say they) although one does pronounce these
words, This is my body, it makes not the consecration.

The second part is the prayer or prayers, wherein they beseech God that the
signs may be changed: then say they, is the consecration made. For by prayers
a man obtains that which he demands: and our Savior did the same after
that he had taken bread, for it is said that he blessed or consecrated it.

The third part is, when they address their words to the people, saying,
Take, eat, this is the body of the Lord: Words which declare unto the people,
and teach them, that it is that, which is presented unto them. In like manner
our Lord Jesus Christ spoke to his Apostles, not to the bread, when he said,
Take, eat, this is my body. The Protestants do say (as the foresaid people)
that they do bless the bread and wine principally through prayers, and not
through those words, to the which God has not given any intrinsecall virtue to
convert substances.

The difference between the Church of Asia, Africa, and the Reformed is, that
those Reformed Churches ask not, nor obtain not by their prayers, as the
foresaid Churches do pretend, that the bread be changed into the body of
Christ: but do ask and obtain that that body may be given them in the
Communion, which they ought to sue for. All men alike, do condemn the opinion
of the Latins, who believe that transubstantiation is made by these words, Hoc
est enim corpus meum: or to speak better, by the last syllable, Vm, This
opinion of the Church of Rome, is the cause that the learned men amongst them
who receive it, do enter into very great difficulties and doubts amongst
themselves, in desiring to take away (some by one means, and others by other)
the absurdities which follow thereupon. The Christian Reader may advise
himself, which doctrine he ought rather to follow, whether that of the
Latins, or the Catholic, which is,

That the consecration and Communion of the body of the Lord is obtained
through the prayers of the Church, and not through any virtue hidden in these
words, Hoc est enim corpus meum.

QVESTION. XXIIII. Whether the outward forms are really the body and blood of
the Lord, without using of them.
THE EAST CHVRCHES.
NIchol. Li. 4. ca 19.
The Armenians do make the consecration in a chalice of glass or wood.

Sacranus. Eluc. ca. 2.
The Russians do say, that the Sacrament of the Eucharist consecrated the day
of the holy Supper, is only meet to be given to the sick, and not that which
is consecrated every day: and they keep it also all the year long in a Cup,
prepared for that purpose, sometime till it be full of Worms, and spoiled, and
they give it in a little spoone. Moreover, they consecrate Salt in Chalices of
wood, and cast the kernels thereof being dried among their small linen. They
consecrate (for them that go to the wars) Wheaten bread in the body of
Christ, and deliver it into the hands of the lay people, who upon the very
point of the battle, do fill with some liquor or other the first vessel that
comes to their hands, fit to contain meat or drink, and putting therein this
bread, they do communicate in order.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
ALuares. Cap. 3.
It is a marvelous thing to see the great harm and peril that the little
children do endure in Aethiope, whom they make to swallow down the Communion
perforce, pouring water down their mouths, as well because the host is of
gross past, as because of their continual groaning. Besides they use Chalices
and spoones of wood.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH
BEza. Confess. 7. art.
The Sacraments are ordained to be used according to the word of God: and
therefore being otherwise used, they are no Sacraments.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
POpe Pius. De consecr. did. 2. Si per.
If through negligence there does fall any of the blood down to the ground, it
shall be licked up with the tongue, the wood shall be scraped: and if it be
not of wood, the place shall be scraped, to the end that it be not trodden down
under feet: and it shall be burnt, and the ashes locked within the Altar, and
the Priest shall do penance forty days.

ANNOTATION.
THe passages or places before alleged, seem not to be to the purpose of
this question, nevertheless they satisfy sufficiently. We search out in this
Treatise the Tradition of Christian people, and because that this question has
not been disputed upon before this time, a man cannot find any express
testimonies: in so much that it must be gathered from the practice of the
Church, what her belief is. Some man will ask, whether Christian people do
believe or have believed, that after the usage of the Sacrament, the body of
the Lord be in the rest of the bread and wine consecrated, and whether the rest
of the bread and wine be holy things, or whether they have no holiness in
them, even as the water of Baptism, which is not scrupulously kept, after it
is once used. The Roman Church holds the affirmative, that is to say, that
the bread being lost, the wine being shed or soaked into wood, are and still
remain the true body of Christ, as is to be seen by the cautions of the
Canon before alleged. But seeing that other people take not such care to
keep the remnants, and to gather them up religiously; it follows, that they
believe not that it is in any wise the body of our Savior Jesus Christ. When
we speak of the remnants, we mean not that which is pretended to be kept for
the sick: for that remainder is thought to abide still changed in those
places where that custom is, to wit, in the East: but not in the Churches of
the Abyssins, or Aethiopians. The Maronites of Jerusalem, who suck the
Sacrament of blood with a pipe, cannot draw out all. Those that do eat with
little reverence, and do cast away the rest of the sacred bread, attribute no
more to it. The Abyssins although that they wash the basen wherein the
Sacramental bread was, and do drink the water, and also seem to do it with
reverence and care: yet nevertheless seeing that they cause the little
children perforce to eat this sacred bread, it cannot be otherwise, but they
must needs loose some of it. As touching that which is practiced amongst other
nations, to use wooden Chalices, that shows manifestly that they attribute
not, or that their Ancestors have not attributed any divine virtue to the
leauings which soaketh into the wood. Howsoever the law of Pope Pius be, it is
not observed: for the wooden Chalices nor the pipes are not scraped nor burned,
neither the ashes kept within the Altar. From thence may be gathered,

That they believe not, that the Remainder of the Sacrament (wherewith no man
means to serve his turn any more) is the body of Christ.

QVESTION. XXV. Whether we ought to consecrate one Loaf for all the
Communicants, or whether it be lawful to use little Wafers.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
VIlamont. Lib. 2. c. 23.
The Grecians do in this fashion celebrate the consecration of the Lord: They
take a leauened loaf, of the value of two or three pence, which they bless,
and break a little morsel out of the midst, which the Priest consecrateth.

It is to be noted, that this morsel is great or small according to the number
of the communicants.

Gagnin. Descr. Sarmat.
The women make a loaf to sacrifice with, which they call Proscura: They do
consecrate the bread for the Communicants, in the mean time while the Liturgy
is said, and the Priest divides it into many portions, and distributes it to
the Communicants, who take it with a spoone, and dippe it in the Chalice.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
ALuares. Descr. Ethop. cap. 3.
They make a Cake of Wheaten flower without leaven, the very same hour: it is
very white and fair, being of the greatness and roundnesse of a Platter, and
of such greatness as the number of the people requires, whereof there are but
few in that Monastery, but in other Churches a man shall see a great number of
people: This bread is made big enough and substantial, by reason that every
one communicates. This bread is called by them Corbon.

THE REFORMED CHVRCHES.
BEza. Quaest. and Resp. 194.
The omission of breaking the bread takes not away the very eating of the
Sacrament it self, but only the true and lawful manner thereof: even as a
spot in ones face, blemisheth the grace of a man's favor, but abolisheth not
his shape.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
HOnorius. Laturg. Cass. de Eulog.
It is reported, that the Priests long a go took Meal of every Family (the
which the Grecians do observe as yet) and with the same did make the bread of
the Lord, which they did offer for the people, and after having consecrated it,
did distribute it to them: for all those that had offered meal, were found at
Mass; and for them it was said in the Canon, Remember these assistants, which
offer unto thee this Sacrifice of praise. But after that the Churches increased
in number of people, but decreased in holiness; it was ordained to communicate
three times in the year: And for that the people did not communicate, it was
not needful to make so great a Loaf, it was ordained that they should make
them in the form of a penny, and that the people in lue of offering the same
Meal, should offer pence.

Durandus. Gem. an. cap. 36.
The Host is of the bigness of a penny, because that our Savior was sold for
thirty pence.

ANNOTATION.
THe Christian nations, contrary to the practice of the Latin Church, do
think that we ought to follow the example of the Lord, and to obey his
commandment. He broke the bread and gave the pieces to the Apostles, and
commanded them to do as he had done, that is to say, to give to the
Communicants the pieces of one self same bread. This Circumstance is noted in
that great Mystery, whereof Saint Paul speaks: It is (says he) a great
Mystery in Christ and the Church: and he shows that all the faithful do
participate of the same body of the Lord, and are one body amongst themselves.
The cup of blessing (says S. Paul) which we bless, 1. Cor. 10. 16
is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? and the bread which we break,
is it not the communion of the body of Christ? for we that are many, are one
bread, and one body: for we are all partakers of one bread.

And as for the rest, our Savior would that a man should do that which he
did, and that in remembrance of him. And this Sacrament is not simply a
memorial of him, being considered as he is in heaven, but a memorial of his
passion: and also of the effect thereof, which is to make them that communicate
partakers of his body, being broken for them all. The foresaid Christians do
think that those little Wafers are not fit to call to mind that Communion.
They show rather that the Lord was not broken, and that every one has his
Christ apart. This therefore shall be the Conclusion:

That in the holy Sacrament, the bread ought to be big enough, and that it
ought to be broken, and the parts there of distributed to the people.

QVESTION. XXVI. Whether it be necessary to put water into the Chalice, or to
put more Wine then Water, or whether one may use any other liquor for want of
Wine.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
LVbelz. Liturg. Cassandri.
The Armenians use unleavened bread, and mingle not any water with the wine.

Alphonsus de Castro. Aduerss haer. l. 6.
The seventh heresy is that which is just contrary to the precedent: for here
the wine is put into the Chalice in such wise, that there is no water at all
put therein: and he says that there needs not any mingling. This is the
error of the Grecians, which Guido Carme did put in the sixth place: It is also
the error of the Armenians.

Scarga. De err. Mosc.
The Muscouites in the preparation of the Chalice, do mingle two or three
drops of Wine in hot water, in such sort that one cannot perceive the Wine
consumed in the Water. Also in stead of wine they use sometimes the Juice of
Apples, which they color with some read berries. They make no scruple to put
in so much water after the consecration that the wine being consumed by the
number of the Communicants, there remains no taste of wine at all.

Barbosa. Odoard. Barb. apud. Cass.
The Armenians that are in India, in stead of the Sacrament of wine (by reason
that in India there is no wine) do take dry Raisons, and lay them in water
all night, to mollify or soften them, and the day following, when they say
service, they strain them, and use the Juice in stead of wine.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
ALuares. Cap. vlt.
In Monasteries and Churches they keep many Raisons half dried, which are
laid in water for the space of twelve days, till that they begin to swell:
then they take them, and afterward put them under a Press, because that of
the liquor that issues from them, they celebrate Divine service.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
REspon. ad Ierem. Resp. ad 1. Resp.
We mingle not water with wine in the holy Supper, because that Jesus Christ
said, I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of this Vine: and made no
mention of any water. In like manner we do not think it necessary to mingle
any water; yet if peradventure there be any, we hold it indifferent.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
HOnorius. De celeb. miss. 41. c. 13.
A pernicious abuse is brought into the Country, that is to say, that they put
more water then wine in the sacrifice, whereas according to the reasonable
custom of the Church, they should put more wine then water.

Comp. Theol. Lib. 6.
If there had been more water then wine, the consecration should have been
hindered.

Lochmaier. Par. cur. cap. 9.
But for want of wine one may omit the sign of the blood, which yet he must do
by dispensation from the Pope.

ANNOTATION.
THe diversity of the practice of Christians does declare, that this is an
indifferent point, for the which we ought not to contest and strive. And the
one part ought not to condemn the other. The Armenians do mingle no water.
The Grecians mingle it not at the same time that the Latins do. The Abyssines
and Indians mingle it not for any ceremony, but use wine that has more water
then wine. The Moscouites care not whether there be more wine or water. Also
no man knows, whether our Savior did mingle more of the water or of the
wine. The Protestants find no fault with the Northren nations that use Syder:
What should one do (says Bucanus) in a Region where is no bread, as ours
wherein is no wine? we must use such food as men use in those Countries, for
that agrees with the intention of Jesus Christ.

The Catholic conclusion drawn from that before alleged, is,

That there is neither Divine or Ecclesiastical Law, that condemns those
that mingle, or those that mingle not water with the wine, whether it be by
way of Ceremony, or without Ceremony.

QVESTION. XXVII. Whether it be necessary to Communicate under the signs both
of bread and wine.
THE EAST CHVRCHES.
IEeremie Oecumenicke. Resp. 1.
Moreover we will answer to the abuse, whereof you speak. First you say that
all ought to communicate under both kinds, and you say well, for we do so, even
when we do participate of the venerable mysteries.

Nichol. Li. 4. ca. 36.
In the Lords Supper, the Grecians do Communicate under both kinds.

Vilamont. Lib. 2. 23.
The Nestorians do consecrate with leauened bread after the fashion of the
Grecians.

Idem. Li. 2. ca. 21.
When the Iacobites do minister the Communion to young children, it is under
both kinds, being therein conformable to the Grecians and the Syrians.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
THeuet. Cos. 2. ca. 14
When they do Communicate, they receive under both kinds, which also I have
seen observed of the Abyssins by their Sect in Jerusalem.

Aluares. Cap. 3.
Their vessels are far bigger then ours are: but of an ill fashion, using no
plate, and they celebrate the Mass with the wine of raisins, which they power
into the Chalice in great quantity: for all those that Communicate of the
body, do likewise of the blood.

THE REFORMED CHVRCHES.
THe Confession of England. Art. 12.
There must be given to the people that come to the Communion, both the one and
the other kind of the Eucharist: for the Lord has so commanded, and his
Apostles have so ordained through all the earth: and all the ancient Fathers
and Catholic Bishops have imitated them.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe Council of Constance. Sess. 13.
Being advertised that in many Churches, they have continued to administer to
the Laics the Sacrament in both kinds, we do declare, that although that
Jesus Christ did so, seeing that afterward it has been received by the
Priests, and by the Lay people under the sign of bread only: that all this
notwithstanding; the Law, and authority of the Canons, and the custom
approved by the Church (Roman) has observed and observes, to avoid
certain dangers, that this Sacrament shall be distributed under one kind, and
we do command upon pain of excommunication, that no Priest do minister the
Communion to the people under both kinds of bread and wine.

ANNOTATION.
THis Question has no difficulty, all nations, except the Latins, do think
that they ought herein to obey Jesus Christ. Those that do hold the holy
Scripture to be true, do confess, that even in things which seem to be of
small importance, God will be obeyed, yea Adam and all his children and race,
for having eaten of the forbidden fruit was lost. And God would have slain
Moses, because that his Son was not circumcised. Vzzah fell down dead,
because he touched the Arc, notwithstanding his good intention. It is a
wonder to see that those that believe this, have yet made a Law contrary to the
Divine commandment of God. The fault is now a days known to many; yet they
will not confess that there is any error therein, for fear least men should
call into question other doctrines. So it is that all nations do confess.

That we ought to Communicate in both kind of bread and wine.

QVESTION. XXVIII. Whether the Sacrament must be kept, to be carried in
procession, and for other uses, or only to be carried to the sick.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
GAgnin. Descr. Sar.
They use the Sacrament of the Eucharist in both kinds, and they have a custom
to use one fashion for the sick, and another for the Co^municants. For the
sick it is kept, all the year, being consecrated the week before Easter.

Scarga. Their Popes, that is to say, their Priests after dinner sometimes half
drunk, do eat with little or no reverence, the rest of the body of Christ,
which was not eaten by the faithful.

Gagninus. They keep not holy the feast of the body of the Lord.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
ZAga Ethiop. Dam. a Goes.
The Sacrament of the Eucharist is not kept with us in the Temples or Churches,
as they do in Europe, that is to say, in the Roman Church. The sick receive
not the body of the Lord, but at such time as they have recovered their health:
This they do, because the Priests and the Laickes do use to receive twice
every week; and all those that would receive it, go to the Temple: and it is
not permitted neither to the Patriarch himself, nor to Prester-Iohn to do
otherwise.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
THe confession of Saxon. Art. 34.
It is a manifest profanation, to carry about in procession a part of the
Sacrament, and to adore or worship it, seeing that part is transferred to an
use quite contrary to the institution, where the Text says, Take, eat, etc.

The Divines of Wittenberg. Resp. Ierem de Chirot.
The Ministers of the Church are ordained amongst us to baptize, and celebrate
the Lords supper, both publicly in the Temples, and particularly in the houses
of those that are near death.

THE ROMAN CHVRCH.
CLement. De rel. and ven.
We must principally employ our selves about the right use of this lively
Sacrament of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, which is the glory and crown
of all the Saints, to the end that it may shine through a festival and
special celebration, to supply thereby that which is omitted in the other
Offices of the Mass.

ANNOTATION.
ALl Christian Nations do agree together against the Roman Church, that none
ought to keep the Sacrament to employ it to any other use, then that to which
our Savior has dedicated it, to wit, the Communion: And therefore it ought
not to be carried in Procession, as Pope Clement has of late time commanded,
in the institution of the feast of God, or Corpus Christi. As for the
reservation which is made to be carried to the sick, it is not in use in the
Churches of Africa, but the Grecians and Latins do approve it, yea and the
Protestants likewise, as appears in the place before mentioned.

Think thou ( says Beza) that none ought to celebrate the holy Supper of
the Lord, nowhere else but only in a public assembly?

Answer. In the beginning of the ancient Church, it was the custom to send
the Eucharist by the Deacons to the sick, being absent, to whom I doubt not,
but that the same did bring great consolation: I desire heartily that this
custom were put in use again. The Resolution of this question is,

That none ought to reserve or keep the Sacrament, but only to carry to the
sick.

QVESTION. XXIX. Whether the Sacrament ought to be elevated or lifted up by the
Priest, for to adore and worship it, or for to Sacrifice through that external
ceremony?
THE EAST CHVRCH.
SAcranus. De Cer. Mosc. 2.
The Russians (as also some amongst the Grecians) before that they prepare the
Chalice, do light wax Candles, and show to the people the bread that is to be
consecrated, with the wine and water powered in the Chalice, and then the people
fall down, bending their bodies to worship and to commit idolatry: But being
once set upon the Altar, and consecrated, it is not worshipped of any, neither
is it elevated or lifted up.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
ZAga. Dam. a Goes.
In this Ministry the Sacrament is not showed, as I see they do here in the
Roman Church.

Aluares. Cap. 3.
After that, the Priest comes speaking in his own language, after our
fashion, and the very same words, but that he does not eleuate the Sacrament,
but covers it.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH
THe confession of Basil. Art. 6.
We adore not Jesus Christ in the signs of bread and wine, which we commonly
call Sacraments of the body and blood of the Lord: But in heaven on the right
hand of God the father, from whence he shall come for to judge the quick and
the dead.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe Canon. Lib. 3. tit. 41. ca. 10.
That every Priest do oftentimes teach his people to bow reverently, when in
the celebration of the Mass the wholesome host is elevated, and that he do
the same, when he carries it to any sick person.

ANNOTATION.
THere is no Catholic ( says De Sacr. Eu. l. 4. c. 29.
Bellarmine) that teaches, that the Sacramental signs must be adored in
themselves, and properly, with that worship which is called Latria, but that
they must be worshipped with a lesser honor, which belongs to all
Sacraments. But we say that Christ must be worshipped in himself, and that
adoration or worship does belong to the signs, in regard that they are
conceived to be the same thing with Christ: even as they that adored Christ,
being clothed upon earth, adored not him only, but also his habit, for he
commanded not himself to be stripped naked.

The Latins do accuse the Protestants, because that they worship not the
Sacrament, or Jesus Christ in the Sacrament; but if a man consider the matter
well, he shall find that they do all that Bellarmine requires.

Socolouius to show that there is a great defect, yea impiety in them, lays
before them the example of all the Christians of the world, who (says he) do
worship or adore Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, every one Suo modo. And if
one can show that the Protestants do the same also, Suo modo: those that
search out occasion to complain, shall they not have reason to be content?
Bellarmine speaks of the worshipping of the signs, and of the worshipping of
Jesus Christ signified In both these the Protestants do use such adoration as
Bellarmine himself does paint out. Those that honored our Savior being in
his Clothes, had not any intention or meaning to honor or adore his clothes:
likewise following the example of Bellarmine, be it that a man have no
intention to honor the Sacrament, he is blameless. If Bellarmine do say,
that the Clothes of the Lord were worshipped per accidens: I do answer him,
that in like manner the Protestants do honor the signs per accidens In
Germany they receive the Sacrament upon their knees: The constitutions of Can.
23.
England do ordain the like. In so doing they do adore Jesus Christ before the
Sacrament, that is to say, the Sacrament per accidens, with a more humble
ceremony then the Christians of the East do, who (as Vilamont says) receive
it not upon their knees. The Churches of the South do the like. If the
Frenchmen do follow their example, they adore it also: eorum modo, and Suo
modo.

The Roman Catholics themselves do not kneel always when they pray or
adore, as it is seen in the benediction of the table, it suffices then in
adoring to have the head uncovered, according to the ordinance of Saint Paul.
As for the rest, those of the East do eleuate or lift up the Chalice in saying
to the people Proschomen, agia tois, agiois: let us prepare our selves, holy
things are for holy people. These words do show that this elevation of the
Cup is not to require any adoration, nor to be a sign of a sacrifice: but it
is done after the example of Jesus Christ, who said to his Apostles, Take,
eat. In like manner it is very well spoken to all the people, that they may
prepare themselves to take it, yea, our Savior did show it to his Apostles,
when he said Take, and the Apostles saw it. And when there be many people in a
Church, and the Altar is low, it cannot be seen of the people without
elevation: but there needs not any ceremony of inclination or bowing then
(for the elevation is not to that end) it is good at the very instant of
receiving. If the question be of the adoration of Jesus Christ, there is none
that will not confess, but that he ought to be worshipped properly and with
that honor called Latria, in the Sacrament. But the Protestants say that to
do this, men must lift up their hearts on high, as it is said in all the
Syrian, Grecian, Roman, and Ethiopian Liturgies.

These words Sursum Corda, do declare that we must worship him in heaven, and
such as he is: in so doing we shall not deceive our selves. But he shall
deceive himself that imagith him to be under the figures: for if he does
honor him under them, as if he were there in such manner as he is in heaven,
that is to say, having his distinct parts, he is deceived, for it is not so:
and on the other side, one cannot imagine such a humane body, as it is said
that he is; to wit, without dimensions, taking up no place, without order of
parts: having the least part of his feet and arms, with the least part of his
head, without seeing, hearing, feeling, or moving and yet living. A man cannot
comprehend such things, he conceiueth that which presents it self before his
eyes, that is to say the Figures, and erreth in the fact, although that he had
no evil intention (thinking that it had been materially.) Moreover, a man
cannot know whether the Priest has had a meaning to consecrate, and so, either
one deceives himself, or else cannot know whether he be deceived or no. But
one cannot be deceived, if he remember Sursum Corda: for so a man adoreth both
Jesus Christ, with true worship, and the figures, Per accidens, as Bellarmine
will have it. This consideration also of the elevation serves to avoid an
important question, that is to say, Whether the ceremony of the external
sacrifice be made in the very body of Jesus Christ. It appears here not to
be so, for if it be not made by the elevation (as it is certain that the
foresaid people do believe, seeing they make no elevation) it is not made
neither in the breaking of the bread, for the body of our Savior cannot be
really broken: nor in the distribution, for that belonges not to the essence of
the Sacrifice, but rather to the Sacrament: It follows then, that the
Ceremony of the Sacrifice is not made outwardly in the proper person of Jesus
Christ, and consequently it is a Sacrifice purely mental and spiritual. From
this above written, and from the practice of the Apostolic Churches it
follows:

That none ought to eleuate the Sacrament, neither with an intention to cause
it to be adored, nor to offer it to God: unless (peradventure) that he do it
to show it to the people, when he summons them to the Communion.

QVESTION. XXX. Whether the Liturgy ought to be celebrated without a
Communion, and whether the Communion be the principal end thereof.
THE EAST CHVRCHES.
THeuet. Li. 8. ca. 15.
The Armenians say the Mass always in the company of two or three, by reason
that the Priest ministers the Communion to the assistants upon solemn feasts,
according to the observation of the ancient Fathers.

Odoardus Barbosa. Liturg. Cass.
The Armenians which are in India do Communicate Salt with Bread, in steed of
the host, because that they Consecrate for all them that are in the Church, and
each one goes to the foot of the Altar to receive there a part.

Melancton. De pace.
In the Parishes in Greece, there are no private Masses: but the Monasteries
do imitate the custom of the Latins.

THE SOVTH CHVRCHES.
ALuares. Cap. 30.
The Debeteres do publish every where that they never heard such a Mass
(meaning the Roman Mass) nor so divinely celebrated (by reason of the
Music) and they find fault with no other thing, but that one man alone sang
therein, without administering the Communion to those that assisted him in his
office.

Moreover. Ibidem.
They make a Cake in bigness according to the number of the persons. In the
towns they make this bread greater and more substantial, because that they
do all Communicate.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
THe Confession of Ausburg. Cap. 1. de Abus.
The institution does ordain that there be a Communion, that is to say, that
the ministers of the Church do deliver also to the rest the body and blood of
our Savior.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe Council of Trent. Sess. 6. c. 6.
The Council desires that at every Mass the faithful would Communicate, not
only with one spiritual affection, but also by receiving Sacramentally the
Eucharist: nevertheless if they do not so, yet it condemns not Masses as
private and unlawful, but does approve and command them.

ANNOTATION.
WHen our Savior instituted the holy Sacrament, he broke the bread, and dealt
the pieces, and commanded that others should do the like. The Protestants do
accuse the Latins for doing the contrary: for their Priests do break the
host, but deal not about the pieces, which is the principal end of breaking.
The greater part of Christian people use the Communion, and above all the rest,
those of Africa: which was the reason that Marnix said, that they had the Lords
supper, but not the Mass. Nevertheless the Latins do call the Mass the
Ethiopique celebration. As touching the name, it is neither Mass nor Supper;
for they call it Codash, and the bread is called by the Abyssins Corbon. If
question be about the thing it self, it seems that every thing ought to be
considered according to his principal end, and the principal end of the
Codash, of the Cophites and Abyssins, is the Communion: the which Communion is
not at all in the Latin Mass, but the same Mass having another special
principal end, to wit the Sacrifice: it follows that the Codash or
celebration of the Corbon is the Supper, according to the saying of Marnix, and
not the Mass, as Father Coton the Jesuit De Sacr.
imagines.

As for the Cross, wax Candles, Censings, and Processions which are in use in
the foresaid celebration, they change not the essence of the Sacrament, but
rather it continues entire, for all that splendour of ceremonies: A man may
gather by that which has been spoken, that the voice of Christians is well
nigh divided into two parts. The Armenians, Indians, Affricans, and the
Protestants of the West do not celebrate without a Communion: But the Latins
and Grecians do. I put the Grecians in this rank, because that although their
Liturgy holds more of the Sacrament then of the simple Sacrifice: yet they
do approve or tolerate the Liturgies without a communion; Nevertheless they
say, that it is not their intention: but that it is the fault of the people,
who present not themselves, although that they were summoned thereunto. And
they forbear not to celebrate the Liturgy, for seeing that action has diverse
ends, they think that although they cannot obtain the principal, yet they
ought not to omit the other, unless (peradventure) some man will say, that the
Liturgy is a Sacrament to the Priest, and serves the people simply as a
Sacrifice. But because that particular Liturgies were not ordained by any
universal Council, which the one half of Christians, or rather more, have
not, and the Greek Church has only by tolleration, and that seldom, it may
be said; that,

The Liturgy ought not to be celebrated without a Communion, which is the
principal end thereof.

QVESTION. XXXI. Whether the Liturgy be a Sacrifice expiatory, and
propitiatory, and obtaining the intercession of Saints, remedy for diseases,
and such like things.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
Jeremy. 1. Resp. c. 13
This holy action is sanctified in two sorts, the one by mediation, for gifts
presented, because that they are presented, do sanctify those that do offer
them, and those for whom they are offered, and do make them favored of God:
The other by receiving, for that is unto us the true bread and drink, as
Christ says. Of these two sorts, the first is common to the living and dead,
for this Sacrifice is made as well for the one as for the other. The other
appertains to the living only, for the dead can neither eat nor drink:
What then? does not that sanctification which comes by receiving, concern
them, and is their condition worse then that of the living? That is not so; for
Jesus Christ communicates himself unto them, in a fashion best known to
himself.

Cythraeus. The Canon of S. Basil is far more famous then the other, wherein
is an excellent prayer. He makes no mention in that Liturgy of offering the
body and blood of Christ, much less to ransom by that deed, the living or
the dead, or to apply it for others.

Sigismundus Lib. In every Temple there is but one Altar.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
ZAga Bishop of Ethiope. Dam. a Goes.
We say no Mass for the remission of sins, or the redemption of souls, but
the dead are buried with Cross and prayers.

Aluares. Cap. 5.
I have seen them bury persons of all qualities in one self same manner,
without any difference: without saying any Masses, either for the dead, or for
the good of those that were living.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
THe Confession of Wittenberg. De ord c. 20
If it be necessary to speak of the Commemoration of that only sacrifice, and
of the application of the merits thereof, then the Ministers of the Church, do
not only make a true and due commemoration of the expiatorie sacrifice, but
also do apply the merits of this Sacrifice.

Bucanus. The oblation of the unbloody Sacrifice does continue safe and sound
with us, whether one regard the benediction of the signs, that is to say, the
recital of the institution of the Lord, and the explication thereof joined
with prayers: by the which (as S. Cyprian says) the passion of the Son in
some sort is offered to God his father: or that by that Sacrifice one understand
the profession of the faith, or the giving of thanks, or the Contribution of
Alms.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe council of Trent. Sess. 6. 3.
If any man say that the Sacrifice of the Mass is only a Sacrifice of praise
and thanksgiving: or only a commemoration of the Sacrifice made on the Cross,
and not propitiatory: and that it profits him only that receives it, and
that none ought to offer it for the living and the dead: and that it is a
cosonage to celebrate the Mass in the honor of Saints, and to obtain their
intercession to God, let him be accursed.

ANNOTATION.
THis is a very hard point to be understood: First it may be demanded, whether
the Eucharist be a sacrifice: Secondly, what that is that is offered: Thirdly,
whether it be expiatorie: Fourthly, whether it profit them that communicate
not: Fifthly, whether it may serve to obtain the intercession of Saints.

First, All Christian people do hold it for a sacrifice, yea the Protestants,
Marcyr, Beza, and Chemnitius: Bucanus calls it (with the Catholic Church) a
Sacrifice not bloody: Every one sees plainly that it is so. If therefore the
Ancient Fathers have ascribed unto this holy Sacrifice the prophesies of
Malachie, and others, they are not peradventure far wide from the intention
of the Prophets. Nevertheless if the principal end of this action is to be a
Sacrament: the name of Sacrament is more fit and convenient for it. In a
Sacrifice one offers, at the Sacrament one receaueth: here one receives not,
because he has not first offered, but one offers, to the end he may receive.

Secondly. The difference is not such in the thing which is offered: One cannot
offer but either gifts, or Jesus Christ: But he explanes not his meaning, which
speaks on this fashion, that is, to offer Jesus Christ: he was offered only
once, when upon the Cross he besought God, that he would receive his passion,
then presented in satisfaction for all the sins of the world. Moreover he is a
continual intercessor for men, and presents to God, not a new passion, which
might be the formal cause of expiation: for that was once done, and cannot be
done again, unless he should die again: but he offers a continual
sacrifice of that passion, in that he incessantly entreats, that God would
receive that very same passion: And to desire of God to receive or accept a
thing, is to offer it to him. Well then, if men do beseech him, that he would
accept and receive the passion of Jesus Christ, they offer it him, even as
Jesus Christ offered it him: but with this difference, that Jesus Christ offered
it by himself alone, and immediately; and men do it by the means and
intercession of the great Sacrificer, and by seconding his sacrifice, and
adjoining their own vows. But some man will say, hereupon it follows, that
in all prayers Jesus Christ is offered. The answerere is, that there are four
sorts of offering: the first is, that by the which Jesus Christ offered
himself in suffering on the Cross: then he besought God either by express
words or in silence, that God would receive his passion there presented.
Secondly, Jesus Christ at his last supper by the breaking of the bread, and by
the distributing thereof, represented his Passion, and obtained of God that the
Apostles might receive that expiation, which was to be merited by his then
approaching passion. In like manner he is offered in the Eucharist, and that
fashion of offering by signs is called Sacrifice. We speak with the voice, the
heart, and by signs, says Bellarmine, in his 2. book and 30. Chap. De Imag.


Thirdly, under the Law they offered sacrifices, which figured the passion of
the Lord, and his only Sacrifice: but those were bare figures. For the
Fathers, although that they knew that they should be saved by the Messiah, yet
they knew not altogether, or at least clearly, that the same should be
accomplished by his sacrifice upon the Cross and passion of our Savior: It is
to be seen, that the Apostles themselves, even after that they had been
instructed, could not conceive this in their hearts and souls. So that the
ancients in sacrifising intended not to offer the only sacrifice of the
Passion of Christ.

Fourthly, there is a mental sacrifice, which is made every time, that one
beseeches God to receive the sacrifice of Jesus Christ: But because that there
is no visible thing therein, neither the Passion of Jesus Christ, nor the
representative ceremony thereof: therefore it is not properly called a
sacrifice. It seems that this before may be agreed upon, as well by the
Latins, as by the Protestants: but behold here the difference. The Liturgies,
and amongst the rest that of the Roman Church, do not explicate this point
clearly: but say indistinctly, that God receives Jesus Christ: so that one
cannot know whether it must be understood, that God is entreated to re receive
or except the action presented by the Priest being considered in himself; or
whether one desires that God would receive the sacrifice of Jesus Christ
represented by the action of the Priest. Moreover one cannot know whether he
ought to understand, that God receives Jesus Christ considered in his Passion;
or considered as he is believed to be in the hands of the Priest. For if a man
pretend to offer him in this last fashion, that will not be to present or
represent the ancient and only sacrifice, but to make another, and of another
quality, although that it be the very same host. And it is this very point,
that the Epistle to the Hebrews does contradict, saying, Heb. 10. 5. to the 15.
That Jesus Christ offreth not himself again, That is to say, considered in the
estate wherein he is at this present; but yet he offers himself, as he is
considered in the sacrifice of his Passion always presented before God. That
beforesaid (which of other men might have been better explaned) being well and
truly distinguished, may take away the offense risen thereupon. But it is not
in these days that these words of offering Jesus Christ, have troubled the
Christian world.

Peucer Chronol. li. 4 ca. Manuel.
writes, that in the time of the Emperor Manuel Comnenus, this very same
thing was debated in Greece, even as it is here with us now a days. In this
time (says he) was argued that question touching the oblation which is made in
the Mass, for the living and the dead. Some men do dispute of the Canon of
the Greeks, which speaks more strictly then the Latins, that is to say, that
in the Mass the Son of God offers himself to his Father, and is offered
by the hands of the Priest, and whosoever contradicted that fiction was deposed
and banished. Hereby a man may see that many have believed that the meaning of
the Liturgy is, that Jesus Christ is offered, being considered so, as he is
believed to be there: which being taken in that sense, cannot be true. And it
is nothing to the purpose, to say that because he is offered, therefore it is
necessary that he should be there really and materially: for Saint Irenaeus
Aduer. haeres. cap. 34.
says, that Altar nostrum est in coelis: Our Altar is in heaven, and likewise
the host. Jesus Christ is also very near to God, and the same Christ
considered in his only sacrifice, is in heaven, as he was on the earth. Say it
be true, that all the foresaid Christians do think (as it has been said)
that the matter which was the matter of bread, is the matter of the flesh of
Jesus Christ, in this fashion it may be said to be present in the Sacrament:
but that is not of the essence of that sacrifice, so as the Church pretends.
When I name the Church, I do imagine that the Doctors and Teachers thereof, if
they have not well explaned themselves, will do it better hereafter.

Thirdly, there is no great difficulty in the demand, that is, whether that
sacrifice be expiatory and propitiatory. If it be meant in that sense, as
prayers are called propitiatory, there is no danger. The Publicane said, Be
merciful (O God) unto me a poor sinner. This was done, God was merciful unto
him, he received remission and forgiveness of his sins, and obtained all
this by his prayers: a man obtains no less in the Sacrament.

Fourthly, Some man may ask whether the Liturgy profits them that
Communicate not. The Africanes are altogether for the Protestants: for they say
no Mass, neither for the living, nor for the dead. As for the Grecians they
make no great matter for those that communicate not: but admit that they say
for them particularly, or that they do comprehend them in the public
Liturgy: they distinguish, and that very well, saying, that in the Liturgy
there must be two things considered. First the prayers and gifts which are
presented, that (say they) does profit those which communicate not. The
Protestants confess the same, for they themselves in the prayers of the
Liturgy, do pray for men: well then to pray, give and offer in the Church, to
obtain Gods grace for another, is a deed which cannot be evil: all which is
granted for those that are alive and Communicate not: for as concerning the
dead, the Grecians mean those that are in Paradise, as hereafter shall be
declared: therein they are not approved, neither by the Roman Catholics, nor
by the Protestants: seeing neither the one nor the other pray for the Saints
which are in Paradise. Now remains the principal point, yea all the
Sacrament, to wit, the breaking and the receiving thereof. The Grecians do
secretly confess, that it was not instituted, to the end that those which eat
and drink thereof, should obtain by that eating and drinking any benefit, for
those that did neither eat nor drink thereof: which is as much as to say,
that private Masses are abuses, being considered as a sacrifice and Sacrament:
but yet that they profit those for whom they are said, in consideration of the
prayers and gifts. Nevertheless, lest all should seem to be attributed unto
this holy Sacrament: they say, that the same does verily profit, but God
knows how. Their irresolution being joined with the practice of the Churches
of Africa, and of India, does give us good occasion to gather, that the
greatest part do hold, that such Liturgies profit those nothing which
Communicate not, whether living or dead: unless only in consideration of the
prayers which there are made.

Fifthly, the question is, to know whether the holy Sacrament and Sacrifice was
instituted to obtain the intercession of Saints, the healing of diseases, and
such like. If all this be besides and against the intention of Jesus Chrrist,
it is manifest, that it were an abuse to convert it to other uses. The Council
of Trent does excommunicate those that hold this to be evil: it would be
known, whether this Council be allowed by the Apostolic Churches. The
Grecians 1. Resp. c. 13
say, that in their Liturgy they make mention and remembrance of the Saints:
but this is not to say, that they think that the Liturgy was ordained to that
end. Likewise, although that the Armenians do kiss and salute one another in
the Liturgy; yet no man will impute unto them, that they do believe, that it
was instituted for to kiss and salute one another. If the Roman Catholics
cannot show, that the foresaid Nations do say their Liturgies of purpose for
to obtain thereby the intercession of Saints: It is a hazard but they will be
found alone in that opinion: attending to see if that will be, we will here
conclude, as well upon this last Article as upon the precedents, and will say,

That the Liturgy which the Latins call the Mass, and the Protestants the
Lords Supper, is a Sacrifice wherein the Communicants, by the receiving of the
Sacrament and Prayers, do obtain forgiveness of their sins: and by their
prayers and offerings, and not by the Communion, do profit those that
Communicate not: but this Sacrifice is not instituted to obtain the
intercession of the Saints, nor for any other uses.

QVESTION. XXXII. Whether we ought to use in the Church an unknown Language,
as Latin or any other, and whether the people ought to read the holy Scripture,
or hear it read.
THE EAST CHVRCHES.
BElon. Li. 3. ca. 12.
When the Priest in Armenia reads the Gospel, the attendants do salute one
another, both on the right hand and on the left* every one understanding the
Armenian tongue, in which language it is always read.

Vilamont. Li. 2. ca. 22.
The Iacobite, do use many languages, according to the several Provinces
where they inhabit, having nevertheless one particular language which they
use only in Divine Service: but what language it was, I could not discover.

Idem. Li. 2. ca. 23.
The Nestorians use the Chaldean language in their Liturgy or Divine Service,
and in their Scriptures.

Idem. Ibidem.
The Armenians can speak diverse Languages, but in their Divine Service,
Masses, Prayers, and Ceremonies, they use the Armenian tongue, which is
understood both of men and women throughout all their Country.

Nichol. Li. 4. ca. 36.
The Grecians do celebrate the Liturgy in their own language, to the end the
common people may be able to understand them.

Vilamont. The Maronites do use the pure Syrian tongue in their Divine Service.

Theuet. Cos. l. 9. c. 12.
The Moscouites have few Preachers, contenting themselves only with the
Lectures which the Priests make every Sunday, who read unto them the Gospel
and Epistles of the Apostles, and the books of learned men, in a language that
they understand.

Cythraeus. The Priests (in Russia) do consecrate with the words spoken by
Jesus Christ, but it is only in the language of the Country.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
THeuet. Cos. l. 2. c. 14
I have seen many Bishops, and have heard their Masses, which they say in
the Abyssin language, the which is very near the Arabicke, yea in the
Characters themselves.

Aluares. Cap. vlt.
All their books (whereof the number is great) are of Parchment, for they have
no other paper, and their Scripture is read in the Tigique tongue, which is
Abyssin, the first Country that received the doctrine of the Gospel.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
Calvin. Just. l. 3. c. 20. 33.
It is evident that public prayers ought to be pronounced, not in Greek
amongst the Latins, neither in Latin amongst the Frenchmen and Englishmen,
as heretofore has been used, but in the vulgar tongue, to the end that they
might be understood by the people: for it is convenient that all be done in
the Church to edification: for no man receives any fruit from an unknown
language.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe Council of Trent. Sess. 6. c. 8.
Albeit the Mass does contain much instruction for faithful people:
Neueruerthelesse it seemed not expedient to the Fathers that it should be
celebrated every where in the vulgar tongue.

ANNOTATION.
IN the Catholic Church of the East, West, North, and South is manifestly
accomplished, that Scripture, which says, That all languages do confess the
Lord. The Church of Rome only (say the Protestants) labors to hinder the
same: They will not permit the Mass, nor any part of Divine service, to be
celebrated in the French tongue in France: and which is more, they have
brought their Latin service into America: But the people cannot say 1. Cor.
14. 16.
Amen, to any purpose: if they understand not that which is said in the Church,
their vows and their intentions cannot be joined together with those of the
Priest.

The Priest and the people, which speak a language unknown and barbarous each
to other, may think one thing and say another: behold here the confusion.
Likewise one may gather by the places or sentences before alleged, that the
foresaid Apostolic Churches prohibit not at all the reading of the holy
Scripture: for if it be permitted to the Laics, yea commanded, to be present
at the reading thereof, being written in the vulgar tongue: it follows that
they may read it also in private. There are Roman Catholics which on the
contrary side do abhor and hate the same. Their Doctors and Teachers Alph.
de Castro de hares.
not being ashamed to say, that the Translation of the holy Scripture into the
vulgar tongue is the mother of heresies.

But there are many Catholics in the Church of Rome which are not of this
opinion, and who read attentively the holy Scripture. Immitating therefore the
practice of the Catholic Church, we will say,

That the language of the Country ought to be used in every Church, and that
it is good to read the holy Scriptures, and to hear them read in the vulgar
tongue.

QVESTION. XXXIII. Whether the Ordination of the Ministers of the Church does
depend on the Pope of Rome.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
Jeremy Patriarch. 1. Resp. c. 14
Ordinations are no further respected of us, then the holy Canons have
prescribed. And as touching the Ordination of a Bishop, the first Canon of
the Apostles teaches us thus: That a Bishop be ordained by two or three
Bishops: and a Priest by a Bishop; in like manner the Deacons, and the rest.

Nichol. Lib. 4. c. 36.
The four Patriarchs are created and elected by the Metropolitans of the
Provinces, who above all other things take great care to elect him, who is
amongst them, the maturest in years, wisdom, and holiness.

Gagninus. Desc. Sar. de rel. Mosc.
All the Metropolitans of the Ruthenians and Moscouites have their authority
from the Patriarch of Constantinople, and in the beginning the Metropolitan was
elected and chosen by the judgment and consent of the Bishops and Abbots, and
of all the spiritual orders, but now the great Duke of Moscouia has this
authority.

Theuet. Cosm. li. 10. cap. 14.
Within the Island of Gezert does the Patriarch of the sect of the Nestorians
make his residence: And also, there the chiefest Bishop resideth; being
ordained to give Orders of Priesthood and Ministry, according to the
Persuasion and Custom of the Nestorians.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
ALuares. Cap. 34.
The Patriarch of the great Negus, who is over all Aethiopia is called Abuna,
without whom there is none found which has authority to make Priests but by
him alone.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
MOnsieur du Plessis. Treatise of the Church cap. 11.
If our adversaries ask us, what was the vocation of those first Ministers,
which undertook the Reformation of the Church in these last days: we will
answer that it is the very same vocation and succession, whereof they brag:
But that vocation which they abuse, our men have well used: And to the vain
succession, which they so much stand upon, we have added the succession of
true doctrine, without the which all succession is but continuance of abuse,
and a vain title.

For John Hus, Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer, Capito, Martyr, and
others, out of whose school the Ministers are come forth, were Priests,
Curates, and Doctors in Divinity. I forbear to speak of Archbishops, Bishops
and Cardinals in Germany, England, Italy and France.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe Canon Renouantes. De Priu. tit 33. 23.
Renewing the ancient privileges of the Patriarchall Seats, we do ordain
that after the Roman Church (which by the disposing of God obtains the
principality of the ordinary power and authority over all the rest, as a
Mother and Mistress of all the faithful Children of Christ): that of
Constantinople have the first place: that of Alexandria the second: that of
Antiochia the third: and that of Jerusalem the fourth: reserving for each one
her proper dignity: in such sort, that after that their Prelates have received
the Pall or Robe, of Pallium.
the Bishop of Rome, (the which is the livery of the plenitude of the
Pontifical Office) and made unto him the Oath of obedience and fidelity: they
likewise have license to give the foresaid Pall to their Suffragans, receiving
of them the Canonical profession, and taking of them promise of obedience to
the Church of Rome.

ANNOTATION.
THe question is not here, to know in what part of Christendom, the true
succession and Ordination is to be found, and which is the Church that has it
not. This cannot be found out by the Tradition of the Churches, and the
greater number thereof: for every one severally does condemn in general and in
particular all the rest. It is sufficient to know, whether they believe, that
it is necessary for Bishops and Priests, to take their ordination from one head
or chief whosoever he be. It may be gathered out of the Authors before
alleged, that they do think that the Apostles having left Successors behind
them in all parts and quarters, those Successors had power to ordain Bishops:
Nevertheless for order sake, the Church has given particular charge and
authority to the Patriarchs and Metropolitanes to ordain other Bishops. Also
the Bishops of Constantinople, Jerusalem, Antiochia, Alexandria, and others
have equal authority every one in his own quarter, and they are installed
into their charges by those of their quarter without incroaching one upon
another.

Also those of the Clergy of England have their odinay and lawful ordination:
for if the Church of England did voluntarily submit it self to receive
Ordination and Confirmation from the Church of Rome, she might challenge her
ancient right. Touching the Pastors and Evangelical Doctors of other places,
the Roman Catholics do think them as much, or rather more, intruded without
vocation, seeing that Luther and Zuinglius themselves, and others were no
Bishops, and consequently excluded by their Canons from the power to ordain.
But the answer is, that indeed a Priest alone, as a Priest, cannot ordain,
but a Priest authorized by a company of Priests, may: for he has the place
and power of the body of the Presbetery. If a company of Priests cannot make a
Priest a Bishop, the Pope could not be a lawful Bishop of Rome: for he is not
made Bishop of Rome, but by Priests and Cardinal Deacons, that is to say, the
principallest of the Church of Rome; it follows therefore,

That Ordination depends not upon an universal head, but only upon the
Patriarchs or Metroplitanes of every place.

QVESTION. XXXIIII. Whether Priests and Deacons may marry, as well by Gods law,
as by Ecclesiastical law.
THE EAST CHVRCHES.
THeuet. Li. 10. c. 15.
The Priests in India are married, and nevertheless cease not to execute their
duties and offices.

Item. Li. 8. ca. 15.
The Priests of the Armenians are married, as all the rest of the East
Countries.

Item. Li. 4. ca. 2.
No man is made Deacon in Moscouia, that is not married: nevertheless he is
not permitted to marry twice, and he that marries twice, remains amongst the
Lay people: and he that remains continent, although he cannot sacrifice by
reason of age, yet does he assist at the Sacrifice.

Vilam. Li. 2 ca. 22.
In Syria the Priests are married as in Greece, in brief they do imitate very
near the use and customs of the Grecians.

Scarga. De vno past. lib. 2. cap. 12.
The Russians and Moscouites admit no man to be Priest, that has not a wife.

Theuet. Lib. 7. ca. 3.
In Cyprus the Bishops have in all ages bin married, as well as the Priests.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
ZAga Episcopus. Dam a Goes de mor. Aethiop.
The reason why Priests are married with us, is because that Saint Paul thought
it better both for the Clergy and Laity to marry then to burn. He himself
says, that a Bishop ought to be the husband of one wife, irreprehensible and
sober: and the Deacons likewise.

Item. The Bishops and Priests cannot marry twice, unless the Patriarch will
dispense with them.

Aluares. Cap 26.
It was demanded of me (in the presence of Prester-Iohn) wherefore we do not
observe the Statutes of the holy Council of Nice, seeing therein it was
ordained that Priests should marry: and a little after he says thus. Besides
his Majesty caused me to speak more concerning the marriages of Priests,
asking me if it was ever known that the Apostles were married. Whereunto I
answered, that I remembered not that ever they married any woman, after that
they were called by Jesus Christ: and although that Saint Peter had a daughter,
that was before such time as he was of the number of the Apostles: but they
told me, that their books did command that they should marry, the which
expressly Saint Peter had in charge.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
THe Confession of England. Art. 7.
We say that marriage is holy and honorable, in all kind of people, and each
estate: and as Saint Chrysostom says, that it is lawful for a married man to
mount up to the Episcopal Chair.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
POpe Lucius. Did. 81. Ministri.
Let such Ministers, Priests and Deacons of the Altar be chosen, for the
services of the Lord, as observe and keep continency.

ANNOTATION.
THe Latins do note above all the rest, that the Christians of the East South
and North, are contrary to them in this point, as well as the Protestants. The
vulgar think that there is no other difference. The foresaid people
notwithstanding do differ from the Protestants in this one point, that is to
say, that they never receive or admit any into the government of the Chrurch,
but only those men that are married. This has been practiced in all ages,
peradventure the Church has had respect to that which S. Paul says, that a
wise Bishop must govern well his own family, so that they would have none but
aged and approved men. And whereas they admit not them that are twice married,
it is because they want not convenient and fit men for that charge, unto the
which the most continent are preferred: one may therefore say,

That Church men may marry both by Divine law, and by Ecclesiastical law, but
cannot marie twice, and continue in their office without dispensation.

QVESTION. XXXV. Whether there be more then three Orders in the Church, that is
to say, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
ALlphonsus de Castro. De haeres. lib. 13.
The Grecians (as Guido says) besides the sacred orders admit not any inferior
orders, but only Readers, and they say that the other, that is to say,
exorcists Porters, and acoluthytes, ought not to be accounted amongst the
orders.

Idem. The Armenians acknowledge but three orders, that is to say, Bishops,
Priests and Deacons.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
ALuares. Cap. 34.
There assembled a great multitude of people to receive imposition of hands of
the Abuna, (for no other but he could give them orders,) the said Abuna made an
exhortation unto them, in the form of a Sermon, then he caused the^ to pass
through a tent wherein he was, and made every one of them read on a book, and
if they could read, he caused them to pass on further, and upon those that
were examined, and were found capable, he imposed his hands, and they were
ordained Deacons.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
THe Confession of the Frenchmen. Art. 20.
As touching the true Church, we do believe that it ought to be governed
according to the policy, which our Lord Jesus Christ has established: that is
to say, that there be Pastors, Elders, and Deacons, to the end that purity of
Doctrine may have his full scope and course, that vices may be corrected, and
repressed, and that the poor and all that are afflicted may be succored.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
ISidorus. Did. 21. Cleros.
All those that serve in Christ his Church, are called generally Clerks; whose
names and degrees are these: the Doore-keeper, Psalmist, Lector, Exorcist,
Acolythit, Subdeacon, Deacon, Priest, and Bishop. And the orders of Bishops
are four, to wit, Patriarchs, Archbishops, Metropolitans, and Bishops.

ANNOTATION.
FIrst, The Church is composed of Clerks, so called of the word Cleros, which
signifies heritage, because that they are after a special fashion, dedicated
to the service of God; and of the Laickes, that is to say, those of the Common
people, so called, because that they are the greatest part thereof. Of Clerks
some are Bishops, that is to say, Superintendants, others Priests, that is to
say, Elders, others Deacons, that is to say Dispensers.

Secondly, there are five degrees of Bishops, according to the five sorts of
assemblies or resortes. The Parson or Curat which resideth in Parishes (for so
were the particular Churches in times past Eusebius. l. 2. c. p. 1.
called, yea the greatest.) The Bishops of the Diocesses, governing the
Presbiterie, or the Senate of the Diocese. The Metropolitans in the
Provincial Synods, the Patriarchs in the Synods of nations, and the
Oecumenicke or general (as they call the Bishop of Constantinople at this
day) which ought to preside or rule in general Synods. The Bishop being
considered without Jurisdiction, is by Divine Law: Let all things be done in
order, says S. Paul. If he be considered with Jurisdiction, and out of
assembly, he is by positive law. Let the Bishops know (says Saint In Epist. ad
Tit. cap. 1. and ad Euagr.
Jerome) that they are greater then the Priests, more by the custom of the
Church then by Divine institution. This word More shows that he acknowledged
a certain Divine authority in them: Therefore the Bishops in the charge of
ruling or governing, are successors of the Apostles and Evangelists: For after
them this charge fell to the most ancient Pastor of every Church: One may gather
by all likelihood that it is of such Bishops, which is spoken in the
Apocalypse: Write to the Angel of Ephesus: Write to the Angel of Pergamus, but
by and by afterward a man holds it better, that, Non aetas sed meritum
faceret Episcopum:

The second sort of Clerks are the Elders, whereof some are Preachers and
Doctors, and do all that which the Bishop does excepta Ordinatione.

The others do teach the rudiments or principles of religion, but not in
public, Sine Ign. Epist.
Episcopo: which if they befound fit to do, they are called Dion. eccl. Hier.
cap. 5.
Liturgij, and have power to administer the Sacraments, having sufficient
instructions, contained in the Formularies of the Church. These Elders are
called Papes in Greece: The Russians have few Preachers but only these Theuet.
19. 12.
Papes. They are very profitable and necessary for little Churches, and for the
meaner sort of people, which get more instruction from a simple Cathechisme,
then from a learned Sermon. They find many men capable of this office, and use
to choose those that are good and approved people, and which are no charge to
the Church.

In Aethiope ( says Lib. 2. c. 14.
Theuet) the Priests after that they have said Divine service, do go to work
to get their living, seeing that the Revenues which they have, are not
sufficient, to nourish them and their Family: For they give not such Donations
to the Church there, as they do in these quarters. Of these Priests the
Nouvelle 123. makes mention: We permit not that any Priest be made* which is
not five and thirty years of age. And S. Paul Tim. 5. 17.
says, The Priests that rule well, are worthy of double honor, especially
they which labor in the word and Doctrine.

The third sort of Clerks are the Deacons, their office is to serve at the
Tables or Altars: as well in the receiving of the gifts or offerings, as in the
celebration of the Liturgy.

Fourthly, the Laickes do also employ themselves in Ecclesiastical affairs;
Princes themselves do rule over the Clergy of their Dominions. The Elders of
the people were in times past Counselors to the Bishops. Saint Ambrose thinks
it not good, that men should loose any benefit of time. Those of the Clergy
have since that cast away this precept altogether: The Laickes which serve in
the Church, are the Subdeacons, Readers, Singers, Porters, Acolytes,
Laborers, and Diaconisses.

These according to the Council of Nice ought not to be accounted amongst the
Clerks. There were no Monks in times past. As concerning the office of
Subdeacons, Lecturers, etc. they have been in several times and places
established in a formal office, yea and that with ceremony: Nevertheless
(and yet this is the question, whereof Divines do here dispute) the Catholic
Church does believe,

That these little Offices are not Sacramental, that is to say, neither by
Divine nor Apostolic institution.

QVESTION. XXXVI. Whether there be an indeleble or perpetual Character
imprinted in the souls of Clerks, that does restrain them from becoming
Laymen again.
THE EAST CHVRCHES.
GAgnin. Desc. Sar.
If any Priest that is a Widdower, do marry with another woman which is at
liberty, he is deprived of his charge, and must not communicate with the
Clergy.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
ALuares. Desc. Aeth.
If it happen that a married Priest do accompany with another woman, he shall
be prohibited to enter into the Church (because that the Lay People, enter not
within, or do not enter within the Closset, where the Clerks be) and shall
not participate of their Revenues. This I know to be true, because that I saw
one which was called before the Patriarch for being found a bed with a woman,
the which he could not deny, and confessed the same in my presence; for
punishment whereof he was forbidden to carry any more the Cross in his hand,
and condemned to take upon him the estate of a secular man. Moreover, If a
Priest that is a widdower do happen to marry with a woman (that is to say,
without dispensation, as Zaga says) he must remain amongst the Lay people.

Alphonsus de Castro. De haeres.
The Armenians do hold that in the Sacrament of orders there is no grace
bestowed, which they hold likewise of the rest of the Sacraments.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
THe Ecclesiastical Discipline of the Frenchmen. Cap. 1.
The Ministers shall be deposed and degraded that teach false doctrine, if
after that they have been sufficiently advertised, they do not desist.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe Council of Trent. Sess. 7. ca. 4.
Forasmuch as in this Sacrament of orders, is imprinted a Character which
cannot be defaced, raised out, or taken away, as in Baptism, and in
Confirmation: The holy Council has just occasion to reject as damnable, the
opinion of those which say, that Priests have a power which endures only for
a time, and that they may retire back again into their first estate and
condition of Lay people.

ANNOTATION.
THis before spoken, shows the consent of four Churches, against the
Council of Trent. It is true, that the Grecians in their answer to the Divines
of Wittemberge do speak of a Spragis a Seal, or mark: Socolouius
interprets it a Character, peradventure willing to persuade men, that the
foresaid Churches do hold with the Roman Church, that in the souls of
Clerks, there is an indeleble and perpetual Character so surely imprinted,
that after their death it may be known. It appears not that they have this
opinion, howsoever it be, both they and the Africanes do hold the opinion,
which the Council of Trent does call damnable, to wit,

That there is not any such indeleble or perpetual Character, which hinders
a Clergy man to take again upon him the estate of a secular man.

QVESTION. XXXVII. Whether that the anointing of the sick be a Sacrament, and
whether the observation thereof be now necessary.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
SAcranus. Eluc. c. 2.
The Russians do say, that the Sacrament of extreme unction cannot give any
remedy against the stain of sin, and that S. James (speaking of unction)
did mean that it was only to help and cure bodily infirmities.

Vilamont. Lib. 2. c. 2^.
The Grecians do deny the Sacrament of confirmation, and Extreme Unction.

THE SOVTH CHVRHCES.
THe Confession of Zaga. Dam. a Goes.
It is to be noted, that with us, confirmation and the Chrisme, or the oil of
extreme unction are not held for Sacraments, nay they are not in use, as I see
here they are in these parts, according to the custom of the Church of Rome.

Aluares. Cap. 5.
The Abyssins use neither Chrisme nor oil of extreme unction.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
THe Confession of the Swizers. Cap. 19.
Confirmation and Extreme Unction are man's inventions, whereof the Church may
rid it self without any damage: and we have them not in our Churches.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe Council of Trent. Sess. 4. c. 1.
This holy Unction or anointing of the sick was instituted by our Lord Jesus
Christ, as a true and proper Sacrament of the new Testament. The virtue of
this Sacrament is the grace of the holy Ghost: the unction whereof serves to
wipe out the guilt of sin, if there be any as yet to purge.

ANNOTATION.
SAint James commands to anoint the sick, Cap. 5. 5.
and to pray for them, and adds, that prayer by faith brings health and
remission of sins Here is a difference between the Roman Catholic Church
and the reformed Church. The Churches of Africa and Asia which do use it, are
manifestly on the Protestants part. As touching the Greek Church, those that
have traveled those parts do protest unto us, that this unction or anointing
is not also in use there. Nevertheless Jeremy writes, that they hold it
until this present time as a Mystery: It is peradventure likely that the use
of oil has been delivered by some one or other of the Apostles, but it is
clear that it was ordained by S. James: it is his Tradition, which since his
time has been observed of us. Those of that Country do tell us, that they
hold it not necessary, and therefore it is not used, although they hold it as
a Mystery, to fill up the tale of the seven holy numbers. Sacranus witnesses,
that in his time (which is but a hundred years since) the Moscouites, and
consequently the Grecians did believe, that this oil was only to heal
diseases. But because that Jeremy says, that it serves for the body and the
soul, and alleges for it the very text of Saint James, one may easily
reconcile that place in saying, that the unction properly regards corporal
diseases: Nevertheless consequently it was a mark of remission, because that
God gives not the one without the other. And therefore a man may by this which
has been spoken gather, that the meaning of the Churches is,

That the anointing of the sick is one of the seven Mysteries: Nevertheless
the use thereof is not at this time necessary, in regard that the same was
purposely Instituted for the miraculous healing of Diseases.

QVESTION. XXXVIII. Whether there be seven Mysteries in the Church, and
whether that two of them may be called Sacraments.
THE EAST CHVRCHES.
Jeremy. 1. Resp. Conf Ausb. cap. 7.
In the Catholic Church of the Orthodox Christians, there are seven Mysteries
or Celebrations: that is to say, Baptism, the anointing with holy oil, the
holy Communion, imposition of hands, marriage, repentance, and holy oil.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
THe confession of Zaga. Dam. a Goes.
It is to be noted, that with us Confirmation and Chrisme, or the oil of
extreme unction, are not holden for Sacraments.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe council of Trent. Sess. 7. ca. 1
If any man say, that the Sacraments of the new law have not been all
instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, or that there are more or less then
seven: that is to say, Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extreme
Unction, Orders, and Marriage, or that any one of them is not truly and
properly a Sacrament, Let him be accursed.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
THe confession of England. (...).
We do acknowledge two Sacraments, which ought to be called by that name, that
is to say, Baptism and the Eucharist.

ANNOTATION.
HEre is a question concerning the words Sacrament and Mystery. As touching
the word Sacrament, noe Christian Nation is holden to use it: for it is
grounded neither upon Divine law, nor Ecclesiastical Catholic law. The word
is Latin, and the Catholic Church never speaks Latin, but only Greek in
the universal Councels. If therefore the Protestants will call none
Sacraments, but Baptism and the Eucharist, they do nothing either against
God, or against the Church. But these two Ceremonies are by them esteemed so
holy, and so authentical, and to have such prerogatives, that they think it
meet and reasonable to call them by some peculiar name: first because that they
are common to all those of the Church: secondly, because that they have a
visible substance or matter, ordained by Jesus Christ: and thirdly, because
that the holy Scripture does attribute very much unto them.

But some will say, the Protestants are contrary to the East Church, both in
the name and in the thing it self: for that Church believes that there are
seven Mysteries. Here is to be noted, that as concerning the word Mystery, the
Protestants have not as yet put it in use, and have not defined what that is,
which may be called Mystery. That word with them is further extended then the
word Sacrament: and which is yet more, they confess that the word Sacrament
may be taken more largely, and they protest, that they will never be
superstitious about words. Chemnitius says, that it was never yet stood upon,
but that absolution of Penitents might be called a Sacrament. Calvin says,
that Imposition of hands in any Ordination, may be called a Sacrament. And the
Apology of the Confession of Ausburg says the very same. Confirmation is
commanded in the Canons of the English Church: and Calvin desires that it
might be used and practiced. The Anointing or Unction of the sick is likewise
a Sacrament, yea even at this time, as Monsieur de Moulin In his answer to the
demands.
says: for the reason wherefore it is not used, is, because that men see not
the effects of those days. As concerning Marriage, if it be likewise taken
simply, they never call it a Sacrament: It is common both to the Jews,
Turks, and Pagans; but if one speak of the marriage of Christians, considered
as it is contracted, and blessed in the face of the Church, it may be called,
as the Patriarch Jeremy calls it, a Mystery or a Mysterious action, and a
holy celebration. And if all, or the most part of Ecclesiastical actions may
be called Sacraments, then more properly may they by them be called
Mysteries: for although that the word of God in it self be also called a
Mystery, yet more particularly when it is employed in some holy action. The
Churches of Africa hold not for Sacraments, neither the Chrisme nor the oil
of Extreme Unction, as Zaga-Zabo one of their own Bishops and Aluares, who
dwelt many years in Aethiope, do witness. These men are more credible then
Titelman, and such like, who never were there. Peradventure the Abyssins would
expound them according to the belief of them of the East: but seeing that here
is nothing controuerted but words, it will be no inconvenience to make this
conclusion,

That there are seven celebrations in the Church, the which are called
mysteries; and two principal (...).
which may be called Sacraments.

QVESTION. XXXIX. Whether it be lawful or needful to pray for the Saints
which are in Paradise.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
LIturgia S. Basilij. Lord have mercy upon us, remember the Saints which have
pleased thee from the beginning: our holy Fathers, the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Evangelists, Preachers, and all the righteous
which are dead in the Faith, and especially the holy blessed and euer-Virgine
Marie, Saint John Baptist, and Saint Stephan the Protomartyr.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
THe Liturgy of Cyrill of Alexandria. O Lord, have pity upon our Fathers and
Brethren, whose souls thou have received: give them rest, call to remembrance
our holy Fathers the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and above all the rest the
holy and glorious Virgin Marie, Saint John Baptist, and Saint Stephan. Grant
(O Lord) that the of souls them all may rest and repose in the bosom of our
holy Fathers, Abraham, Isack and Jacob, grant that their souls may inhabit
and dwell in a green place by the waters of Comfort in the Paradise of
pleasure, from whence grief, heaviness, and sighings are chased away. Raise
their bodies in the day which thou have ordained according to thy true
promises, which cannot fail.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
BEllarmine. De Sanct. Beat.
The first question is, whether the souls of the faithful separated from
their bodies (and such as have no need of Purgatory) are admitted to enjoy the
felicity which consists in the clear vision of God. This has been the
opinion of ancient and modern heretics, that they are reserved until the
last day in some secret receptacle, where they see not God, and are not
blessed, but in hope. Tertullian affirmed it first: Vigilantius followed him:
Guido attributes the same to the Armenians. The Grecians held it in the
Council of Florence. Luther holds the very same error, and Calvin Instit. l.
4. 20
also, who brings no arguments to prove it.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
THe Council of Wittenberge. Cha. 24. De mem. Def.
The State is all one of a Saint which is at rest in Christ, and a faithful
man that dies, for he that dies in the Faith is a Saint. We do think it a
thing agreeable to a godly soul to make an honest mention of his Elders
departed in the faith. Charity requires that we wish and desire to the dead
all tranquillity and felicity in Christ. But there is no testimony in the
Prophetical and Apostolical doctrine, that the dead are helped by Prayers,
Watchings and Merits, or that they obtain in heaven a greater felicity
thereby.

ANNOTATION.
BEllarmine tells us, that the Churches of Greece and Armenia do believe,
that until the day of Judgment, the Saints do not enjoy that perfect
felicity, which is called the vision or sight of God. They think (says L. 2.
chapter 21.
Vilamont) that there are none there but the Virgin Marie, and (peradventure)
the good thief. And that the rest are in certain Chambers, where the Angels
wont to visit them: They would say lodgings, whereof our Savior speaks. In
my Fathers house are many mansions. The Africanes do believe the same, as may
be gathered by their Liturgy. Bellarmine attributes the same to Calvin. As
for the Syrians, their errors (says Villamont) are not so great as these of
the Grecians: for they believe that the righteous are in Paradise, and the
wicked in hell, and that in praying for the dead, their pains are diminished,
albeit there is no place to purge souls; the Anaphore of the Syrians, Anaph.
D. Basil.
says thus: O Lord, Creator of soul and body, remember those that are
departed out of this world, refresh them in thy Tabernacle: pass them thither
from horrible lodgings, draw them out of darkness and dolor. In like manner
the opinion of the Apostolic Churches, is contrary both to the Roman
Catholics and to the Protestants (but it is a curious question.) For they
hold,

That the Saints which are in Heaven, do not enjoy the vision or sight of God,
until the last day, and that we ought to pray for them, that is request that
God would put them in a clear place, or that he would keep them if they are
his own, or that he would raise them in the last day, or that he would pardon
them at the day of the 1. Match. 12
Resurrection.

QVESTION. XL. Whether the Saints do understand, or see by reason of the
vision or sight of God, or by any other means, the Prayers and affairs of
those that are upon the earth, and whether it be lawful for them of this
world, to recommend themselves to their Prayers.
THE EAST CHVRCHES.
Jeremy Patriarch General. 1. Resp. c. 21
Invocation agreeeth properly to God alone, and appertains to him, both
chiefly, and very peculiarly. But that which is done to the Saints, is not
properly due to them, but (if it may be so said) rather by accident and grace:
for neither Peter nor Paul understand nor hear those that call upon them, but
it is (...), the spirit of Charity that is in them: according to that which
was spoken by the Lord, I will be with you until the consummation of the world.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
THe Liturgy of the Ethiopians. Rejoice O Lady, for we will pray for thy
health: O Virgin at all times, mother of God and of Christ, carry up our
prayers on high, unto the ears of thy son, to the end that our sins may be
pardoned. Rejoice O Lady, for thou have brought forth unto us the true light,
Jesus Christ: Pray for us unto him, to the end that he may have pity upon our
souls; O thou good Minister S. Paul the healer of Diseases, which have
received the Crown, pray for us, that our souls may be delivered through the
multitude of the mercies of Jesus Christ.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe council of Trent. Sess. 9. Decr. 2.
The holy Council does command all Bishops, and all others who have charge
to teach, that they instruct the faithful, concerning the intercession and
Invocation of Saints; teaching them that the Saints do offer their prayers to
God for men: and that it is a thing both good and profitable to call upon them
humbly, and to have our refuge to their prayers.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
THe Apology of the confession of Ausburg. Of the Invocation of Saints.
We do confess that the Angels do pray for us, yea even in particular, as in
in Zachary, cap. 1. The Angel prayed thus: O Lord of Hosts, how long will thou be unmerciful to Jerusalem?

Melancton. Ad Langaeum.
If we must needs retain some intercession by reason of the Custom received,
albeit that the same be dangerous: nevertheless it would be determined:
whether it ought to be constituted in that form, which is in the ancient
prayers of the Church, where Invocation is made to God, and not to Saints: and
yet there is mention made of some intercession, for it is certain that the
Saints in heaven do pray for the Church in general, as godly men do in this
world.

The confession of Wittenberg. De inuo^. cap. 2^.
The Angels do pray to God for us in some sort: But for all the Prayers of the
Saints which are in heaven, we must not take occasion thereby to call upon the
Saints: for in the holy Scripture there is neither commandment nor example
thereof. And seeing that it is necessary, that he that is called upon should be
a searcher of the heart, the saints ought not to be called upon.

ANNOTATION.
BEhold here two questions: the one concerning faith or belief, the other
concerning the practice of the Church. First, A man may demand, Whether the
Saints do understand our prayers? The Roman Catholic Church does answer,
that they understand them in the vision or sight of God, as in a glass. The
belief of the East Church is contrary, which says, that the Saints do not
understand any thing at all: and indeed, as it has been said in the
precedent question, they believe not that the Saints do enjoy perfect felicity
in the vision of God. But rather they hold with the Reformed Churches, which
do abhor this Invocation of Saints, especially because the Church of Rome
does attribute unto them, that which appertains to God, and which God never
communicated to any creature whatsoever, to wit, to have an habitual knowledge
of the thoughts of men: for if any Prophet has had by revelation any
knowledge, the same was by an extraordinary dispensation. S. De cura pre mort.
Augustine says, that if the Saints have any care of the living, it is even as
the living have care of them, to wit, the one not having any particular
knowledge of the estate of the other.

Secondly, The other question is, to know whether it be lawful for a man to
recommend himself to the prayers of the Saints. Here they commit three
Logomachies: The first is in the word to Invoke or Invocation, which sound so
il in the ears of the Protestants, that they therefore do abhor all other
Christians. Jeremy Bishop of Constantinople, avouches, that this word is
improper: It rests only then to find out a word more pleasing and fit.

Well then thus it must be, to recommend a man's self to the prayers of Saints,
is to attribute unto them some divine matter; but on the contrary side it
confesses them to be creatures, subject to the Creator, nay it is to debase
them, when a man does desire them to pray for him, which is as much as to
endeavor to stir up their piety and charity.

The second Logomachia is in the word Intercessor, which they use for want of
another, to signify him that prays for another. Bellarmine himself
confesses, that Jesus Christ is the only Intercessor, and therefore if the
Saints are heard, it is by reason of Jesus Christ the Intercessor, as well for
the living as for the dead. In like manner, the Saints dead and living are in
the same rank, and the Saints departed are Intercessors unto Jesus Christ
himself for the living.

The third variance in words is, in that the Grecians and the Latins do pray
thus, Saint Peter help us, our Lady have pity upon us us. Bellarmine says
that this is, as if one should say, Saint Peter help us through thy prayers:
but the Protestants would that men should speak plainly, and they are as
far from receiving these terms, as the Latins are little disposed to
correct their Hours, or the Grecians their Horologe, (for so they call their
books of prayers). It appears not that the Aethiopians use this manner of
speech: yea Hondius in his Cosmographicall Cart or Map, says that they do in
no wise call upon the Saints. Aluares neither says not that they do, which he
would hardly have forgotten, if it had been so: so that if they have no other
invocation, but that which is found in their Liturgy, a man may think that
these are rather Apostrophes and Prosopopaeaes, to stir them up to devotion,
then true inuocatitions: as also the Protestants do sing with the Psalmist,

Praise God ye Angels of great power, ye Angels of God, which do all that he
commands, as soon as you hear his voice. As for other matters, two things
are objected against this invocation or exhortation of Saints practiced by the
Grecians, Armenians, and other of the East: the one, that it is an idle and
unprofitable interpellation, seeing that the Saints understand not at al those
that pray unto the^. Whereunto they answer, that the spirit of Charity,
which they have, understands the Prayers, and knows the thoughts of men,
and that this spirit was promised them until the end of the world: It seems
that by this word (...) which they use, they mean the holy Ghost, dwelling in
the faithful: for the Patriarch Gennade takes it in this sense, in that place
of Scripture which we have alleged in the Preface of this Treatise, where it
is said, that all the Apostles had one self same teacher, to wit, (...). So
that the opinion of the Grecians should be this, that it is good to recommend
our souls to the prayers of Saints, because that the holy Ghost which dwells
in them, and which understands the prayers of them that are living, does move
the Saints to pray for them. The other objection is, that there is no
commandment of God to recommend a man's self to the Prayers of the dead. They
answer, that God commanded the friends of Job, to go unto Job to pray him, to
pray to God for them, and that there is no impediment, why a man may not do
the like to the Saints that are dead. The greatest argument herein, is the
custom received from antiquity in the Catholic Church. The intention or
meaning thereof now a days is,

That the Saints do not understand the Prayers of the living, nevertheless it
is lawful for us to recommend our selves to their Prayers, because that the
holy Ghost, the spirit of Charity, which dwells in them, does induce them to
pray for the living, either in general, or in particular for those that
recommend themselves to their prayers.

QVESTION. XLI. Whether those that have been Canonized by the Pope, are truly
Saints.
THE EAST CHVRCH.
THeuet. Cos. lib. 10. cap. 15.
As concerning the Saints of the Latin Church, which we reverence, the Indians
acknowledge none of them, except the Apostles and Prophets, nor the Grecians
and Iauians likewise.

Idem. Lib. 18. 10
The Grecians do keep holy the Feastiuall days of Saints as well as we, not
for that they acknowledge those which the Latins and the Church of Rome does
reverence.

Sacranus. De r^l. mosc
They speak ill of the Saints of the Catholic Church, and faith, under the
Roman obedience.

Gagninus. They reject the Saints of the Church of Rome, and do hold them for
great Heretics.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
Theuet. Lib. 10. 15.
The Abyssins do acknowledge but very few of our Saints Honored in our
Church, except Catherine, by reason that her body is in Mount Sinai, Saint
Anthony an Egyptian, and S. Helen: except also the Virgin Marie, whose name is
acknowledged throughout the universal world.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
CHemnitius. De ven. Sanct.
Those of the Church of Rome do worship many Saints, which never lived, as
George, Christopher, and Catharine. This saying has been used in the Church of
Rome, that in earth men do worship the relics of many, whose souls do
burn in hell.

They are worthy of the hate of al good men, though there were no other reason
but this, that they have depraved by their fables, the Histories of the lives
and deaths of the Saints, which doubtless were very full of true doctrine and
consolation.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe Gloss of the Canon Gloriosus. De rel. and Ven.
The Pope alone has power, not only to extol some amongst the Saints, but
also to Canonise them: first because it is one of the greatest matters that can
be propounded amongst Christians: Secondly, because miracles are attributed
unto faith: Thirdly, because that if it appertainneth unto the Pope, to
determine those things that are doubtful in the Scripture, then by far
greater reason ought he to judge of holiness: Fourthly, to the end that the
people should not be deceived through the simplicity of many Bishops: and
fifthly, to the end there should not be an infinite number of Saints, least that
thereby devotion should grow cold.

ANNOTATION.
IT is a thing confessed, that particular Churches may err, namely in the
Canonizing of Bellar. de Sanct. beat. lib. 1. cap. 18.
Saints: and by tradition of the Catholic Church: the Church of Rome ought to
be held for a particular Church. This above written does show that the most
part of Christians do not hold for Saints those which the Pope has canonized.
If any man say that the Church cannot err: I will answer, that from thence it
follows, that it cannot be, that she can undertake to Canonize them, whom she
never did while they were in their bodies. The Church cannot make a new article
of Faith. Pope Leo the third (says Bellarmine) was the first which Canonized
Saints; before they were honored by custom, and not by law: the same is
retained as yet in the East Countries, where they name none Saints, but those
ancients which lived about a thousand years ago; there are none in those
Churches which think themselves able to know, who those be whom God has
chosen. Not because that none ought to hold for saints, those whose holiness
the ancient Church did acknowledge: it would be worse to doubt it, then
dangerous to believe it charitably. That which induces the Protestants to say
that Catherine, George, and Christopher never lived, is the falsehood of their
Legends: Bellarmine confesses, that they are Apocrypha. They of the East do
believe, that there was a certain man named Christopher, but no Giant. They
hold likewise that there have been a S. Catherine, and a S. George, both very
renowned in all the east: But if credible histories do contradict the Story
of their lives, it may well be said, that they were not, to wit, such as they
are imagined to have been. To end, seeing that the Churches have every one the
memory of the Saints, who have lived in their Countries: the surest way is,
not to condemn them without good and sufficient proof: Nevertheless it is
not an Article of Faith, that they should be al Saints, no nor those neither of
the Church of Rome: for all the Churches do believe,

That those which the Pope Canonizeth, are not undoubtedly Saints.

QVESTION. XLII. Whether it be lawful to paint God, to bow or kneel before
Idols or Images, to bow the head or uncover it before Churches, Crosses, or
Pictures of Saints, or when we take in hand holy Relickes, and the Books of the
holy Scripture?
THE EAST CHVRCHES.
DAmascen a Greek Doctor. Lib. 4. ca. 8.
Who can make an Image of God, who is invisible, incorporall, and
incircumscriptible? It is a great folly and impiety to seek to give a shape to
him, who is Divine.

Sacranus. Eluc. ca. 2.
The Russians do abhor the Images of the Roman Catholics, and do
dishonor them as much as they can.

Cythraeus. The Moscouites have no Images in their Churches, but the Pictures
of Saint Nicholas and the Virgin Marie. They handle not the Books of the holy
Scripture without bowing their bodies many times, in making the sign of the
Cross.

Jeremy general Patriarch. 2. Answer to the confession of Ausburg.
None ought to reprehend us if we incline or bow our selves before the Images
of Saints: for we do bow as well before the one as before the other, because
that they are made after the Image of God: and Saint Basile says, that the
honor of the Image does ascend unto the first pattern. And the Israelites did
kneel round about the Tabernacle, which bore the Image of Celesticall things,
and of all the Creation.

THE SOVTH CHVRCHES.
ALuares. Cap. vlt.
Within their Churches are to be seen many ancient remembrances of Saints,
which are not upon the Altars, because it is not their custom: But they have
them within their vestries wrapped up and mingled with many books and Papers,
and they never bring them forth unless it be upon Feastiuall days.

Idem. Upon the walls of their Churches is to be seen the remembrances of
Jesus Christ, our blessed Lady, the Apostles and Prophets: and all those in
flat painted pictures, for their is no restoration or mending of them. They
will not have Jesus Christ painted, as he was crucified, saying that no man is
worthy to see him in that passion.

Theuet. Cos. li. 4. cap. 2.
The Cephalians do use Images, but only in flat or plain pictures, after the
manner of the Armenians, Georgians, Grecians, and others of the East.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe Council of Trent. Sess. 9. 2.
The Images of Jesus Christ, the Virgin Mary, mother of God, and other Saints
must be had and retained, especially in Churches, and honor and reverence done
unto them, as appertains.

Cardinal Bellarmine. De Imag. cap. 21.
The Images of Christ and of the Saints ought to be worshipped, not only by
accident or improperly: but also in themselves and properly; So, as that they
limite and finish the adoration, as considered in themselves, and not only as
they supply the place of the first pattern.

THE REFORMED CHVRCHES.
THe Confession of the Swizers. Cap. 4.
Forasmuch as God is an invisible spirit, and an infinite essence, he cannot be
represented by any art or Image: that is the reason, why we do not stick to
call (with the holy Scripture) the Images of God plain lies.

The Confession of Bohemia. Cap. 17.
The Church is also taught that none ought to honor holy men as God, much
less Images, neither worship them with any honor or affection of Spirit, the
which is due only to God.

ANNOTATION.
THere are diverse and sundry opinions touching Images. First the Mahometists
will have none at all. Secondly, the Iconomaques do think it unlawful to have
any in their Churches. Epiphanius held this opinion, saying, that it is against
the authority of holy Scripture, that the Image of a man should hang in a
Church, but he cites not the place of Scripture: Also the Grecians and
Latins do not believe that so learned a man did write the Epistle, where the
same is found. Thirdly many Protestants now a days do say, that it is not
expedient to place Images in Churches, confessing thereby that the same is a
thing of it self indifferent. Fourthly Chemnitius says that Images are
profitable in regard of the history, and decent for the Ornament of Churches:
and that the abuse maybe avoided by the preaching of true Doctrine. Fiftlie,
the second Council of Nice after Saint Basil and others (followed by the
Churches of the East and Africa) does teach that it is lawful to bow down
before Images: and because that the law of God is by some opposed thereunto,
Thou shall not bow down to them, the Council answers by distinguishing,
that there are two fashions of inclining or bowing. The one Latria, which is to
have trust and confidence in that thing, before which a man boweth, or to
prostrate himself altogether before it. The other is the inclination called
Dulia, which a man uses when he meets with one of his friends: (for in the
East Countries, the custom is to bow their heads in saluting one another, as
they do put off their hats in France) in this fashion says the Council, it
is lawful to bow or incline before Images: And which is more, the same
Council says, that this inclination or bowing, does altogether tend to the
thing represented: the meaning of the Council was explaned in this verse, Hanc
videas, sed mente colas, quod cernis in ipsa. Behold the Image, but honor in
thy heart, that which it does represent.

Moreover, to the end that none should think that this is some particular
Ceremony belonging to Images only, the Council and the Grecians do hold to
this day, that passing before any Church or Cross, or in taking up the holy
Bible, a man ought to incline or bow his head, which is as much as for a man in
France to put off his hat: and that (...), says the Council, that is to say,
having the heart elevated up to God. The Abyssins do not pass beyond these
limits. They have pictures in their Churches, but the people very seldom enter
into the place where they are: they are not upon the Altars, toward the which
they turn themselves in praying. Also if they do incline or bow their heads,
it is in passing before Churches, Crosses, or the stones of the Altar. The
Ecclesiastical persons enter not into the Church with their hose and shoes
on, according to that which God spoke to Moses, Put off thy shoes, for the
place where thou stand is holy ground. He that comes by a Church, if he be
a horseback, will alight, until he be past it. Behold here the Ceremonies of
the Africanes. They of the East do pass these limits; especially the lesser,
for they stand still, while they pray and bow their head before the images, but
they kneel not down. Jeremy says, that it is not in favor of the Images:
for all the honor is carried to the pattern; as if he should have said, that
they are honored only by accident, as when a man saluteth any one, he puts
off his hat, before his habit, without having any meaning or intention, to do
it in honor of his habit. So that whereas they pray before the pourtraict or
Image, it is, (say they) to stir up themselves to devotion, and to show how
much they honor the thing represented. All these exceptions take no place
amongst the Protestants. We ought not (say they) Obs. in harm. Conf. Sect. 2.
attribute to the Images of Saints any kind of worship, either Civil or
Religious, for the same cannot be done without detestable superstition. It
seems that this is the greatest accusation, which the Protestants have against
the Churches of the East and Africa. Nevertheless this custom is not now a
days, the ancient doctors which destroyed the Pagane idolatry have approved
it: their devotion did lead them to it. Peradventure no man will think it
strange, if he consider the persons, time, and place. Those Fathers might
defend themselves, as having the Spirit resting upon them insignes, which is
not granted to the meaner sort of people. The Christians of the East have been
always given to ceremonies. It was the custom to bow the head before the
Images of Kings and Princes.

Artabanus king of Persia (says Suetonius) worshipped the Eagles and the
Images of the Emperous. The Grecians at this time do argue thus: If it be
lawful to uncover the head, in passing by the Image of a King, why not in like
manner by the Image of Jesus Christ?

They of these Countries do answer, that it is not the custom amongst them,
to uncover their heads before the Images of 2. Resp. ad Gre.
Kings: whosoever should do it, would be held ridiculous. In like manner, if a
man should do so before the Image of a Saint, the Protestants would call it
superstition. The Roman Catholics do pass very often by Churches, and
Images, without once moving their hats, or bowing their bodies: Neither do
they so, when they take in hand their Hours, or the holy Bible. The custom in
these parts is, to put off the hat, when in publik acts the King is named:
Moreover the Protestants in England do ordain, that men put off their hats at
Sermons, when they hear the name of Can. 18.
Jesus. In like manner all countries have their customs: that which is
ridiculous and superstitious in one place, is held and esteemed comely and
religious in another. The most expedient way would be, in stead of calling one
another Idolaters and Heretics, to exhort one another charitably, to do all
to edification; to avoid the appeareance of evil, and excess, and not to
scandalize the Infidels and unbelievers. If any Infidel do enter into the
Church (says S. Paul) will not he say, that you are out of your wits?

In like manner, when an Infidel or unbeliever does see a Christian praying,
with his eyes fixed upon an Image: will not he say, that he speaks to the
Image? Entreaties, obtestations, and mutual demonstrations do serve sometimes
to procure the peace of the Church, but injurious speeches will never take away
schisms, and the passages or places of Scripture which are alleged, to make
that seem unlawful, which is but indecent: do not cause either the
superstitious to leave their superstition, or the less devout their
irreligion. The strife founded upon the Equivocation of the Greek word (...)
edifies as little. A great part of the Church will never consent to a manifest
alteration. Those that govern the Church, do swear at their entrance, to
follow the tract of their Predecessors: but it happens very often that evil
customs do ware away by laps of time, although not so fast as those which are
good.

The Church of Rome never staieth upon these terms, as Wicelius a Roman
Catholic writes, yea one that was very much Epist. in exerc. verae pietat.
affectionate. If I would ( says he) I could produce the testimony of the
Primitive Church, by the which the use of the intercession of Saints is
coroborated. But as I do affirm this, so I also confess, that it does grieve
me, that under pretext of I know not what Dulia, it is affirmed, that one may
and ought to honor with adoration the Saints and their Images? The Divines of
the ancient Church have preached to the people, that they must honor, but not
worship or adore the Saints: Well then, if they have truly spoken thus of
the Saints, what think you, would they have said of the Statues and Images of
Saints worshipped in Appearance, and honored with the manner of Divine
worship? Those who in Churches adore Images through any appearance, seem not
much unlike those, which in times past worshipped Gods and Goddesses. Where is
the sobriety of our understanding, to bow or stoop before carved or molten
Images, contrary to the law of God? unless peradventure we would offend the
Jews, the Sarasins, and those which are parted from us, through such like
enormities? The strange nations, of whom we have spoken (to wit the Christians
of the East and South) have very holily kept and observed the law of God
touching adoration, and have honored the souls of the Saints, in rendering to
God that which appertains to God, and to the Saints that which appertains
to the Saints: for who can find colors always to excuse himself if he daily
being too much given to vice, do foolishly search out extremities, by
mistaking the mean?

From this discourse of Wicelius a man may learn two things: First, that the
Churches of the East, and of Africa, are not fallen into the error of the
Latins. Secondly, that in the Church of Rome there are good people, which will
not be Idolaters, no not in outward appeareance, They are to be well advised,
whether it be tolerable for them to stay in the Church of Rome, and to call
her Mother and Mistress, and to hold them for heretics which do depart from
her, and yet withal to call her Mother and Mistress of Idolatry. For it is
certain, that she approves not only the appeareance of evil, which Wicelius
condemns, but also the evil it self. And for the same cause Thomas of
Aquin. has been canonised by her, yea honored by a solemn feast, as a Saint
and a true Teacher: and it is he that maintains, that a man ought to adore
and worship Images with the same adoration or worship as the thing
represented; to wit, the Image of Jesus Christ with Latria, and those of the
Saints with Dulia, in such sort, that the Images are also the object of
adoration: against which doctrine, the learned Earl In Apol. de im.
Picus has written, who nevertheless denies not, that a man ought to adore
Images: but not, says he, with that adoration which Thomas maintains.

Some man may ask, if Thomas went beyond the mean, in the adoration of
Images, how shall we call that error and vice? The Image adored with Latria,
shall it not be an Idol? and he that adoreth it in like manner, shall he not be
called an Idolater? But this opinion is not yet forgone in the Church of Rome.
Cardinal Bellarmine their great Doctor maintains it. We must not (says he)
adore the Images only by accident or improperly (as the Grecians say) but also
properly, and in themselves.

The foresaid Christian people are also contrary to the Church of Rome, in
that they will not have the Divine essence painted, especially in the Churches:
and follow the opinion of their Doctor Damascen, although that there are some
Grecians in places near to Italy, which take liberty herein, as may be seen
in their Horologies, printed at Venice. Moreover they abhor Images of Gould,
Silver, wood and stone, as smelling of Paganish idolatry, and have none but
pictures. The conclusion of this question, according to the opinion of the
foresaid people, is,

That it is lawful, but not necessary, neither (peradventure) profitable to
bow, or uncover the head before Churches, Altars, Crosses, Pourtraitures, or
Images of Saints, or in handling holy Relics, or the books of the holy
Scripture. That it is some appearance of Idolatry to pass these limits. That
it is plain Idolatry to adore Images properly. That it is an imitation of the
Pagans to have Images of relief in Churches. That it is folly, and impiety to
make an image of God.

QVESTION. XLIII. Whether it be lawful to vow single life, whether Monks
ought to be of diverse Orders, and whether it be lawful for them to beg.
THE EAST CHVRCHES.
Jeremy the general Patriarch. 1. Resp.
You say that you prohibit not good works: Nevertheless you account
holy days, Ceremonies, regular fasting and monastical life unprofitable
works; that is not well done, neither does it agree with the holy Fathers: For
if you do approve al good works, you will aproue these things, for they are
good; and for instance: Basil the great says, that a contemplative life has
one chief end, that is to say, the salvation of the soul.

Theuet. Lib. 6. c. 1.
Near to mount Sinai you shall find at this present a religious order of
Monks, which are of good conversation and holy life, founded in times past by
the great Emperor Justinian: The Grecians do say that it was the first
Monastery of their religion: for others they have none, neither would the
Grecian and Trapezontine Emperors ever have any other order, but that of S.
Basil, Bishop of Cesaria, who instituted his order of Monks in the East,
about the year of our Lord 380. He caused those that professed his order to
vow chastity, which were not received, till they had attained to the age of
eight and twenty years.

Gemistius Pletho. De Pelop.
If the people given to meditation do not labor, it is a superstition, the
third kind of impiety.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
ALuares, Descr. Aethiop.
In all the Dominions of Prester John, there is but one order of Religion,
which is of Saint Anthony the Hermit. Item. the greatest traficke in Faires
and Markets, is made by Monks.

Zaga-zabo Bishop of Damin Goes
Aethiopia. With us, the Priests, Monks and all the Ministers of the Church
do live by their labor; for the Church has not, nor receives not any
Tithes: Nevertheless, the Church has revenues and lands, which the Monks do
Till and labor themselves, and it is not lawful for them to beg from door
to door, neither to wrest or wring any Alms from the people.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe Council of Sess. 9. ea. 15
Trent. In any Religion whatsoever, as well of men as of women, they must not
make profession before sixteen years be accomplished.

Sixtus Extr. de treuga and Pace.
quartus. Let not the Parish Priests hereafter say, that heresies are arisen of
Mendicant Friars, seeing that in truth our faith has been illuminated, and
the Church exalted by them, and especially by the Orders of the Iacobins and
Franciscans.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
THe Confession of the Cap. 19.
Suizers. Those that have received from heaven the gift of a single life, so
that they are pure in heart and soul, ought to serve the Lord in that
vocation, so far forth as they feel themselves endued with this Divine gift:
for such men are more fit to set their minds on heavenly things, the^ those
that are distracted with the affairs of their families.

The Confession of Cap. 19.
Bohemia. There are bountiful and peculiar promises, made to them that are
such, and singular recompenses, so that a great reward shall be given to this
excellent work, to wit, To him that shall voluntarily leave Father, Mother,
Brethren, and Wife. Those which have received this gift, ought to take heed
lest they loose it: Nevertheless, there must no snares be laid for any.

Calvin. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 13. 18.
We reject not Monasticke vows for any other reason, but that they are rashly
made, by those which have not the power to keep them.

Idem. Sect. 9.
Saint Austine proves, that it is not lawful for Munkes to live in idleness.

Idem. Sect. 14.
Look how many Monasteries there are in these days: so many conuenticles are
there of Schismatickes: And to the end that their division might be better
known, they have given themselves diverse names. They are not ashamed to glory
in that which S. Paul had in execration, 1. Cor. 1. 12.
saying that the Corinthians did divide Christ, when they said, I am of Paul,
and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas; and I of Christ. And now a days they think,
that they may without doing any injury to Christ call themselves Benedictans,
Franciscans, Dominicans.

ANNOTATION.
THere are three things to be regarded in a Monastical life. First, the will
to live in a Chaste single life, joined with the deed. Jesus Christ approves
this will and this Mat. 19. 11
estate. That is the cause that the Grecians did extol it, following S. Basil,
but with hyperbolicall terms, as may be seen in their answer to the Divines
of Wittemberg: They believe that if it be a Divine and supernatural gift,
then it ought not to be esteemed unprofitable, neither as a humane invention.
The hate which a man bears to the abuse of a thing, ought not to prejudice
the true use of it. They call that life Angelical: Acertaine Grecian
expounding that word, has told us, that they believe that the life of the
Caloiers is Angelical, as long as they do good, but diabolical as long as
they do evil. Secondly, is to be noted the Custom of those that will follow
this institution, to associate themselves in Colleges. The Protestants
condemn not that. The Monasteries (say they) were in times past houses, where
some did labor and work with their hands, others did exercise themselves to
serve in the Church. The third thing to be noted is the Vow. The Protestants
likewise do not absolutely condemn it, but in that (says Instit. lib. 4. cap.
13.
Calvin) it is made by those that have not the power to accomplish that which
they have vowed; the same Author does think that a Vow may be taken at
threescore years of age: For S. Paul says, Let not a widow be taken into the
number under that age. That Canon of Saint Paul has not been observed by his
successors, for afterward were they received at fifty years of Nouel. 6.
age, and after Nouel. 123.
that at forty. Nevertheless, the same is continued, and is as yet held in
the East Churches, because it is necessary that he that Voweth, should have
knowledge by long experience, that he has received of God power to accomplish
and perform that which he has vowed, contrary to which the doctrine of the
Council of Trent is, which says, that a Vow may be made at sixteen years
of age. The foresaid Churches would not allow of diverse Sects of Munkes and
Friars: and therein are differing from the Latin Church, or rather contrary
to it. As touching the begging of Munkes, the proofs before alleged do show
that these Churches approve it not. Amongst the Latins themselves, there were
many which have condemned it, as Pope Nicholas the third De uerb. sig* c. 2.
says. In the Churches of Africa, the solemn vows of chastity, Poverty and
Obedience, are not used, as in the Church of Rome. Therefore the belief of the
foresaid Churches is,

That such may vow Chastity, as know by sufficient experience, that they have
power to accomplish and perform their vows. And that Munkes, ought not to
bear the name of diverse Sects, nor consume by their begging that which
appertains unto those which cannot labor.

QVESTION. XLIIII. Whether the Church ought to have Festival days and
fasting days, appointed: and whether there be any Divine or general
Ecclesiastical law, about the same.
THE EAST CHVRCHES.
Jeremy Patriarch of Constantinople. 1 Resp.
We ought not only to perform the Commandments, but also ought not to
despise the institutions of Feasts, having in remembrance the 53. Canon of the
Apostles, which says, If any one upon festival days eat not flesh, etc. And
the 69. Canon says, If any do not fast the holy Lent, or VVednesdaies and
Fridaies, let him be deposed.

Nicholas. Lib. 4.
The Armenians do keep Lent, neither eating any earthly flesh or fish: and to
show themselves much differing from the Grecians, upon certain Fridaies they
eat flesh, and drink wine, and all other food that pleases them.

Vilamont. Lib. 2. cap. 21
The Grecians observe not the four times nor the Vigilles: they eat flesh
every Saturday: they have four Lents in the year. The Armenians keep not
Christmas day holy.

Gagnin. Desc. Sar.
The Moscouites do celebrate many feasts of saints: but not upon those days
that the Romans do celebrate them: they have not at all the feast of Corpus
Christi: upon the festival days the chiefest amongst them, after service, do
spend the time in eating and drinking, but the Citizens and Artificers do
betake themselves to labor and Domestical affairs, and other business,
saying, that it is for Lords to keep feasts, and to abstain from labor.

Genebrard has brought to light the Calender of the Syrian, Greek, and Latin
Churches, wherein one may see the difference touching feasts.

THE SOVTH CHVRCH.
ALuares. Cap. 7.
The Aethiopians do keep Lent, and do begin it the Monday after Sexagesima,
(ten days after Shroue-Tewesday) and so they make their Lent to continue
fifteen days longer, taking those days for advantage, because that they fast
not on Saturdaies.

Their manner of fasting is, NOT TO EAT until night, communicating every day,
which is the reason why they singe not the Mass during that time, but only in
the night: and after service they communicate, and then go to supper. And even
as they have these fifty days of Lent: In like manner they take other fifty
days after Easter, and the Pentecost, wherein they fast not, and then when it
is not fasting day, they celebrate Mass in the morning, eating flesh during
that time, without excepting any one day.

The Lord of Escales has brought to light the Calender of the Church of
Aethiopia, wherein one may see the feasts and the fasting days there, and how
much they differ from ours.

THE LATIN CHVRCH.
THe Council of Lions. De Conf. did. 3 Pronunt and^m.
It must be declared to the Lay people, what times they must keep holy in the
year; to wit, every Sunday from eve to eve, and to eschew all imitation of the
Jews, they must also keep these Feasts, Christmas, S. Steven, S. John, etc.

The Fasting-dayes of the Latin Church, are ordained De Consecr. did. 3. and
elsewhere.

THE REFORMED CHVRCH.
THe constitutions of Can. 33.
England. Seeing that the Authority of the holy Fathers, grounded upon the
example of the Apostles, has commanded to celebrate Prayers and Fasting in the
solemn ordination of Ministers, and to that end, has ordained certain
prefixed times for the foresaid Prayers and Fastings: We honoring their Holy
and Pious institution, do will and ordain that hereafter no Priests nor
Deacons, be ordained, but upon those Sundays, which follow immediately after
the Fasting of the four times, vulgarly called the Ember weeks, hitherto kept
in the Church of England.

The Synod at Torun in Of the year 1595. Art. 15
Poland. We have thought it necessary to appease the wrath of God with Fasting
and Prayers, assembling our selves together with one consent at certain times.
And to the end, that we may not ordain any new thing touching this matter, we
have Dedicated unto Fasting, the days accustomed four times in the year,
which are vulgarly called the days of abstinence: Nevertheless, we will not
hinder the faithful to follow their devotion, in observing Fasting and Prayers
at other times: but on the contrary side we do exhort and stir them up
thereunto.

Oecolampadius. We have not learned out of Gods word any distinction of
meats: Nevertheless, that we may pray more sincerely, we do abstain, not
without fruit, from meats not prohibited: In consideration whereof, the
fathers have consecrated forty days before Easter for to Fast.

Zanchius. In 4. Praec.
The ancient institution of Lent cannot be simply condemned, but the necessity
which is enforced. Item. Telesphorus about the year 139. makes mention
thereof, as a thing observed before his time. We do ordain (says he) that
all the Clergy do abstain from flesh, seven whole weeks before Easter.
Saint Ambrose says that before, Lent continued but six weeks.

The feastiuall days of the Church of England are set down in the Book of
Common Prayers of the said Church.

Chemnicius and Zanchius do note those feasts which are kept by the
Protestants of Germany.

ANNOTATION.
THis Question might have been omitted: Nevertheless because that there are
too many scrupulous people, which take more heed to the external service of
God, then to the truth of belief, it shall not be much besides the purpose,
to give here advertisement touching Feasts and fasting. It is therefore to be
understood, that the Apostles never made in common any order touching Feasts
and Fasting: If they had, it would have been known, for the Tradition would
have been alike amongst all Nations, which is not, nor never was.
Incontinently after the time of the Apostles, the Churches of Asia, where Saint
John governed, yea, where S. Peter and S. Paul taught, were found to differ
from the Church of Rome, touching the Feast of Easter. There is no doubt, but
that the Feasts of the Apostles were ordained a long time after their decease.
As touching fasting, there are two sorts: The one (which is truly and properly
fasting) is abstinence from all kind of meat: this fasting is observed and
very much used in Aethiop, and amongst all the Iacobites. The other kind of
Fasting, is an abstinence from the most delicate and delicious meats. Against
which Fasting, the Protestants do bring this sentence out of S. Paul. 1. Tim.
4. 1.
The spirit speaks evidently, that in the latter days, men shall give heed
unto the spirits of error, and doctrine of Devils, which teach lies through
hypocrisy, commanding to abstain from meats, which GOD has created, to be
received with giving of thanks. Some will demand whether the Protestants do
pretend, that this place of Scripture is absolutely against Lent and
observation of Fridayes: Zanchius answers no. Lent was instituted before the
year 139. and the Author is not known: For the constitution of Telesphorus
served but to confirm that, which was then already received: So that if some
of the Apostles were not the inuenters thereof, yet it is certain that it was
some of their Disciples, all the rest consenting thereunto. The saying also of
S. Paul cannot be applied to that institution; for S. Paul says, that this
forbidding should be in the latter days. The same Zanchius says, that Lent
was free until the time of Pope Gregory the seventh, that is to say, until
the year 1075. And that this Pope did forbid (in the Latin Church) to eat
flesh, upon pain of mortal sin: And that this prohibition so absolute and
exact, is that whereof S. Paul speaks: For otherwise it is not a true
prohibition or forbidding. The Roman Catholics do bring other exceptions, to
wit, that these meats are not forbidden as evil of themselves: Another
answers them, that Saint Paul says, the use of them must not be forbidden,
and speaks in the same sort of Marriage, which is not forbidden, but only to
those which have vowed never to marry. Also unless one do vow not to eat
flesh, the use ought not to be absolutely forbidden him. The Latins say also,
that they forbid it not, but for certain times. The contrary part does reply,
that it is ever a forbidding. That which is white for one day (says Eth. 1.
Aristotle) is no less white, then if it had been so a whole year. As for
the Christians of the East, they are more exact obseruers of Fasting and
abstinence then the Latins are, although that their Church has not this
doctrine, that it should be unto them a mortal sin: Zeal and devotion is
many times imitated by superstition. The Reformed Churches have their Fasts,
and do keep them straightly, and the common people amongst them might fall
into some scruple of conscience, but that they are oftentimes advertised of
their Christian liberty.

It has been said before, that the Ethiopians do believe, that the
commandments of the Church do not bind a man upon pain of mortal sin.
And in that point they are manifestly on the Protestants side, as the Grecians
also are, if they hold that which their ancestors held: all alike do believe,
that the Bishops may both make laws, use their censures, and impose certain
punishments upon the infringers or breakers of them: but not forbid as God,
If thou do eat of this fruit, thou shall die the death, both temporal and
eternal. So that some scruple is noted among Christians, but the doctrine
which they confess, is,

That the Church may ordain holy or festiual days, together with abstinence
of all or some kind of meats: nevertheless not so as to bind the conscience,
without contempt or scandal: and the diverse practice thereof does show, that
there is no Catholic ecclesiastical law, which has ordained either festival
days, or fasting days, or the manner of keeping those feasts or fasts.

The Conclusion of this Treatise.
THe Council of Basil has declared the Pope to be subject unto the Church.
If the same were believed at this day by the Latins, as it is by all other
Christians, it were sufficient to make a peace. If the Pope may transport that
Sea out of Rome, the Church may do it far better; yea the East Church might
have done it at such time, as it was greater then the Latin. It follows
also, that all that the Popes have ordained, approved, or tolerated, is under
correction. If there had not been ambition in him, or in his Clergy of Rome,
he would have heard the Catholic voice of the Church: This ambition is the
cause, wherefore the Grecians do call him an Arch-hereticke, the Indians a
reprobate Bishop, the Protestants the son of perdition. Those that live
under him use not these terms: Nevertheless they are not far wide from this
belief. If the Duke of Venice should presume to call himself Monarch, and
that the most part took arms against him, calling him Tyrant, Capital and
Principal enemy of the Commonwealth; and that there were others more patient
then they, which confessed that in truth he was not such a one, as he counted
himself to be: nevertheless believed that he ought to be supported: I pray
you would not all these Citizens agree together in the principal point,
although they were of diverse opinions in the manner of proceeding?

Father De Sacr.
Coton after many others, makes an argument here, which he thinks to be
invincible: The Son of Perdition (says he) must sit in the Temple of God
according to Saint Paul, that is to say, in the Church of God, according to
Upon the 2. Epistle to the These. cap 2. 4.
Crysostome: And we must not go out of the Church, for out of it there is no
salvation; therefore we must continue under the son of perdition.

Answer. The Temple of God is all the earth: in this Temple there are many
Episcopal Chaires, which (as Pope Pelagius says) are one nuptial bed of
Christ, that is to say, which make but one Church, which begets children to
God by baptism. Well then, if he that sits in S. Peter's Chair teaches
not at all, who will gainsay, but that without forsaking the Church, one may
go to hear him which sittes in Saint Peter's chair at Antioch, among the
Stan. Or^ch. Ep. ad Hosiu^^.
Armenians, or in the seat of S. Andrew in Constantinople? Some will say that
the Protestants do not take this way: But we have showed that if ceremonies
were laid apart, and that Logomachies were eschued, there would want but little
of agreement: and scarce would there be any discord, but only in these four
points: First, about Images: Secondly, prayers to Saints: Thirdly, the time of
making Monastical vows: Fourthly, about the conversion of Bread and Wine in
the Eucharist, and peradventure not so great as is imagined.

For the first, it is decreed in the second Council of Nice, that one should
put off his Hat in passing before a Church, a Cross, an Altar, an Image or
portraict of a Saint, having the heart lifted up to God. The Protestants do
call the same superstition. See, here is a great heresy, a trim subject to
divide Christianity! Panigarolas confesses that one may altogether let pass
Images, why not then this ceremony? The Catholic Romans know well enough,
that sometimes they were not used at all. And Wicelius says that we ought to
eschew all appearance of evil. In the time of S. Basil there was tolleration
herein. Vigilantius brake the peace, peradventure his injurious speeches have
been the cause, why men did more in hate of him.

The second Question, whether one ought to recommend himself to the Prayers of
the Saints, is of the same nature. They of the East Churches do confess, that
the Saints do not understand our Prayers: Nevertheless, that the holy Ghost
which they have, does induce them to pray and to cry Abba father, (says S.
Paul) that is to say, in general, for those that recommend themselves to their
Prayers. The Protestants do confess that the Saints do pray, and that one
may wish or desire, that they would so do; notwithstanding, they hold it
absurd to address our Prayers unto them, seeing that we do know that they
understand us not. Melancton thinks that one might peradventure use the
ancient manner, that is, to direct our Prayers to God, in making mention of the
Prayers which the Saints do make: So that all do tend to the same end, but
do differ in terms.

The third difference is of lesser importance. It is certain that in the time
of the Apostles, the widows were received, without any regard to their age: If
there had been no abuse, S. Paul would not have made mention of Reformation.
If the Caloiers of the East, and the Antonians or Estafarus of Aethiop, are not
good people, it is for the Bishops of those Provinces to provide and see to it,
as also they ought not to think much, that other Nations have found out a
lawful remedy.

The fourth and last point, is the Question so much disputed upon now a days,
touching the changing of the Eucharist. Here without doubt is a difference in
men's belief. But the Reformed Churches have not debated against the Catholic
Church, and are not separated from them of the East and the Africans, for they
were not in their union. Moreover, those that deny it, show themselves ready
to communicate with them that believe Consubstantiation, which not withstanding
by their saying, is almost as contrary to the Articles of Faith, as the Roman
Transubstantiation. Less occasion have they to hold themselves separated from
the other Apostolic Churches, which (as has been said) believe not Jesus
Christ to be any where else then in heaven, touching his humanity: And their
belief, contains not any thing that does contradict the Scriptures,
although they be not able to conclude the same necessarily out of the
Scriptures.

The belief of these Churches is, that by Prayers the Bread is changed into
the body of the Lord, as Christians are, and that in both there is a change not
only in name but really. Because that some supernatural thing proceeding from
the matter of the body of the Lord, which is only in heaven, is infused into
the matter of bread, and from thence passes into the soul of the Communicant,
and has the place of form both in the one and in the other, and causes that
both the one and the other be called, after a special fashion, the body of
Christ: Because that they suffer a change through the obtaining of a new form,
or else their form suffers a change through the obtaining of new faculties.
And that is the reason, why as well the said Churches as the Reformed, do
confess that (as S. Paul writes) The bread is the Communion of the body of
the Lord; The difficulty therefore lies in this point, to wit, whether the
Bread has positiuely in it self this form or faculties: to communicate them
unto the Soul by it self: Or whether the soul receives them of the Bread,
because that the holy Ghost which is present in the Bread, as in all things,
causes that when one receives this bread, he receives the body of Christ, by
means of this essence, or faculties which proceed immediately from the same
body. If there were as much Charity in men as zeal, they might find this
above mentioned tolerable, until an universal and lawful Council.

In the mean time, it is the part of the lovers of truth, and enemies of
heresies, to search and seek out the truth, sufficiently contained in the holy
Scriptures, wherein if they find any obscurity (which they shall not in those
things necessary to salvation) it is their part to have recourse unto the
voice of the Churches, to the which our Lord has promised his assistance. And
if they be not of one accord, then to suspend their judgment: or else with a
holy liberty to try all, and to retain that which they take to be good in
every one of them. If you proceed thus (Christian Reader) you will no more
say, I am of Paul, and I am of Cephas, but rather you shall be true
Catholics and Orthodox Christians, and in no manner Idolaters or Heretics,
Grecians nor Romans, Papists nor Huguenots, Lutheranes nor Caluinists,
Protestants nor Puritanes: and make them liars, that seek to stain your
beautiful and holy profession, with names so infamous and unworthy of
honorable people and true Christians.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
THose that do build Religion on Ceremonies, will think that this Book is
lame or maimed, because that it does not declare those, which are observed by
every Nation. But we thought it a labor as much unprofitable, as envious to
the most judicious Readers. Calecas a Roman Catholic has written a volume
against the Grecians, wherein he speaks almost of nothing else. That we may
not omit any thing of importance, we do advertise, that there are two evil
Ceremonies found among the Grecians. The first is, that they use Leauened bread
in their Sacrament: The other that they abstain from things strangled and from
blood: In both they think themselves grounded upon the holy Scripture, The
Grecians having opposed themselves against the Latins, In answer to the
confession of Ausburg.
do reprehend them because they use little Wafers unleavened, and not ordinary
Bread, as our Savior did. They do not think that this word Bread, agrees to
those Hosts or Wafers, and that most commonly that name is not given them.
Moreover to make their fashion seem better, they have thought good to say,
that Jesus Christ did not institute this Sacrament in the days of sweet
bread. As for unleavened Bread, the Roman Catholics do not insist much upon
it. And it is not so important a matter of faith, to know upon what day the
Sacrament was ordained, provided that one pretend not to prejudice thereby the
History of the Gospel, the passages or sentences whereof may be better
reconciled through the one, Acts 15. 15.
then through the other. As for abstinence from things strangled and from
blood: It is founded upon the decrees of the Apostles assembled in Jerusalem,
the which Decree they do not think to be abrogated, because that their Church
which they hold to be true and Catholic, has still observed it: Yea, this
manner of abstinence has been confirmed by the sixth Synod. There is
likelihood that they have remitted this to a general Council, for they have
not much pressed this point against the Latins. The Aethiopians are both in
the one and in the other, on the Romans and Protestants side. In France the
Protestants do use leauened Bread, after the fashion of the Grecians.

Against the Churches of the Abyssines in the South is objected that they are
rebaptized every year: But the Ambassador of Prester-Iohn says, that the
cause why they bath themselves in Rivers and Ponds, is not because that they
think it necessary to salvation, but they do it upon the day of the Epiphanie
in remembrance of the Baptism of our Savior. It is to be noted, that this
ceremony is new amongst the Abyssins: for their King David which reigned but
about some hundred years ago, said that the same was by the institution of
his Grandfather. The Roman Catholics have no occasion to impute this unto the
Abyssins for an error: seeing that in the Church of Rome they baptize Bells,
and contrary to the practice of the Apostolic Churches, they sprincle water
every day entering into their Churches, for remission of venial sins, a
custom taken either from the Jews, as the Grecians do reproach them, or else
from Pagan Idolaters.

The other accusation against the Iacobites is, because that they tolerate
Circumcision: upon which Berthius says thus: They circumcise their children,
both Male and Female, but they borrow not that from the Jews: (insomuch that
the same is not for any Religion sake, as Aluares also says) but it is an
ancient custom, for Herodotus witnesses, that the Ethiopians in times past
likewised used it. It has been likewise thought by some, that the Iacobites
baptize with fire: But the Historiographers and those of the Country do
certify us, that the same is not so: but they make incisions in their temples,
either for comlines, or else for their healths sake. If the Ethiopians have no
other errors, then those which appear unto us, we might (peradventure)
appropriate unto them by better right that place of Scripture, Cant. ca. 1.
vbi cubas in meridie, then the ancient Donatists could attribute it unto
themselves. *

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE MATTER CONTAINED IN THIS BOOK.
OF the Popes spiritual authority. Quest. Quest. 1. Of the first Seat. Quest.
2. Of Miracles. Quest. 3. Of personal Succession. Quest. 4. Of Multitude.
Quest. 5. Of the Popes temporal authority. Quest. 6 Of the sufficiency of the
holy scripture. Quest. 7. Of Canonical books. Quest. 8. Of the Latin
Translation of the holy Scripture. Quest. 9. Of Traditions. Quest. 10. Of the
proceeding of the holy Ghost. Quest. 11. Of true faith. Quest. 12. Of
Free Will. Quest. 13. Of Justification. Quest. 14. Of the merit of good works.
Quest. 15. Of Purgatory. Quest. 16. Of Pardons. Quest. 17. Of Christ his
discention into hell. Quest. 18 Of the necessity of Baptism. Quest. 19. Of
Confirmation. Quest. 20. Of particular Confession. Quest. 21. Of the change of
the signs in the Eucharist. Quest. 22. Of the words of consecration Quest. 23
Of the Sacrament reserved. Quest. 24 Of the bread in the Sacrament. Quest. 25
Of mingling Wine and Water in the Chalice. Quest. 26 Of the Communion under
both kinds. Quest. 27 Of carrying the Sacrament in Procession. Quest. 28 Of
the elevation of the Sacram. Quest. 29 Of private Masses. Quest. 30 Of the
Sacrifice of the Mass. Quest. 31 Of an unknown tongue in the Church. Quest.
32 Of the ordination of Ecclesiastical persons. Quest. 33 Of the Marriage of
Ecclesiastical persons. Quest. 34 Of Ecclesiastical orders and offices Quest.
35 Of the indeleble Character. Quest. 36 Of Extreme Unction. Quest. 37 Of the
number of Sacraments. Quest. 38 Of Prayers for the Saints. Quest. 39 Of the
Invocation of Saints. Quest. 40 Of the canonizing of Saints. Quest. 41 Of
Images. Quest. 42 Of Monastical vows. Quest. 43 Of feasts and fasting. Quest.
44

