A BROTHERS GJFT: Containing AN HUNDRED PRECEPTS, Instructing all sorts of
people to a godly, honest, and moral life.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign
of the Bible without Newgate. 1623.

TO HIS LOVING Cousin Mr. Thomas Smith, all health, grace, and happiness.
ACcept good Cousin, a small token of my love: value not the heart according to
the greatness of the gift; only taste and try, and you shall find it, though
small, yet not altogether fruitless, especially if after trial you trust and
make use thereof. Your kind acceptance of this shall be a means to beget a
better: So wishing Gods grace and blessing to you and all your righteous
endeavors I rest,

Your ever loving Cousin HVMPHRY EVERINDEN.

A BROTHERS GJFT:
1 IVdge not of Religion by the tongue, but by the life: the heart thou can
not search, and the life does more plainly bewray the sincerity of the heart
then the tongue: for it is an easy thing and cheap to speak well, but costly
and laborious to do well.

2 Never call or account a man which is truly and absolutely covetous,
Religious: thou may as well call an open adulterer or common drunkatd,
Religious: for Cotousnes is as contrary to religion as the other, as much hope
of the other as of the covetous: and the covetous should as commonly be
accounted not religious as the other, but that His filthiness is covered with
the cloak of thrift, his parsimonie with a pretense of not nourishing the poor
in idleness.

3 Avoid the company of a covetous person, as thou would the company of a
Thief, Whoremaster, or Drunkard: for he is the most dangerous thief, because
by the Laws unpunishable; he is as scandalous as the other, because as odious
to God, and as sinful: His company is more dangerous then the others, because
his wickedness is not accounted sin, therefore not accounted dangerous.

4 Be sure (frequenting Sermons) to be perfect in the first principles of
Religion: for As it is impossible for him to read well that knows not his
Letters; so is it impossible to reap any full fruit by hearing of Sermons, not
well knowing the first principles.

5 Receive the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ often: no Spiritual
exercise is to be used seldom: The Word without the Sacraments, is like a
Writing of Confirmation without a Seal.

6 If the Lord have sent into thine own Parish a Preacher, on the Sabbath
hear him: for if he be bound to feed the flock of God which depends on him,
his flock is bound to receive their food on him: If thou go from him, for
contempt; Remember what our Savior said of Judas as well as of the other
Apostles, He that despises you, despises me.

7 Receive the Sacrament of the Lords Body and Blood, always humbly kneeling:
think not that so doing thou adorest the Bread, for thou may adore the Bread
as well sitting or standing: and if thy heart be free from superstition, the
three gestures are in themselves free, and being in themselves free, obey thy
Prince in that one of them, that he commanded for conscience sake. To urge the
second Commandment against kneeling at the Sacrament, is ungodly and
profanely to make and account the Sacrament an Idol.

8 Hear the word of God often: say not thou can hear enough at one Sermon
to practice a long time after; for there must be line upon line, precept upon
precept: because all the food thou receiuest at one meal turns not into the
nourishment of thy body, thou therefore eatest again, and often: So because
All thou hear at one Sermon is not remembered, nor at large practiced of
thee, thou also must hear again and often.

9 Desire in prayer to be frequent in heart, not eloquent in words: the Lord
(to whom thou speak) is not like those itching ears which regard to hear
no Sermons but such as are pollished with eloquence fitted to their humors,
pounced with variety of learned Arts: but The simplicity of the heart pleases
him best, and what is to him most acceptable, shall be with him most auailable.

10 Be not long in Prayer, but often: long continuance, at one time, dulleth
the affection (such is our weakness) and the affection dulled the prayer is
dead: since, then lips labor, and not the heart: yet frequency in Prayer,
increases the feruencie of the affection, and the fervent cry of the affection
pierces far: so that The feruenter the Spirit, the nearer his groans ascend
to the ears of God.

11 Choose such a Trade of life, as wherein with honest Art and gains, thou
may maintain thine estate, not such an one, as wherein without cousoning
shifts thou can not gain: some trades of life now used, are in the first
institution unlawful; others in their first institution lawful, yet, as now
they are used, unlawful: a third sort, by the ungodly, with cousoning shifts
abused, but, By the honest and godly with sincerity lawfully used.

12 Measure out the day into set portions, appointing to every of thy actions,
therein to be performed, his times of the day, and continuance of time and in
every day, let God have some time spared from thy labors: and if extraordinary
occasions with-call thee to interrupt thy appointed order, rather take the time
from thy portion which in the six days is the largest, then from the Lords,
which is the least.

13 As the Sabbath is wholly to be spent in Gods service, excepting some time
for thy necessary refection, or perhaps recreation, or upon extraordinary
occasion for the preservation of the life of Man or Beast: So the week days
are wholly to be spent in thy calling (not in Idleness) excepting also some
time for the private worship of God, or upon extraordinary occasion, for his
public service: yet, Delay not at any time of the day, or in any day of the
week, in thy labors, going, riding, or sitting, to lift up thy heart unto
God, the mind will be always busied, and better such thoughts then other.

14 In the Morning, remember thy birth; that as the Sun rises, not to stand
still, but to go forward, not to darken, but to enlighten the earth: so thou
wast borne, not to continue a child, but increase in true knowledge of thy
Creator, By the light of a godly conversation to glorify thy God.

15 At Noone, remember thy middle age; that as the Sun when he is at the
highest, declineth without staying, so thou In thy greatest strength shall not
stay, but in a moment decrease, and descend toward the Grave.

16 At Night, remember thy grave, whereof thy bed is a figure; and thy death,
whereof sleep is an image: remember that as the Sun sets, the next
morning to arise again, to begin either a fair day or a foul: so shall thou
ly down in the dust, at the Resurrection, to arise again, If thou have done
well, to glorious life and light; but If thou have done evil, to everlasting
darkness.

17 Make conscience all the day to follow thy vocation diligently, as in all
thy life to embrace Righteousness sincerely: for Thou shall give as certain
account of thy ^^^e, as of thy deeds.

18 Be wary and heedfull in thy dealings, not to be cousoned or ouer-reached
of every one, for this heed is godly and honest; yet it will be said,
simplicity is a jewel, and Christians must be as little Children: truth,
agendo; not always patiendo: In doing; not always in suffering: for he that
has commended the simplicity of the Dove; that is, simplicity without
deceit, has also Commanded the wisdom of the Serpent; that is, wariness
without guile.

19 Before and after meat, give GOD thanks, partly for Gods sake, partly for
thine own: for Gods sake, to acknowledge him the giver to his glory for thine
own sake, To obtain his blessing to thy comfort.

20 In feeding be sober: yet pine not the body for want of food, remembering,
that the Golden mean is best in all things; and that thou may offend in
either extreme, in the excess, and also in the defect: if he be blameable,
which having this worldly goods, does not feed and refresh his poor hungry
brother, Much more is he faulty and cruel, that pineth his own body for want
of food.

21 Account it as grievous a sin to ouercharge thy body with meat, as with
drink: God who has commanded the sober use of his Creatures, has commanded
the sober use of the one as well as of the other: and therefore the excess in
the one, is as sinful as in the other: the Drunken man has abused one of Gods
Creatures, the Glutton many: Many a foggy Belly-god cries out of the swinish
drunkard (and deservedly) where he amongst his dishes is more swinish and
beastly: The Beast exceeds more in eating, then in drinking.

22 In the feeding of thy body, remember thy Soul: if thy body must needs
perish and pine for want of food, so must thy Soul: the one is fed with
corporal meat, the other with spiritual: The one is often fed, else it
decaieth; so must the other.

23 Use recreation, yet such as is honest and without offense: as thou would
not feed on such meats as should poison thy self, and thy enuenomed breath
should infect others: so use no such recretion as shall either infect thy own
self, or give occasion of corruption to others: Remember all lawful things
are not expedient.

24 Use recreation when thou feel a want of refreshing of the Body or the
Mind, not whenever thou desire: for the corrupted appetite is unbridled,
and must be restrained with Christian discretion. Many Gallants, having
wherewithal to maintain themselves, spend all their time in pastimes: who, no
less offend, then if they did nothing but eat, drink, or sleep: They sit
down to eat, and drink, and rise up (not to labor) but to play.

25 If thou find the flames of the fire of concupiscence within thee, defer
not to marry: know that thou art called to that estate; and that as thou art
bound by the Laws of God, to abstain from fornication, adultery, and such
like uncleanness; so thou art not only permitted, but bound to marry, when
thou burnest: Marriage is the ordinary means that God has appointed for the
remedy of Lust.

26 Say not thou art poor, and therefore if thou Marry, thou shall impair thy
mirth, and undergo many encumbrances: better the troubles of this life, then
the foulness of the Mind: God will provide for thee, if thou cast thy care
on him: Measure not the time of Marriage by the increase, or decrease of this
wealth, but by the power thou have to contain, or have not to contain. A
fool he is that says when he is rich, and not when he is sick, he will
provide for a dangerous disease.

27 Use thy Wife as a companion, not as a servant; as she is not the head, so
she is not the foot; she was taken out near to the heart, no out of the
heel: As She is to be a comforter, not a controler: So She is to be a
comfort, not a slave.

28 Yet suffer her not to be thy commander, for thou art the head: yet disdain
her not to be thy aduiser in that which is good: and let her not rule neither
by advise or command, in that which is evil. Have discretion to distinguish
between wise Abigaile and vainglorious Eve, or Iobes foolish wife: A good
Woman makes a good Man better, and An evil Woman an ill man worse.

29 Although she have many faults (whoredom excepted) yet forsake her not:
rather be careful beforehand to choose for virtue, not for beauty: thou have
taken her for better and for worse: A wise Husbandman if he have a barren Field
and full of thorns, straight puts it not away, but labors with all skill,
care, and diligent culture to amend it.

30 Feed not, nor cloathe more finely or daintily then she: but as she is thy
yoke fellow, to help bear the labors and sorrows of this life, so Let her
be partaker with thee in the fruits of your labors.

31 Be abstinent in sleeping, for conscience sake, as in eating or drinking;
for God is offended by the excess of the one as well as of the other: as thou
ought not to eat or drink so long as the belly will receive or hold, so
ought thou not to sleep so long as thou can or desire: he which
sleeps overmuch, is not only lazy, but sinful; and he which sleeps
least, sleeps near half his time. Half the time of thy life thou restest
in the shadow of death.

32 Never account him thy friend, that speaks thee always fair, for these
causes: First, most commonly, the fairest speeches are but flatteries,
proceeding from a filthy and dissembling heart: Secondly, he cannot be a friend
which always speaks fair; for a friend must be like a good Physician, who
sometimes purges and sometimes restores: so A true friend; sometimes
comfort, and sometimes reprehendeth.

33 Bear with thy friend in many things, and account him not thy friend that
bears not with thee likewise: love covers a multitude of offenses: True
brotherly Charity consists not only in doing, but also in suffering.

34 Seek and enquire earnestly for a true friend, for he is a jewel not easily
to be found; and when thou find, try before thou trust, for no jewel
adorning the life of man is more sophisticated then friendship: and when thou
tryest him, try him in adversity: for as most men are lovers of prosperity, so
many will love thee to be partakers of thy happiness. Friendship is tried as
faith; in hoping, not in having; in woe, not in wealth.

35 Have not many friends, for it is a thing impossible to have many and true;
but if thou have, thou art the happiest man on earth, and shall be chronicled
for a wonder: Many have lived having not one, never any that yet had many.

36 Provoke no man to be thine adversary, but so much as in thee lies, have
peace with all men: In provoking an enemy thou procurest thine own harm, and
suffer rather as an evil doer, then as an innocent, and so losest the
recompense of thine afflictions: if thou prouokest an enemy, thou stirrest up
his rage, and by consequence, art a means to provoke his wicked and injurious
dealing and so also by necessary consequence his judgment, which is contrary
to Charity: Charity commands to be a means to help, not to hurt the body,
much more the Soul.

37 Beware of the violence and subtilty of thine adversary, that it hurt thee
not: but if thou must needs be wronged of him, rather yield that his force hurt
thy body, then that his allurements or thy impatience hurt thy Soul: the
damages of the Soul are more irreparable then the harms of the body; that
his oppressions endammage thy goods, then that his reports disparage thy fame:
For a good Name is to be chosen above great Riches.

38 When thou beholdest Gods judgments fall on thine adversary, give God thanks
for thy deliverance; but yet rejoice not at his affliction: for this
displeases God, to whom vengeance belongs; and it is a just judgment of God
to thrust him into the stead, that is glad of his enemies fall. Charity rather
desires deliverance with the safety of the persecutor, then with his
destruction.

39 Fret not at the riches, honor, or prosperity of thine enemy; alas, they
are but snares, they may be his portion, which he has only in this life: thy
portion is far greater, peace of Conscience in this world, and everlasting
bliss in the world to come. A folly that the lean Cow should fret at the fat:
She being lean, is reserved for increase; the other being fat, is appointed
to the slaughter.

40 Obey thy parents, yea, although they be wicked. As is the King unto his
Subjects, so is the Father to his Children, set over them by God, and Gods
ordinance: as therefore we must obey even evil Princes for conscience sake,
as the ordinance of God so also must we be obedient even to wicked Parents,
as set over us of God, And he that disobeyeth them, cannot be excusable.

41 Yet obey not thy parents in that which is contrary to the Word of God: who
commands things unlawful, commands not as a Father, but as an enemy; not
as the substitute of God, but as the instrument of Satan: in this case, thou
must Forsake Father and Mother and all, for Christ's sake; and profess that
thou have but one Father which is in Heaven.

42 Yield unto thy Parents not only honor and obedience, but relief also in
their necessities: thou have received from them, next under God, thy body, thy
being, thy maintenance, and can not requite their kindness whatsoever thou
do, since Thou can not beget, bear, and bring forth them as they have
thee.

43 Contemn not thy step-father or stepmother, thou owe them duty, as thy
natural parents: As I will make it plain by instance.

First, thy mother having married another man, he and she by marriage are made
one flesh, thou owe therefore to one and the self same flesh, one and the
self same duty; And so if thy Father marry another woman.

Secondly, thou having married a wife, art by marriage with her, one flesh, and
therefore one flesh has also one father and one mother; how can one flesh
although in two persons, not honor one and the self same parents: So is it to
a woman that has married an husband.

44 Regard thy master as the instrument of God to teach thee that knowledge,
which God himself without the ministry of any master did teach thy
forefathers, Arts and Sciences are the gifts of God, and Masters are the
ministers of God, as from him to impart them to us.

45 Love, obey, and honor thy Master and thy Mistress acknowledge Gods
ordinance in them, that he has set them over thee: thy parents having given
thee, under God thy being, They also, under him give thee thy being skillful.

46 Behave thy self to thy fellow servants, as to thy yoake-fellowes, willing
to help them bear the burden as thou would be helped; if any be more
skillful then thy self, and thy elder, respect the gifts of God in him: if
less skillful, and thy junior, regard him as in the hopeful way to knowledge:
crow not over, nor oppress such a one, but remember that when thou thy self
had thy beginnings, thou would have been loath to have been oppressed.

47 Accompany not with a lewd fellow-seruant, otherwise then in your necessary
labors, lest thou lose thine own recompense, and receive of his stripes: The
gentle Ox draws with the unruly, but rangeth not with him when he is out of
the yoke, lest also with him he be turned off to the slaughter.

48 Learn rightly to distinguish betwixt Faith and Presumption: for as there
is no means without the one unto salvation, so there is but one means beside
the other to damnation.

49 As before the fact to say, The Lord doubtless will be merciful to me in
this, is presumption: so to say after the fact, The Lord doubtless will show
mercy, if joined with repentance, is faith, if without repentance is also
presumption.

50 Make use of Gods mercy with reverence, not with malepartnesse, Though God
be merciful, yet he is mighty and just.

51 Continue not in sin, for God is just: yet despair not though thou have
often sinned, for God is also merciful.

52 When thou have grievously offended, be not less confident to obtain Gods
mercy, then when thou had less offended: for By how much the more thou have
sinned, by so much the more thou art in thy self miserable: and by how much
the more miserable thou art, by so much the more pitiful is God: and by how
much the more pitiful, by so much the more merciful is he

53 Make not light of sin because God is merciful: a Kings pardon is not to
be played withal, but with reverence to be received. Gods grace by how much
the more abundant, by so much the more to be respected, and not abused

54 Procure the love of all men so far as with a good conscience thou may:
but if thou must needs incur hatred, be hated of the evil rather then of the
good: for The hatred of the evil is a probable sign of Gods love, the hatred
of the good of Gods displeasure.

55 The hatred of the good may many ways endammage thee, the hatred of the
evil cannot hurt thee, though for a time it may afflict thee: for, God for
whose sake thou art hated, shall turn their curse into a blessing.

56 Love whom thou love unfeignedly: the good for Gods sake, and as the
children of God, to whom let thy love be without dissimulation, as it is to
their father: the evil either by kindness or reprehensions to amend them: so
shall thou show thy self a builder in Gods work, and not a plucker down; a
planter in Gods Garden, not a supplanter.

57 If thou feel the sweetness of Gods mercies abundantly, be not careless
and heedlesse of his judgments; God is contemned by the careless respect of
any of his attributes. As his mercies are contemned, if by Faith his love in
Jesus Christ be not apprehended: so his power is despised, when his judgments
be not feared Gods judgments await those nearest, which by any means go
astray in the abundance of his favors.

58 If thou have offended God, be careful to amend in the time to come, then
shall thy former iniquities be blotted out of his Register, and thy present
righteousness be regarded of him in Christ: for God considers not what a man
has been, but what he is, As the Tree falls so it lies; as God finds a
man, so he takes him. He that has a heavy burden on his shoulders already,
if he desire to be eased, must lay up no more.

59 Think it not sufficient to amend thy life in the time to come, but also
reconcile thy self to God by faith, an' true repentance for that which is
past: the New man is not put on, before the Old man is put off: He that will be
eased of a heavy burden, must not only heap up no more, but cast off that
which is upon him already.

60 Defer not thy repentance to thy deathbed or last hour, that is the time
of thy passage to give up thy accounts, not the time of deliberation to make it
up; at that time the body is not only weakened, but the mind: and not only
weakened, but also disturbed: Woe to those wretches which in the hour of death,
first desire to learn an Art so hard and intricate, viz. The Art of
reconciling and uniting themselves to God.

61 If thou feel in thy self a distrust of Gods love, and an unsteadfast
persuasion of thy salvation; examine and try thy self whether it be not by
reason of sundry sins which thou fosterest in thy bosom, not repented of nor
forsaken: for then as thy conscience preaches peace for thy reformation in
some things, it will preach judgment for thy want of reformation in others: and
because thy greatest uprightness cannot save thee, but thy least sin is able
to condemn thee; thou shall not feel the comforts of saving health from thine
imperfect reformation, but shall see the representation of Gods judgments
awaiting thy defects. That which cannot save, will not preach peace, but that
which can condemn, will preach judgment.

62 In thy practice of repentance, lament and forsake all thy sins, if thou will be at perfect peace with God, thou must make a final end of al
controversies: Thou must bury altogether all matters of contention, and not
begin them again.

63 Be not partaker with the ungodly in his sins yet pry not more into others
faults then into thine own: the curious searching into other men's estates
which appertains not to thee, is a principal means to cause thee neglect the
due examination and trial of thy self. If every man would look carefully
into his own garden, he should find so many weeds to be plucked up therein,
that he should not need curiously to wander into another man's field.

64 Judge no man rashly to be damned, or a Reprobate; for although there be
many fearful presumptions in a profane life of reprobation; yet but one
infallible token, which is the sin against the Holy Ghost, for all other sins
whatsoever may be forgiven: Thou may see how the tree stands in present;
but know not how through Gods mercy he may fall.

65 Flatter not thy self that it is but a foolery to be in thy life precise
and careful: for as there is a difference between heaven and hell, so there
must be between ye professors of either. The childrens bread is not for dogs,
nor the joys of heaven for the profane.

66 Be careful rather to be precise in life then in profession; yet so precise
in profession also, as not to blush at the words and works of piety.
Preciseness in profession without the life, is a Christians tongue without a
Christian.

67 Let the inward feeling of Gods mercies toward thee in Christ, be an
assurance of his fatherly provision for thee in things of this life: for
although Gods especial favor and outward prosperity do not always hold
hands; yet must his fatherly care in the greater be assurance of his never
failing care in the lesser: He which is ready to give unto thee heavenly
things, shall he not give thee earthly; do thou rely on him for the one,
and will thou not trust him for the other?

68 In matters concerning thy souls health, be advised by him that is a man of
God. But thou will ask how thou shall know him? I answer, if he be humble and
meek like his Master: but how shall thou know whether he be humble and meek?
I answer, if he be proud and stately in his carriage, he is not humble and meek
in his heart: For although there be counterfeited humility, yet there is no
counterfeited pride.

69 If thou obtain not presently what thou desire at the hand of God, be not
discouraged: God in withholding his hand, does not only try thy patience, but
also commend his gifts: Those things are accounted the meanest which are
soonest obtained, but those the most precious which are most hardly procured.

70 Love God zealously, yet without co^ditionall expectation of reward: for
although thy love toward God shall not be unrecompensed, yet ought it not to
work for recompense: For love seeks not his own, it is no mercinary contract.

71 Account it the most fearful estate of life to live without crosses and
afflictions; for when parents do not scourge their children, either they let
them alone without rebuke to run headlong into all impiety, and from thence to
destruction; or else they have renounced them as bastards and none of those
that shall any longer be partakers of their fatherly care or love thus to be
dealt withal by an earthly father is dangerous and grievous: But much more so
to be left to our selves of our heavenly father.

72 Flatter not thy self in thy sins, that it shall not be for Gods glory to
confound thee being so seely a creature: for God is glorified by the
destruction of the ungodly, as also he is by the salvation of the righteous:
the righteous in his salvation is exalted with God, when God and his elect are
exalted in the fall of the wicked, remember this undoubted truth, Thy
wickedness hurts not God but thy self.

73 Avoid the company and inward familiarity with the ungodly, as thou would
avoid the strokes of Gods judgments: For when two embrace each other arm in
arm, it is hard that the stroke that hitteth the one should miss the other.

74 Lament not with excessive sorrow the death of any friend, if thou fear
their departure out of Gods favor; as thy prayers cannot redeem them, so thy
sorrow cannot help thy self or them. If they be departed in the favor of God,
let thy joy for their happiness requite thy loss. If thou be doubtful of
their estate, thou have not cause to rejoice at that which peradventure is not,
nor to sorrow at that which perhaps has not happened, But in Charity to hope
the best.

75 Learn to distinguish truly between security and true peace of conscience:
Security feels no danger, and has no fear; Peace of conscience feels and
fears, but overcomes and rejoices in the assurance of Gods favor: That
thou may be most void of care, take heed of Security: no man feels his
own force in the time of peace.

76 Fear not death although he be grisly: the grim sir though he bring ill
news past, yet he brings good news to come: many an ill man fears not the
Devil when he leads him to an earthly treasure, And shall a good man fear
Death when he opens him the door to heavenly joys?

77 Possess not thy mind with the foolish fear of the dead, or the company of
a carkase: a good man will not hurt thee dead or living: An ill man may well
hurt thee when he is alive, but cannot harm thee when he is dead and not able
to help himself:

78 Desire rather to live poorly and honestly, then richly and dishonestly:
poor honesty gets a richer purchase then rich dishonesty; the one purchases
heaven, which is the gains of all; the other hell, which is the loss of all:
honest sorrow purchases greater comfort then dishonest joy: For more comfort
shall a man reap at his latter end by one hour spent in Gods service, then by
many years spent in vanity or wickedness.

79 Suffer not thine eyes to wander too large, nor thy tongue to walk too
fast: for as the best means to preserve the body in health, is to keep the
eyes open and the mouth shut; so the best means for the good of the soul, is
to shut the casements of the one, and to set a watch before the other.

80 Avoid the company of a contentious man, he is a perilous evil in two
respects; for either he will contend with thee, and so thou shall procure the
stroke of the edge of his malice, or else provoke thee to contend with others,
and so thou shall for his love get the hatred of many. A penny is dear bought
with a pound.

81 In seeking to persuade thy friend to forsake any wicked course, begin first
with kindness, it may prevail without reprehensions; he is a foolish
Physician who if he can cure with mollifying Cataplasmes, will use painful
Cauteries: reprehensions take the better place, where kindness has led the
way. The body which has bin strengthened with a cordial does the better bear
out a violent purgation.

82 Seek for the lawful assistance of Physic in the time of sickness, it is
as needful and as lawful, as to seek for meat and drink in the time of
hunger and thirst: God has given to every Plant his several virtue, not for
nothing, but for the health of the body, as of the selfsame Spirit there are
sundry operations for the health of the soul.

83 Defer not the Christening of any Child, though thou be compelled to do
it in thy own house: Wheresoever two or three be gathered together in
Christ's Name, he is in the midst amongst them. The little Child must not be
denied to come to Christ; who cannot by the word, must by Baptism: though thou
might falsely object, the Baptism helps it not; Yet so it becomes us to
fulfill all righteousness.

84 Love, honor, and obey thy Prince, dearly, reverently, carefully: he is
Pater patriae, the father of the Country, thou one of his children, if his
subject: Thy good and safety is a part of that heavy burden of care that lies
on his shoulders.

85 Love also, honor and obey the Clergy; they are the eyes of God, for they
are his watchmen; they are the mouth of God, for They are his speech-men,
messengers, and Ambassadors for Christ.

86 Love also, honor and obey all Magistrates under thy Prince, they are as
the members of his Body, whereby he works thy good and safety; thy Prince
and the Magistrates his substitutes are the hand of God which carries the sword
of Justice to punish the offender. And the purse of reward to recompense the
good.

87 Give unto the godly his due praise for his goodness; who does well,
deserves praise of all; and who deserves praise of all, deserves praise of
thee: pay him therefore his due and right, otherwise thou do show thy self
injurious.

88 Commend not the ungodliness of the wicked man: better it is in love to
cover many sins, then in flattery to commend one: to commend that which is
evil, is to make God a liar and unjust, which both discommendeth and punishes
it: To commend that which is evil, is to injury the good and innocent, viz. To
bestow his portion on the unworthy, and to rob him of his due, and to make
those partaker with him in his reward, that have not labored with him in his
work.

89 Be not hasty to reveal the infirmities of thy brethren, especially of the
Clergy: for, whereas therein thou think to do justly, thou may
notwithstanding do very wickedly in causing a scandal to arise at Religion
which cannot so soon be healed, as the offense of thy brother being concealed
by secret admonition might have been salued; thereby, not only the offense of
thy Minister shall be lothed, but also himself and his doctrine so much
suspected, as that many a saving admonition of his shall be suspected.

90 Esteem not thy self out of the favor of God, because thou art hated,
disliked, slandered, persecuted, poor and despised; for thy Master Christ was
poor, hated, disliked, persecuted, slandered and despised; yet he most highly
in Gods favor, and thou for his sake: When therefore for his sake thou art
hated, disliked, slandered, poor, persecuted and despised, thou art sure to be
highest in his favor.

91 Yet boast not of thy sufferings: when thou suffer for thy deserts, thou
receiuest not enough for thy sin, thy punishment is just: thy cause requires
mercy, thy sufferings challenge not recompense: It is the cause and not the
punishment that makes a Martyr, the Thief was hanged for his murder, as well
as Christ for the truth.

92 Yet distrust not of Gods mercy when thou suffer for thy deserts: Gods
elect have been punished for their sins and follies, yet have comforted
themselves with the hope of Gods favor. It is a token of fatherly care and love
when the child is chastened for his faults; all punishments whatsoever, are to
the penitent but chastisements.

93 Think not vaingloriously to maintain thy reputation, without the fear of
God; an ungodly life makes the greatest gifts thou have become contemptible:
Wisdom does more dignity a poor man then riches a fool. No man dares to
touch the hayres of a King, whilst they are on his head, in scorn: but being
once cut off, they are cast with others unto the dunghill, and trodden under
foot.

94 Object not against this advise: but those that fear not God, are in these
times in greatest esteem: for of whom are they esteemed? of themselves; and
therefore of no indifferent Judges; of those that are like themselves, and
therefore of no competent Judges: Not of God nor of the good, and therefore not
rightly esteemed.

95 Harken not to fame what others say of thee, so much as to thine own heart
what it does witness of thee: fame may flatter thee causlesse or condemn thee
unjustly, but Thine own heart shall tell the whole truth without flattery and
falsehood, which none but God and thy self is privy to.

96 Think it not sufficient to sorrow for thy sins, and to hate and detest
them; but know that thou must strive against them, and overcome thy corrupt
affections. A mortal enemy is not subdued when he is hated, but when he is
resisted; nor when he is resisted, unless he be vanquished.

97 Feed not on delights hastily, nor when thou tastest them with greediness:
there is no poison like to the sweetest, because it is most greedily devoured,
And most speedily conveyed into all parts of the body.

98 Be as sparing in persecuting, yea the evil (if thou be no Magistrate) with
the safety of Gods glory, and thine own life and estate as thou can: Let the
Magistrate call thee to the bar, call not thou him; overmuch rashness and
hastiness in persecuting is a shrewd presumption of a malignant spirit, as a
learned Father has notably observed, that Cain persecuted Abel; not Abel,
Cain: Absalom, David; not David, Absalom: the Jews, Christ; not Christ the
Jews. A mild spirit rather suffers then does violence.

99 Account it a greater happiness to suffer wrong then to do injury; if
thou suffer wrong, thou art of the number of those whom Christ has pronounced
blessed: If thou do wrong, of those which he has denounced cursed.

100 Let this short prayer be often sent the Ambassador of the desire of thy
sorrowful soul, to the throne of Grace: Lord I am a most grievous sinner,
therefore most miserable: but by how much the more miserable, by so much be
thou the more merciful to put away my sins, and to cure my miseries, and to
renew me and strengthen me with thy grace, in the course of my life hereafter,
that I may not only endeavor, but delight to glorify thee, as heretofore I
have been accustomed and have delighted to dishonor thee. Amen.

IN thy Religion be sincere,
and seem but what thou art:
For God that made thee fully knows,
thy inward thoughts and heart.
Yield to thy parents honor due,
their needs see thou relieve,
And wisely rule thy self always,
lest thou their age do grieve.
Thy wife as a companion fit,
not like a servant use:
Yet let her not rule over thee,
lest thou thy place abuse.
A friend do never him esteem
that always speaks thee fair,
For he a friend is for himself,
and naught for thee does care.
But make thou much account of him
that plainly will reprove,
When ought amiss in thee he sees,
for that is sign of love.
For many a one in vice run on,
and think they naught offend,
Because that claw backs flatter them,
and none will reprehend.
Be thy vocation high or low,
or whatsoere thou art,
With conscience manage thy affairs,
and uprightness of heart.
Defraud no man by any means,
take heed none thee deceive,
The Dove and Serpent think upon
if thou will rightly live.
Of th'Iudgement day and last account,
see thou still mindful be.
That sin thou may the better shun,
and all lewd courses flee:
So shall thou lead a happy life
while God a place does lend,
And afterward receive a Crown
which never shall have end.
FINIS.

