The Stage of Popish toys: Containing both Tragical and Comicall parts:
played by the Romish roysters of former age: notably describing them by
degrees in their colors.

Collected out of H. STEPHANVS in his Apology upon HERODOT.

With a friendly forewarning to our Catelin Catholics: and a brief
admonition, of the sundry benefits we receive by her Ma: blessed government
over us. Compyled by G. N.

Printed by Henry Binneman. ANNO DOMINI. 1581. Cum Priuilegio.



TO THE RIGHT HONOrable, Sir Christopher Hatto^, Knight, Captain of her
Majesty's Guard, Vizchamberlaine to her highness, and of her Majesty's most
honorable privy Counsel.
SAge Sibilla (right honorable) said to Aeneas that no way could be closed
against Virtue: affirming that al actions happily succeeded whatsoever the
attempt be, Virtute duce. And Theodorus Biblian der defines Virtue to be
invested with diverse titles, according to the diversity of her proper motions,
as in discerning the deceit of man's traditions, in choosing the verity, and in
flying false Hypocrisy, she is called Prudence: in maintayning Gods glory, in
withstanding the Popes tirannie, and in defending the true fellowship of
Prudence.
Christian society, she is named Fortitude: in suppressing Idolatry, in
embracing mercy, and in aduauncing the ministers of his heaue^lie Fortitude.
majesty, she is said to be Justice, in moderating Romish furies, and weak
affections, in qualifying Popish quarrels, and perverse conditions, Justice.
and in using either to bring both to the true use of Gods word, she is termed
Temperance. A Prince with these pillars does ever prevail: a tree with these
branches, does ever blossom, and a body with Tempera^ce.
these members overcomes the labors of Hercules. Besides these general graces
of Virtue, there are two special precedents chiefelie to be looked into, the
cause, and the execution, both which, your honor (whose forward favor to al
Christ's professors (under her Majesty) among the rest of right honorable) long
since considered of, performing, confirming, and executing the effect, in such
famous sort as the whole World is amazed and mated at her Majesty's most
happy and blessed government, whereby you have hitherto proved in your noble
person, Sibillas sayings to be true, that nothing can prevail against this
divine Virtue: which some define to be God himself. And now, seeing his
ancient and opposite enemy the Pope, has foysted in among us Petifoggers,
who (like sheet stealers, tinckers, or Connyskin buyers) creep in corners to
utter their trash, my fortune being (by a French man) to meet with a pack of
their paultry, I presume in humble sort to present the first show thereof to
your honor, wherein if I play the bad Peddler (so your honor pardon me) I force
not, for truly I am not their feed Broker. I have entitled it The Stage of
Popish toys, as a most meet term for the matter. the sum and substance whereof
I confess to have collected out of H: Stephanus in his Apology upon Herodot,
who coateth the^ in their Couchanele colors: and therefore if any part have his
wrong dye, I must yield to the fault, and excuse my Author. But my self
(without vaunt) a martial professor, and continually armed to the proof with
a seruisable and dutiful heart to your honor: I hope my errors shall pass for
the easier payment, and be the better born with, for that hereby I affirm this
ancient Emblem, In vtrumque paratus, and vow my daily prayer, for the
proceeding and increasing of that which God at the first placed in you, and is
according to the saying of Plato, No man to be noble without a heavenly
inspiration.

Your Honors most bound servant in all humble duty. GEORGE NORTH.

The Stage of Popish toys.
THe Locretians had a special law, worthy to be noted of all good governed
common wealths, and chiefly of us Englismen, in these dangerous times, if
every one would look into his duty as he ought: For whosoever presumed to
call in question, any thing that passed, by the decree of those, who were
authorized by the Prince, to devise, publish and establish good laws among
them, should be freely heard, so he came collered with a halter about his
neck, to the end, that delivering probable argument to maintain his
presumption, confounding (in reasonable judgment) the same he argued on, and
approving his Council to stand more with a common wealth: he was unarmed of
his Hemp, highly commended and preferred, both by Prince and people. But if he
were convicted in his arrogancy, and found more busy to reprove, than wise to
maintain: he was straight trussed up according to deserte, whiles his fault
and folly was in memory.

Socrates gave less liberty to his Citizens, for he would have no law
disputed of openly, not of those that had the authority to reform them: much
less that any other (either publicly or privately) should dare maintain
argument of them: For he considered how laws are scanned, when they come to
the discussing of the common sort.

If England (whose government by Gods great blessing, executed in the person
of our most sacred Sovereign) had the laws of Locretia, or the sharp
precepts of Socrates, our Papists durst not (for the rope) contend so
openly, nor for fear of due justice, presume so boldly (of their errors) as
they do. But such has bin her Majesty's mercy to them all, in pardoning,
prolonging, bearing and forbearing, hoping that God would convert them, or
duty reclaim them, covering with equal care to confirm her loving subjects,
in one mind, in one obedience, and in one profession, as they (abusing her
gracious clemency) wax more indurate, and wilfully run into all the ylles
that may be:

If they would desire God to give them the true knowledge of his word, and
steadfastly persevere in prayer, to be instructed by his holy spirit: no doubt
but his divine Majesty would so open the eyes of their reason, as they should
see what danger they dwell in, to the everlasting destruction of their Souls,
and what cunnyng has kept them in their error from the beginning: which true
judgment can no way be attained unto, unless we constantly continue in
prayer, till we perfectly feel and justly find (in our selves) his heavenly
blessing confirmed in us.

How many in all ages (even from the first creation of man) have delivered
(in the testimony of their blood) the most abominable abuses of that Romish
Antichrist, on whom you so much depend? how many of all Nations, most
excellent and learned writers (by the authority of the sacred Scriptures) have
published infinite volumes, showing and approving the most joyful fruits of
the true and perfect profession of Christ crucified, and how these two do
differ (in all degrees) no true Christian but knows, so far as God may
excel man, is not to be doubted: But so far as his wickedness may match
with ye hateful sin of Lucifer, to the malice of the heavenly Majesty, this
proud beast presumes on. Have the clouds of error so covered you as you
cannot see? has the mystes of ignorance of meshid you, as you will not
understand? or does the fury of Pharao so bewitch you as you are become
desperate? will not Moses move you, will not Gods word win you, nor his
threatenings reclaim you, except you have miracles? can nothing but a Pope and
his Pardons please you: your Pilgrimage to Saints of both kinds content you,
and a muster of Masses, with a world of Monks make you to seem Christians?
Have not we more good aduertisementes, more manifest signs and tokens, more
sharp rebukes, more gentle warnyngs, and more mylde admonitions than our
elders had? Is not vice now better discovered, all sorts of sins reproved,
and more lively (to the quick) both by word and writing touched, than ever it
was? yet what was cold in them, is frosen in you: where they innocently
halted, you are willingly lame: where they were (by ignorance) dim sighted,
you are (by wilfulness) altogether blinded: and where they were hard of
hearing, having no remedy, you are stark deffe in your stubborn obstinacy.
How hateful and dangerous it was in those days, to deliver the truth (unless
they would by fire alter into air) sundry that suffered their torments
testified. But you that have the free scope of the Gospel to entreat on,
whereby you are taught the true way to our only Savior, whose errors may
be eased, whose doubts may be cleared, and (free of all fear) may seek,
ask, knock, be resolved and received, do stubbornely stand on your own
conceits, holding dreams for devotion, and dwell in a most hateful hope of
alteration. By Christ you are called, by the Prince commanded, and by your
brethren entreated, to enter into a safe unity among the^: the Banquet is
prepared, gods word does inuit you, and (bringing your wedding garments) no
guests more welcome: let no shame withholde you from so sacred a feast, grudge
not to go, and the holy Ghost will guide you. There is more comfort (says
Christ) in one sinner truly repenting, tha^ in many that from their beginning
have continued constant. If to yield (in worldly causes) be wisdom, profit,
and policy, how much more will it benefit the health of our Souls, to
return (in singleness of heart) to his heavenly Majesty, if to bend, be
better than to break, let ^^ plye and apply, our living to his liking, that
has power to bruise every bone, and to consume us as chafe before fire: let
not our old Adam (whose knobbed and knotted branches, will rather rende than
cleave) cause the whole body to be cast into an everlasting and unquenchable
flame. It will then be too late to say with Dives, send to my brethren that
they may know the distress of the pain and torments I am in: you will
truly be aunsweared, they have the Prophets and Preachers among them, etc.
You can no way excuse your selves by ignoraunte: for as the Sun (excelling
all other lyghtes) does shine both on good and bad: so does the bright beams
of Gods word (far surpassing the Sun in clearenesse) extend an equal
comfort (though the use be not equal) as well upon the sinner, as the just
liver.

Yet as the Ethyopians do curse the Sun for scortching them: so do the
desperate, that are given up to their own lust, hate his heavenly word for
rebuking them.

I have heard sundry of your coat say, that the loose living of some our
Prelates and Preachers, does make you the more to mislike their doctrine:
deceive not your selves, it will pass for no payment: They live as flesh,
into are as men: we must direct our lives to their sayings, and not to their
doyngs. And it is also written, if an Angel come out of Heaven, and denuer you
other doctrine, than is contained in the Testament of our Savior Jesus Christ,
reject him and believe him not. More, if they receive not that you teach in my
name, leave them, and shake the du^^ of their dwelling Paul to the Gala. 1. 8.
9.
from your feet. It shall be better (in the general judgment) for Sodom and
Gomorha then with those.

Hear we have no commandment to follow their living, but we are hardly
threatened to obey their Preaching, so long as they keep within the compass of
the Gospel, showing us of no salvation besides Christ crucified, and that none
may come to the Father, but by him.

You will object the sayings of Christ in the. 5. of Matthewe Sic luceat lux
vestra coram hominibus, vt, etc. Let your light Math. 5.
so shine before men, as they may see your good works; and glorify your
Father that is in heaven. It is a good, and ghostly admonition, and I wish it
were so, yet no direct doctrine for us, that if they live not accordingly, to
condemn their sayings, by their doings: for if that be authority to confirm
the one, or consounde the other: your selves should look into the lives of
your Ancient fathers (so termed) as Abbots, Pryors, Monks, Nuns, and
Friars, of all feathers: Bishops, Prebends, and Priests, of all sorts, with
the lives of sundry Saints, canonized by your Pops, and even the Popes
themselves (with all their College of Cardinals) in whose damnable trace you
desire to draw, without regard to God, your Prince, profession, or Country,
whose great abuses, from the beginning (founded on all filthy hypocrisy,
respecting neither person, place, nor times) manifested their lives to their
learning, confirmed their doctrine to their doing, with such, and so hateful
examples, as I sorrow to know them, shame to think of the^, and am much more
hashfull to write them. Yet least you should say, I suppose more than I can
prove: I will (in pardon of the learned) deliver you somewhat, testified by the
true auth^ and of sundry. Wherein, if I keep not the order of a perfect ^ut
bring ^apher: impute it rather, to the imperfection of my (...), than to the
baseness of the matter: whose had substance (I confess) may abhor any
Christian to read it, yet no more than is meet to be known. And therefore first
I address me to their superfluous excess in gourmandise, the surse and sink
of all sin. The French proverb says, Apres la panse, vient la danse, After
meat comes mirth: for gluttony is the chief nourisher and leader to all
inceste and letcherie: if you then join the quality with the quantity, of
that they commonly fed on: that is, to compare the finesse of their meat, to
the filling of their paunches: you shall find then, that under the title of
Holy poverty, they were as curious and dainty mouthed as might be, accounting
of no God, but of the Pope, and their bellies.

As a Prior of Prouance, playing with his Minion, in the morning after he had
gaped, stretched, belched and spitted, he commanded a coople of Partridges to
be roasted for his breakfast: which when he had devoured, with a pot of the best
(half in a passion) said, good Lord give me patience, for we of the Church
suffer sundry crosses, Affirming the fury of a Cardinal, that at a general
counsel grew in a great chafe, because he was served with Patridges and
Wodcocks, without Orenges, Apo. Ste Fo. ^^^.
saying, what penance do we endure, and what persecution do we pass for our
Mother Holy Church? So as, the mark whereunto all those gross creatures of
the Popes did tend their trauayles, was only to make good cheer, and to live
at ease and pleasure.

We read of one, that before he was Pope (in sign of humility Apo. Ste Fo.
^27.
and devotion) would ever feed upon a net: but so soon as he had
attained the Papacy, he commanded his man, to set those bourde clothes aside,
for he had gotten that he fished for. It was in those days, a familiar
saying, to name a Friar or a Monk, a right brother: which (in effect) was a
good companion, one that loved to fare well, and to have good fellowship:
whereof proceeded this proverb, He lokes like an Abbot, he is as fat as a
Monk or Friar, he is as great as an Abbie lubber, and as well in larde, as a
hog. As though there had been some secret Sympathy, between Hogs and Monks,
I mean, in puris naturalibus, In their own nature, for Saint Anthoni^ (a
founder of their fraternity) was first a Swine-heard, and then a Monke-heard:
which truly appeared in his professors, for they went about, crying, give
something of your charity, to the Porklings of Saint Anthony. And a certain
Scot writing an Epigram, concluded his resolution, in these Verses.

Credibile est Circen, mutasse potentibus herbis
In Monachosquesues, inquesues Monachos.
No doubt but Circes could, Apo. Ste Fo. 329.
by Herbs of virtues hie
Make Monks of Hogs, and Hogs of Monks, as fat as Bore in stye.
And in truth, what condition of life, could be more resembled to swine, than
theirs, that commonly fed on the Church? whose order of living (besides their
brutishe behavior) was as careless of religion, as hogs are senseless of
reason. One of their own profession, who knew their nature by a true measure,
and could shape a Monk by the shadow of a beast, or a beast by the
substance of a Monk, describes the^ thus: he must be nastie, a glutton,
slouthful, a whoremonger, ill given, a fool, blockish, a drunkard, and
ignorant of al good Arts, drink like a Pigge, and feed like a Hog: So
that, if he can a little sing, it suffiseth to be an Abbot. Another more
abruptly, though as aptly, making a similitude of a three footed stool, by a
Friar, says: he is rounded like a fool, clothed in graye like a Woulfe, and
girded with a cord like a thief: and yet is no fool but a Friar.

Our simple Priests, yt professed not so strict a life, whose profits only
co^sisted in ye merits of the Mass: had special care (how good soever their
bread were) to drink still of the best, and good reason they had, to dry up
raw humors, lest in celebrating their Mass, some rumaticke matter might drop
from their drowsy brains: as also devotion is ryper, in a warm stomach than
a cold: And according to the opinion of our old As the father the son, the
holy Ghost, the twelve Apostles, Marie, the Thief, the Centurion the Publica^
and others
Poets: Post pocula fluit sermo. Therefore he that should play so many parts
alone as those in their masking Massings do, had need drink of the best, and
in a full cup: for if it be tolerable to say hoc est nasum meum: This is my
nose, in lieu of hoc est corpus meum, this is my hody: so it be done, cum
intention consecrandi: or no ill to cast a child into a tubbe of Water, so it
be cum intention Baptizandi: as sundry their gloses co^firm: what error can
there be in a poor Massing Priest, to drink drunk, when it is done cum
intention missificand^: Ap. Ste Fo 330. Fo. 330. Fol. 331.


As a Curate at Fere in Tartenoys had drunk so deep over night: that the next
day in lieu of Christening, he ministered to the infant his last unction.

And another priest at Ansterda^ in Holla^d, yt slept in his Memento, Apo. Ste
Fo. 331.
being suddenly wakened cried ye king drinks: dreming he had bin in the
company, he was drunk in the night before. Ap. Ste Fo. 592.


As also a Person of Vittre in Brytaine (ouerwatched at Post and Pair) dwelte
so long in his Mement^ that being hastily wakned, he cried flush, and began to
rake the Chalice to him.

A Curat of a village called old Slough, (between Hamburge and L^becke) slepte
so soundely in his Memento as the party Ap. Ste. ^o. 37.
who helped him to Mass (in the mean while) stole away the Chalice and the
plate: And when the Priest wakened he ran after him in his robes, crying stop
the thief: who was worthyly mocked of every man, for that he did not first
^argaine with him, what he would have for helping him to Mass.

Among this good company, I must (in pardon) place a Apo. Ste Fo. 592.
Chaplain of the Lord de Bies. who setting in a corner of the altar a draught
of the best (reserving it for his Vltimum vale, after he had said Mass) in
the midst of his Memento, he spyed his boy about it: to whom he suddenly
spoke aloude, let it alone you villain, it was not set there for you: whereby
you may see, what a special care these Mass Merchauntes had, to a cup of good
Wine.

If I should from the Priest to the Pope, look into al their excess in
delicacie and gluttony: it would make a more volume than my muse prete^deth.
But you may imagine of their meat by the men, and of their diet by their
degrees: For if the poorer sort (eue^ to beggars) could feed fat, full and
fine: you must suppose, the mytred, read hatted, and triple crowned, cate not
of the worst: but as their stomachs longed, so would they ever have their lust
answered.

Pope Iulie the third, otherwise called John Maria de Mo^te, Apo Ste ^^. ^^56.
commanded to have a Peacock that was dressed for dinner, to be kept cold for
his supper: which not being done accordingly, he grew in a great rage for it:
a Cardinal, then being with him at ye bourd, persuaded his holiness not to be
angry: to whom the Pope replied, saying: if God were so highly offended in
Paradise, to cast out our first father Adam from thence, and only for eating an
Aple: why shald not I (being his vicar on earth) be more furious for a
Peacocke, knowing how far it is in value above a rotten Aple.

The same Pope loving Bacon very well, and wanting it at his bourd (in anger)
asked his Steward, how it happened Fo. 356.
he had not his Gammon of Bacon? to whom he answered, your Physicians charged
me, to bring none before you, whereat his holiness entered into such a raging
Passion, as he said: Porta mi quel mio piatio, al despetto de Dio, Bring me my
Baco^, in despite of God.

Hear you have their disordinate desire, to live delicately: for the which,
they spared no degree, nor respected any person, but Epicure like, lived only
to eat.

Which truly was the chiefest cause, why they entertained the World in so
great abuse, and yet do, where their authority and ancient credit has
place: for all their endeavor and Study from the lowest to the highest, was to
bring water to their Mill: To the end, their teeth might want no griste to
grind on. And Turpe lucrum that which all Ethnic authors condemned and
banished their common wealths: These seeming Christians, found such savor
in, as these foolish toys void of all reason (to the judgment of the wise)
wroughte them the easiest and readiest way to infinite wealth. And all that
has bin or may be alleged to the contrary, is but wind and labor lost, for
that it is spoken to their bellies, which have no ears: for they kept this
proverb, as a principle among them, Lucri bonus odor ex re qualibet, that is,
The smell of gain is good of every thing. For though by word and writing, they
were often reproved for their shameless spoils called peelers of the Church
(in lieu of pillars) Crucifix Cormora^ts, Mass feeders, Dissemblers, Grypers,
Ipocrites, and ravening wolves: yet they forced no more of it, tha^ ye covetous
Athenian did, of whom Horac^ makes mention thus: Populus me sibilat, at mihi
plaudo, ipsi domi simul ac nummos contemplor in arca. The people do his^e at
me, I rejoiced at it, for at home I do glory at the sight of my gold in my
Coffers. And truly, notwithstanding they carried the only countenance of
the world, yet were they mocked of sundry, but their faces were so brazen as
they forced not of it. As a Monk of Bloyse replied to one that scorned him: we
may well, and on an easy price, give you leave to mock us, seeing we gain
so much, by mocking of you, who answered, not so outragiously, and with such
blasphemy, as Pope ^e^n the 10. did to Cardinal Bemb^e where Apo. Ste. Fo. 358.
he alleged a text of Scripture unto him: what riches do we acquire and get
by this fable of Christ? where if he had said, by abusing the name of Christ he
had spoken the truth. For it is incredible to consider what wealth those of the
Romish church did wallow in: As B^ptist Fulgosa (a great fautor and favorer
Baptist Fulgosa li. 9. c a. 1
of their profession) does mention unto us an example of one named Pete^ Riarus
which was first a Friar Minor, and after made Cardinal by Pope Sixtus the
fourth. For (says he) this Riarus was not alone content to wear cloth of gold
in his house, but his hangings and couerleds were likewise of clothe of gold,
he also made a feast to Ellenor of Arago^ (that passed by Rome to marry with
Hercules de Est duke of Ferrara) that continewed in service seven hours: with
such magnificence, as at every course his servants changed themselves into
new Liueries. All which Pomp was nothing to the pride and bravery of his
Concubine named Tiresia, whom he kept in such sort openly, as her shoes were
all covered over with pearls and precious stones, which History more at large
is extant in Fulgosi^ book, entitled De hominum l^x^ atque delitijs in the
ninth book and first Chapter.

And as the forenamed Pope Leon did wonder at the wealth that the fable of
Christ brought them (as he most blasphemously does term it) so is it
justified by a Friar of Millian (named Sampso^) that by one croysarde gathered
to himself Fo. ^36.
120. thousand Ducats, which he after offered for ye Papacy.

What greater contempt could be committed against the glory A special pardon
given by the Pope, by carrying a cross about named a croisard^ which commonly
came forth under the pretense of going against the Iurke and other infidels.
of God, or how could his poor members be more abused or bewitched, than they
were by the colorable and cunning pretext of this croysarde. For they
persuaded the people, that if their benevolence were bountiful to this cross
offering, they should be saved, with their fathers, their mothers, and their
chidren: And to be slack in giving (or not to give) was a sin unpardonable,
and wrought their assured damnation. Which brought the porer sort into so
desperate an error, as it caused them to guage or sell their souls to the
Devil in procuring money for them by all unlawful means, rather than they
would lose the benefit of so large a blesting, and incur the danger of so
certain destruction, supposing in their simplicity, that this pardon
prevailed, both against God and the Devil. In the time and Article of death,
they would give no hope of salvation to any, unless they made Saint Francis, S
Dominicke or some other Saint their heir being patron of their profession. For
they knew how to charm, the conscience of those, they confessed, as they
would be sure to glean a good part of that, which the poor widow and her
children (in right) should live on.

It is written, yt one of these holy fathers, most shamelessely Apo. Ste Fo 3^4.
affirmed in his Sermon at Bordeaux: yt when as often as any money was given for
those yt were in purgatory: their souls (heari^ng it sound tinck, tinck, in the
basen) did al in great joy, laugh the music of it. And since I have made
mention of Purgatory, I crave pardon of the reader: to note a pleasant
example or two, touching the credit of it.

Pope Clement ye eight (with certain Prelates his friends) being besieged in ye
Castle of Saint Angel in Rome a gentleman Fo. 417.
of the same City said: If his holiness (upon whom all the world have so
long builded their opinion) can not free himself, and his faithful followers,
from this place of imprisonment: I must (for my part) be constrained to
believe, that he is of much less power, able to deliver poor souls out of
Purgatory. A Florentine being earnestly solicited by certain Friars, to
redeem the soul of his son out of Purgatory, promised, that Fo. 519.
if they would take upon them, and yt he might be assured they did it, he would
(for their merit) give the^ a Ducket. After they had said their charms and
solemn Masses for him, they came for their gold: to who^ ye good man answered,
when you show me some assured sign, of his delivery: I will hold my word with you,
Those ravening mates, not so content (hoping by extremity, to obtain their
purpose) complained to the Duke, who sent for the party, and asked why he
performed not his promise to them: to whom he answered, it rested on this
condition, yt it should appear to him, they had delivered his son out of
Purgatory: and seeing it was at the first, their own seeking, he (knowing them
to be subtle) was loath to loose his money, without good and true testimony:
the Duke smelling ye mystery, turned to ye Friars, and told the^ he had
reason: And therefore said, if you will send ye same soul to me, or two others,
to witness his delivery, or bring me some writing under his own hand
subscribed by Christ, I will see you shall be answered ye uttermost: otherwise I
should wrong him too much, and show my self partial in Justice.

A gentleman of France playing the same part, when they came to demand money
for the Masses they had said for the Fo. 393.
soul of his friend: he asked, if there were any danger of his return again
to Purgatory, being once (by their good prayers) delivered from thence: they
answered no: why then quoth he, it were a needless charity, to give any thing
for him yt is alredie in safety: and therefore I think it a godly policy, to
keep my money in store, to pleasure some other poor soul, not yet delivered,
and so sent the^ away fasting. A Venetian told ye Popes legate, yt his holiness
was evil councelled at the first, for it had bin more wisdom (said he) to have
published, yt he could have delivered souls out of hell, rather than out of
Purgatory: for touching Purgatory, it is to be considered whether there be
such a place or no: but for Hell there is no question, since the whole world
believes there is one. What treasure this toye of Purgatory brought to your
mother holy church, the pride of your Pope holy father, with all his marked
train, of Coules, crowns, and tippets, have in all ages testified.

The French king being at Rome where seeing the pomp of Fo. 468.
the Popes court (and specially of the Cardinals) asked ye Cardinal of Autgnion
if the Apostles of Christ went so su^ptuously apparelled: he answered no: but
your Majesty must consider (said he) that states with time do alter, for the
Apostles were fishers, and lived in those days when Kings were shepherds.

If you suppose it a reproof to our profession, the lack of sound learning
in some our ordinary Ministers: look into your Romish religion, and you shall
see examples of sundry to be more sottish, unlearned, and less witted, tha^
the worst and simplest of our sort. As one commended to a Bishop to be made a
Massing Priest, whom he finding at dinner, the Bishop Apo. Ste. Fol. 403.
to prove his Latin, said: Es tu dignus? he answered, no sir I thank you, I
will dyne with your servants, believing that Dignus had bin to dyne.

An other coming to be Priested, and asked who was father to the four sons
of Amon, was set a ground, and answered Fol. 403.
he could not tell, and therefore was refused. Who at his coming home showed
how hardly he was handled: his father to instruct him said: Ball my dog has
four whelps and who can be father to my whelps (thou beast) but Ball. This
settled so great reason in his son, that he was assured now to be admitted:
And so being asked the second time, who was father to the four sons of Amon,
he answered readily and wittily, Ball my fathers dog. An other of the same
Fol. 404.
stamp, being demanded, what part was best of a roasted Pigge, answered the
skin, which was well lyked, and he admitted. A byrd of ye same neast standing
by being likewise Fol. 404.
asked, what part of a Calfe was most delicatest and daintiest, said the
skin, for he seeing the others answer to pass for good payment, supposed
his coin every way as current.

A certain Frenchman that had served a Scot, was persuaded Fol. 501.
(because he could a little read) to become a Priest. When he should take
orders, the Bishop speaking Latin to him, he answered that his master
understood Scottishe very well, but for his part he had not yet learned it,
supposing the Bishop had spoken Scottish to him.

An other (of more learning but of less wit) being asked in Apo. Ste. Fol. 501.
Latin, Quot sunt septem Sacramenta, answered, Tres, Aspergillum, Thuribulum,
and Magnum Altar: which is in English, How many be the seven Sacraments, the
answer, Three, the Holy water Sprinckle, the Sensar, and the high Altar.

And seeing occasion offers it self to make mention o^ holy water (in pardon
of the patient reader, and to justify so necessary a matter as holy water is
to your holy mother Church) I will not let slip the testimony of three special
authorities.

A certain pleasant reproved because he did not put off his Apo. Ste. Fol. 572.
Cappe when the Priest sprinkled him with holy water, answered, if it have
power (as you preach) to pass to Purgatory, surely it must have much
easier passage through my Cap.

A Gentleman of gallant spirit (named Godon) a Councellor Fol. 573.
of ye Parliament Court in France, being present, when king Francis the first
of that name, was devising (with others) the readiest mean, how he might stay
or encounter the Emperor, who (as the report went) was coming against him
with a great power. Godon hearing some wish they had so many thousand
Gascoynes and some so many thousand Launceknights (with other sundry wishes)
said to ye King: seeing it is in question to wyshe, if your Majesty will
pardon me, you shall hear my wyshe, which shall be such as will cost you
nothing, where all the rest of theirs depend on great charges, the King
knowing his pleasant humor, wylled to show what he would wish, sir said
Godon I would wish to become a Devil, but for one quarter of an hour, that
I might go directly to the Emperor, and break his neck. Truly (quoth the
King) I see now you are no better than a fool, as though the Emperor had
not holy Water in his Country to chase away Devils, as well as we have here
in France, In pardon of your Majesty (replied Godon) it may so be, and I
believe some young Devil (not skillful of his craft) would fly the holy
Water: but such a Devil, as had at any time been a Godon, all the holy Water
in the world, could not fear him, wherein he pleasantly touched the
superstition of it.

A register in Paris named Lory hearing a Cardinal bemone Fol 573.
his Minion, for that she was possessed of an evil spirit, and could by no
skill or cunning be freed nor eased, said, I can show you a ready remedy.
The Cardinal thrice glad, offered any recompense he would desire: Lory
replied, my reward shall be no more then my cost, and that is not much, you
need not to give her but one Clister of holy Water, and that will chase all
ill Spirits out of her, if the force and virtue of it be such, as you say we
must believe.

I have one pleasant proof more of ye ignorance of your lack Straparole.
latins, worth the remembrance, which is of a professed Priest of Normandy
that would needs travel to Rome, for a license to have two Benefices, who
desired his Bishop to write to the Pope in his commendation, imagining upon his
coming what his holiness would say to him: and as he understood by others
(of his own mark) that had bin there for the like purpose, he learned three
Latin words, sufficient as he supposed to serve his turn, which for that it
has the best grace in Latin, I am enforced so to deliver it: for after he had
saluted the Pope, and said, Salve sancte Pater, the Pope would ask, Vnde
venisti, then he should answer e Normandia: next his holiness would demand,
Vbi sunt litterae tuae, he should say In manica mea, and so take his letters
out of his sleeue and deliver them, for Priests in those days commonly carried
al their trashe in their sleeves. This gallant glorying in his learning, and
triumphing of his Latin, mumbled so much of it, as he did forget the first
part, which put him into such despair, as he meant to return, yet hoping that
the image of our Lady (whose chaplain he was vowed) would do him some good,
he went into a Chapel to perform his devotion, where by ye appointment of
our Lady (as he after reported) the Priest in his Mass recited, Salve sancte
parens, which was to our Norman the greatest joy that might be. For when he
came to the Popes presence, he said Salve sancte parens, the Pope amazed at
this new salutation, answered, Non sum mulier: ye Priest (dwelling upon his
instructions) followed with his lesson e Normandia, ye Pope thus crossed, said,
Diabolum habes, the poor Priest replied, In manica mea, supposing he had said
well.

If men could be more ignorant than these Massing maies were, let the wise
judge: and no marvel, for their only study consisted in a special care how
to live easilye and dai^tily. Was it not ridiculous to see those, that seemed
most prosounde and wisest, to use in their Sermons so great absurdities. ^or
one alleging the authority of Seripture, to confirm the credit of the
Mass, enterpreted, Inuenimus Messiam, We have found the Mass. An other to
prove their crossing by Scripture, Fol. 586.
affirmed, that Signa autem eis qui crediderunt, Make the sign of the Cross
on those that have believed. Among which brave interpretations, is to be
remembered a Curate in the Country of Artoys, that had a process against his
parishioners for pauing of the Church, who alleged this text of Scripture for
his purpose: Paueant illi and non paueam ego: Jeremy the 17. Chap.
whereby he affirmed that S. Hierom said, that they should paue the Church and
not he. Also what way their gloss had gotten, upon this place of Scripture,
Confitemini alter vtrum, Confesle your selves to the Priest, all the world does
know. Truly in this abuse consisted their greatest glory, for although
their shameless lives (seen to the open view of the wise) were sufficient to
reprove them and confound them, yet in this private confession, they practiced
more villainy, than any honest Christian can endure to hear or read: which
shall be hereafter partly touched in his place. Yet to show you in some sort,
their absurdity and vain glory, I will deliver you two examples short and
pleasant.

A certain Mason coming to be shriuen by his Curate, Straparole.
who had learned great words to countenance his credit with his Parishoners,
to the end that he would seem a profound clearke and wise among them:
demanded of him (you must suppose with open mouth) whether he were Auaritious,
who answered no: art thou (quoth he) Luxurious, he answered no: art thou not
Superbous he answered no: Art thou not Inuidus or Irous? The poor man
(ignorant of these terms) still answered no: ye Priest in a rage said, what
art thou then? a simple Mason sir (quoth he) as you may see by my Trowell.

A poor shepherd being likewise asked by his ghostly father, whether he had
kept the commandments of God, answered Straparole.
no: whether he had kept the commandments of the Church, he answered
(likewise) no: what have thou kept then (quoth he) nothing sir said the poor
shepherd but my sheep. Although the Pope thought it requisite that these
Massing Priests should have no more learning than nee^e^ them: yet (saving
their honor) some of the greatest, could mistake their Latin, as well as the
rest. For Henry the. 8. of famous memory, sending (among other things) to
Francis the French King and the first of that name twelve great Mastiues, as
parcel of his present, writing thus: Mitto tibi duodecem molossos twelve
degges: which Prat his Chauncellor and a great Sorbonist Doctor took to be
Duodecem muletos twelve moyles: and therefore desired his Majesty to give him
him the twelve Moyles that King Henry had sent. It is strange said his
master, that Moyles should be sent me out of England, and therefore willed
to see the letters: where the king found the error, and Prat perceiving it,
said he mistook Molossos for Mulettos.

And seeing I have occasion to call this Prat into the play, the more to
manifest unto you his covetous life matched with tyranny, and his miserable
death joined with blasphemy, being of the Church of Rome a professor, and of
ye poor members of Christ a cruel persecuter: I will deliver you the same
which is written of him, simply as I find it.

This Prat after he had bailded a fair Hospital (which Apo. Ste. Fol. 379.
the king seeing said it was not large yn^ugh, to lodge all those that Prat
had made poor) fell sick of such a horrible disease, as the worms did guawe
and pearce through his stomach, not without cursing and despiting of God,
both for pain and extreme impatience: occasioned as well by the grief he
felt, as of the hatred he had, to see all his Cofers sealed up: that he said,
thus it is to serve the King both with body and soul. This Prat was the first
in France, that brought and presented to the Parliamente house the Inquisition
of Heresies: he gave forth the first Commission to execute those that spoke
against the Romish Church, whose blaspheming death confirmed the cruelty of
his life, for clean forgetting God and his mercy, he manifestly showed what
Saint he served.

Also Ponchar Archbishop of Toures, following the erection of a burning
Chamber, he was (by the fire of God) Apo. Ste. Fol. 379.
burned himself: which began at his heels and feet, and increased so
upward through all his body, as they were feign to cut his members by piece
meal away.

One John Ruze, a Councellor also of the Parliament, ye cruellest persecuter of
Christ's professors in his time, was Fo. ^79.
likewise punished by ye secret fire of God, yt he felt himself burn as in a
furnace: and showing no sign of remembering God, his whole body consumed
withal, and so dying in most horrible blasphemy, he refused to call to God for
mercy.

And as the Divine judgment was executed upon this, so Fol. 380.
was it upon another Councellor of ye Court, named Claude de Asles, for the
same day yt he gave sentence for ye burning of two true professors, immediately
after, using ye company of his harlot (in the very act) was taken with an
Apoplexy and so suddenly dyed. Likewise one John Menier Lord of Oppide, a
follower with all his force, for the burning and Massacring Fol. 380.
of Christ in his members: was taken himself with such a burning strangurie,
as with the pain thereof he fell into so extreme impatience, yt he blasphemed
God even to his last breath, saying, why should not I curse him, whom those
damnable Lutherans did glory and praise in the midst of their torments? By
this the reader may judge in what misery those men dwell, whose consciences
give them such horrible assaults, as a late Chau^cellor of France, mightily
combatted by his conscience, at the instant of death cried, Ah thou Cardinal
thou Cardinal, thou do cause us all to be damned. An example of Gods great
justice, on those that seek the Innocent blood of his professors.

I did at the first crave pardon of the mildest minded Papists, to bear with
my error, if I placed not my authors as I ought, which I confess may manifest
my ignorance, yet truly they need not fear, that it will mar the credit
of their matter, the substance is so good: and therefore to confirm old
proverbs, Sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus, I will show you some examples,
what fruits followed the hateful excess of the Crucifix cormerantes, who sed
only on their holy mother Church.

A certain Gentleman of Perigourd in France, held in his house a Friar, his
confessor, who^ he favored for his counsel, Apo. Ste. Fol. 303.
and reverenced for his profession. This Gentleman (whose wife had lien in
child bed the space of three weeks) determined one night to have her company,
which our Friar perceiving, so used ye matter, as he prevented his master,
enjoyed his place, and (keeping himself silent) ^u^ningly (unknown) departed
from her, which done, he hasted to his house, called ye porter, and fled the
punishment of his fault. The husband coming to his wife (as he had pointed)
and she simply supposing he had bin with her before, delivered such speeches unto
him, as he perceived ye treason committed against them both. Then considering
how none lay in ye quarter of house, except her brother and his confessor,
entered into suspicion of him, and went straight to his Chamber, where he found
him not, which greatly increased his jealousy: but when he had spoken with his
porter, he was assured of ye villainy, and returning to his wife, manifested ye
circumstance of ye mischief unto her, whereat ye poor Gentlewoman was so
abashed, and grieved, ye it brought her into extreme despair, as being left
alone (her husband gone after ye Friar) her innocent heart yielded to her
feeble hand, and stra^gled her self, who wrestling with the agony of this cruel
death, did (with her foot) kill her little infant that lay by her: and giving
a great cry (at her last gasp) wakened her maid that foundly slept in the
same Chamber: when she saw this pitiful spectacle (past all remedy) she
called her Maistresse brother, who beholding the lamentable condition of his
sister and her child, demanded of the maid who it was had committed this
cruel Act: she answered she could not tell, unless it were her master,
for she certainly knew none but he had been there. This Gentleman, sought his
brother in his own chamber, and finding him gone, he exclaimed against him for
ye murder, and with revenging mind he took his horse to follow him,
supposing he had bin fled for the horriblenesse of the fact: whom when he heard
returning (for the darkness of the night had taken from him the author of
all his woe) he violently flew upon him (with words of reproach, calling him
most wicked wretch and tira^nous traitor) ran him through with his rapier. The
gentleman having no leisure to enquire the occasion of so sudden assault,
being wounded to death, yielded unto him. But when he understood the villainy,
with his brothers innocence, he over late craved pardon for the harm he had
done him, remount^d him as well as he might, and brought him home to his house,
where the next day following he likewise dyed. By this tragedy we see, how the
lewd lust of a Friar was the occasion of the murdering of three innocent
persons.

In the time of the Emperor Maximilian the first, there was in his country a
Covent of Friars, highly renowned Apo. Ste. Fol. 337.
for the opinion that every one had in their holy profession. Near unto which
Abbey there dwelled a Gentleman of great worship and credit, who favored
these Friars, wi^h a seruent zeal of devotion, and was a special benefactor
unto them Among which company, he chose to himself a confessor, to whom he
gave full power and authority over his house and household. This lecherous
lubber became so enamored on the Gentlewoman, as (resolved to put his lust in
execution,) coming to her house, and finding not her husband at home, he
demanded of her whether her husband was gone, she answered, to a Farm that
he had, where he meant to make his abode for three or four days, but if he
had any special matter to do with him, she would presently send a
Messenger for him: whereupon he taking occasion to perform his damnable
pretense, walked up and down about the house, as one ye had some matter of
importance, or some great mischief hammering in his head. The gentlewoman
perceiving it (for that his countenance argued, he was not content) she sent
one of her maids to know, if any of her house had offended him, or that he
lacked his desire in any thing. This maid doing her mistress message, the
Fatherly Friar, or rather Hellish fiende, took her (in sign of courtesy) by
the hand, and leading her aside into a corner of the Court, he cut her
throat. In the mean while there arrived a Tenant of the gentleman's that
brought him rent, who humbly saluted the Friar, and he embrasing him (with the
same knife he had murdered the maid, which was skant cold of her blood) he
likewise cut his throat, and after closed the Castle gate unto him. The
gentlewoma^ musing yt her chamber maid returned not, sent her companion to call
her, and to know the cause of her stay, which the Friar (in sort as before) took
her by the hand, and with the same bloody stratageme, sent her after her
play-fellow. Then when he saw himself alone in the house, he came to the
gentlewoman, and delivered her the effect of his devilish desire: showing how
long he had earnestly loved her, and that now the hour was come, that she
must needs yield unto his will. She that never had any evil opinion in him,
and least looked for any such salutation, answered, my good Father, I believe if
you knew me to be so evil disposed, or yt you thought I had so bad a conceit
in me, you would be the first yt would either reclaim me, or discover my shame
for it. The Friar (to cut of al circumstaunces, and to prevent that might
follow) flatly persuaded her, there was no remedy: willing her to go into ye
Court, where she should see the su^ of his pretense. When the gentlewoman
beheld her two maids and her tenant lying in that pitiful case, she was so
astonyed and ouerset with fear, as she remained speechless. This villain
(who made no account to enjoy her company for one time, but to have the abuse
of her body for ever) would not force her, and therefore said: Mistress be
ruled by me, and doubt of no danger, for you are in the hands of him, that
loves you above al ye men in the world: and so taking forth the gown of a
Nouice (which he had brought with him for the same purpose under his long robe)
he willed her to put it on, otherwise she should pass the same pain those had
done, which lay before her eyes. The gentlewoman seeing her own peril (as well
to save her life, as to gain time, in hope that her husband would come to
her rescue) she feigned willingly to obey him: and at the commandment of the
Friar, vntyred her head, wherein she used as much delay as she might. But in
the end, when she was in her hair, the Friar (not regarding the beauty of it)
did hastily cut it off, and further caused her to strip her self to her
smock, and to put on the little frock he brought with him: which done he made
all the haste away that he could, carrying with him his heavy and sorrowful
Nouice, whose company he had (in beastlye lust) so long desired. But it
pleased God, that her husband, (who had dispatched his business sooner than
he supposed he should before his going) returned home by the same way, that
his distress^d wife and this murder^us mate was coming. When the Friar
perceived him a far off, he said to her: behold where comes your husband,
who I know, if you make any countenance to discover your self, he will take
you from me: Therefore go you before me, and see that you turn your face on the
contrary side, that he perceive you no^: for if you make any sign or gesture
unto him, I will sooner cut your throat, than he shall be able to free you
out of my hands. In which discourse, the Gentleman approached, who, after he
had saluted him, asked him from whence he came: to whom he boldly and
shameleslye aunsweared, from your house sir, where my Mistress your wise is
very well, and does earnestlye look for you. The gentleman rode on, not
perceiving any thing: but his servant, who was accustomed to entertayne this
Friars companion (named Frater John) supposing it had been he, called unto
him. The poor gentlewoman, perplexed in all the passions of mind that might
be, durst not turn her head toward him, nor answer any one word:
notwythstanding, the fellow to see his vizage, crossed the way of her, to
whom (so far as she durst) she made a sorrowful sign, with her trembling
eyes, that were full of tears: The servant supposing some mystery in it, and
gessing at a glaunce who it should be, he hasted after his Master, and told
him, that the Friars companion was not Frater John, but seemed to be his
Mistress, who he affirmed (with a face all covered with tears) she did
cast a pitiful regard toward him. The Gentlemanne, half offended at his
follye (as he thought) said his manne was mad, and made no accounte of his
words: yet he still continewed in his request to his Master, desiring leave
to return, and to see the truth of that he imagined. Whereunto the Gentleman
agreed, and stayed to hear what news his man would bring him. The Friar
looking back, and hearing him call Frater John, doubted least he had
discovered his Mistress: and therefore with a long armed batte (a common
weapon for those mates to martch wi^h) he so reached at the fellow, as he
felled him off his horse, and straighte leaping upon him cut his throat: his
master, who saw a far off his man overthrown, supposed he had fallen by
some mischaunce, and therefore hasted to help him up again. But when he came
nere to this desperate and sturdie Friar, with the same blessing that he
unhorsed the man, he unhorsed the master, and cast himself upon him, with all
the violence he might: and if ye gentleman had not bin both bold and strong,
ye Friar had there ended the Tragedy. But by his strength, he held him so
hard in his arms, as he could do him no more hurt: And withal forced him
to forgo the knife wherewith he had performed all this mischief, which his
wife seeing it fall from him, took it up, and put it into the hand of her
husband. The case being altered, the gentlewomans courage increased: for in
the most furious manner that she might, she bestyrred her to plague him, that
had so much punished her: And in the mean time the gentleman so stabbed in
the Friar, as he was feign to yield, and confessed the truth of his fault.
The Gentleman would not kill him, but kept him to discover more, and to
receive some sharper correction, for his so horrible an offense: and so carried
him to the Emperors justice in Flaunders, where he uttered the order of the
execution of this mischief, with the cause, showing what a number of
Gentlewomen and beautiful may^s (by the like murders and treasons) were
closely kept in their Monastery, which proved true, by commissioners
appointed, they first delivered for the all such women as they found most
pitifully closed in their Cloisters, and (for an everlasting memory to their
posterity) they shut up all the Friars in the Abbey, and burned both the house
and those damnable wretches together.

Here you have a manifest mirror of all the mischiefs that may be, which
shows no single sin, and in one private, but by a most bloody and common
consent of the whole Covent: the like never heard nor read off before,
committed by any Barbaria^, Jew, Turk, or Heathen. I should (in troth) do
double injury to our new found Jesuits, and deprive them of the honor they
deserve, if I should not appoint them (as guestes twice welcome) a special
place in these bloody banckets: for albeit neither Saint Francis, Saint
Dominick, nor Saint Anthony, was acquainted with the^: yet are they cloth of
the same wool, and will prove no worse in the wearing though dyed into an other
color, for you shall find them as ignorant as Monks, as imputente and
shameless as Monks, and as mischievous and profane as Monks: and therefore,
for affinity, fraternity, and society, they have all vowed their devotion to
one Saint. And where they be (indeed) ancient, and can claim their
antiquity from the fall of Lucifer, yet as politic children, following the
suttletie of their Father (to deceive the iniquity of time) do mask under a
strange visarde. By which pretext, they have promised, to restore England to
their Romish mother holy Church again. And therefore to further their
sailing, that they may the sooner be set a shore at Wapping, I will show you a
creedible example or two (committed by some of their profession) as horrible as
the rest.

A Gentleman of Lymosin (Lord of Saint John de Lygours) abusing his wives
mother, and having children by her (under benedicite,) discovered his fault to
one of this fraternity: who to prove their profession free of no sin,
exercised the craft of coining, and now took occasion (having this gentlema^s
head at his foot) to persuade him to join in making of counterfaite money
with him. After they had practiced this matter long between them, the Jesuit
seeing the in^est to press the gentleman's conscience (as it daily unquieted
him) for all the ordinary absolutions he had given him: and finding, that he
took greater pleasure in the mother, than in ye daughter, he persuaded him to
marry her: showing that the marriage was most lawful in her, in whom he most
delighted: confirming yt the matrimony he dwelt in, and all that came of it
was accursed. And therefore he took in hand, to free him from this care:
which he executed in the absence of the gentleman, though his consent were
with him. So, entering on a night into the Castle according to his custom
(having coltes of his own coat with him) went straight to the gentlewomans
chamber, whose throat he cut in her bed, and after murdered her two little
infants that lay by her: the one of them, calling him by his name, held up his
hands, and leapt into his arms for mercy, as he confessed at his execution.
Not satisfied with this (with the help of his companions) he massacred all
that he found in the house: and to cover the fault, meaning to burn them, he
brought their bodies together into one chamber, and set fire on the whole
Castle. But God, whose providence would not suffer the fire to consume neither
the one nor the other, they were pitifully found, the murderers taken, and the
fault confessed, which the gentleman hearing, fled to Sauoye, and passing for
Gene, was known upon the way, followed to Lausanne, and there executed. Oh
wretched condition more than damnable, devised without malice, performed
without mercy, and by a Jesuit of the Popes professors.

A foul of the same feather, in Vienna in Austrie meeting upon the way a poor
young maid of the age of nine or ten Apo. Ste Fol. 306.
years, whose beauty, and body (though in bare terms) was not to be
mistiked: he taken in a sudden lust to her, persuaded the young thing that he
would better her state, if she would be ruled by him. The Girl seeing him to
seem a holy Father, and like a master in Israel, supposed she had found good
fortune, believed his persuasion, and went to his Cloister with him, where she
was for a time closed in his Cabinet, and in the end, desiring to enjoy a more
liberty, she was rounded, crowned, and vested in Saint Jesus habit, and so
continewed many years, in sort as a Nouice. In Anno. 1569. a gentleman's son
of the City, accustomed to come among them, happened to break a glass
Window, belonging to this holy Father: who laid hand upon him for it, had
him in, and hanged the poor child by the hoeles, with as many scourges, as he
and his darling could (in charity) bestow upon him. Which known to the
Father, desirous to be revenged of the harm done to his son (without any
threats) he invited them to supper: who being arrived, and entertained into
sundry places of the house (attending in hope, the time of their good cheer)
they were at last brought into a great chamber where certain gallants were
ready to receive them of purpose to perform the pleasure of their master: who
after they had used a long admonition, touching the injury done to him and his
Child, they did read our Jesuit such a whipping Chapter from the head to the
heels, and basted him so on both sides for burning, as they took his stomach
clean from his supper. And when they went about (with the same lesson) to
teach his Nouice to spell and to put together: our old leachor on both his
knees entreated for him, offering to suffer as much more (though it were
painful to him) so they would spare him. Notwithstanding, seeing he was a
partner at the childs punishmente, they stripped him, whereby the mysterye of
his lewd life was discovered: which being delivered to justice, he boldlye,
and shameleslye aunsweared, it is written that it is not good for a man to be
alone, and therefore he had chosen her for his companyon.

By this is showed not alone the order of their lives being a principle of
their profession, and a general rule to all of their Court: but also it
manyfesteth their shameless doyngs, adding sin to sin (by blasphemy)
applying the Scripture to their beastly and more than abominable behavior.

A Widow of great wealth in Padua, having one Apo. Ste. Fo. 308.
of this cloth and color to her co^fessor, in whose holiness she reposed the
whole hap of her age, as well for the good opinion she had in him (for these
fellows have the fetch according to the suttlety of the first Serpente to
creep into the consciences of women) as for the devotion she bare to his
order. This gentlewoman on a time, bemoned her self unto him, showing how her
greatest c^re was, for ye marriage of her daughter, her only child. He who had
for all payme^ts his answer ready coined said: surely Mistress I think your
motion happens very well: for God who forseeth the petitions of the just,
even as he sent his Angel Raphael to Tobias, so has he brought me a
special Husband for your daughter, and such a one as your own heart would
wish or desire. For I assure you, I have now in my hands, the most honest
young gentleman of all Italy: who has heretofore seen your daughter, loves
her person, and greatly commends her behavior: so, as this day (being in
the best part of my prayers) this gentleman moved by the holy Ghost (as he
told me) came to crave my counsel, and declared the good affection he has to
marry with her. And I that know his house, his friends, and himself, to be
of a fair living, promised to speak unto you of it. This Jesuit, or this
Satan in the shape of a man, to avoid suspicion, the cunninger to carry at
before him, and with the more finenesse to abuse this poor widow: did affirm
his worthiness every way, if one inconvenience, were not the let to so good
a motion, and that none in the City did know of it but himself. Which was,
where he would have succored his friend, that another sought to murder, he
drew his Rapier, meaning only to parie them, and it happened his friend to
kill his adversary: wherefore he (although he struck never a stroke) is fled
from his Country, because he assisted the manslayer. And by the Council of his
friends, he is retired to this City, in ye habit of a scholar, where he
means to continewe unknown, until his kindered and friends have taken order
in the matter for his liberty, which he ^op^th will be very shortelye: So
that for this reason, if you like of the party upon my faithful persuasion,
the marriage must be made in as secret sort as may ^e: and withal, you
must be content in the day, to suffer him to repair to the common Lectures,
the more to cover the suspicion: And every night to the comfort of you and your
daughter, he shall accompanye you to your best pleasure. The good gentlewoman,
who was easily bewitched to believe these counterfaite Gods, thought her
daughter better provided for, than she could otherwise by any mean deuis^: ^
therefore took so great pleasure to hear the devise (according to ye p^ouerb:
It is easy to deceive the simple and true meaner) as upon those conditions,
this Minion was brought, and they fianced the same day: and after midnight (for
the more have to receive of the old woman five hundred ducats in lieu of her
daughters dower, which like false harlots they parted without any broker) he
said Mass and married them: after which marriage, they lived a certain time
together with equal contentment, to the great comfort of her mother, who
highly thanked God and her confessor, for the good hap of her daughter. But
in the end, a Dominus vobiscum (pronounced by this For all other were in
respect but beggars to these Jesuits.
honest young Gentleman, who was both a Jew, a Jesuit, and a Priest) so
discovered the matter, as their knauerie began to appear in their kind: for
this new married wife following the devotion she bare to this proud
profession, waiting on her mother to hear Mass at their Covent, even as this
companion turned to say Dominus vobiscum, ye poor young woman, stood more
astonished than a founder of Bells. And after she had a little recovered the
extacie that this sudden sight brought her into: she showed her mother
plainly that he which said Mass was her husband, or at the least one that
resembled him much. The old woman making very dangerous to hear it, would
not be persuaded that any such mockery could be committed by those that were
so holy, accounting it the greatest sin that might be, to have so harmefull
a thought of them: and therefore sought to remove that damnable opinion from
her daughter. But the Ite missa est, manifested the whole mischief, for then
it did not alone confirm ye daughters fear, but it also brought a doubtful
imagination to her mother: notwithstanding she suspended her earnest belief,
until she might see more proof of it: and therefore she concluded, that at
night when he should come to lie with his wife, the mother should (as it were
in a jest) hold both his hands, whilst the daughter pulled of his coife,
which practiced and performed accordingly, they found his crown fair shaven,
that bewrayed the knauerie. Then there was no more question whether he were a
Priest, but they both bethought, how they might be revenged of so great an
injury, for she was robbed, her daughter spoiled, and both infamed, and all by
the lewd abuse of her confessor, for whom she presently sent, faining to have
some great secret to show him. And calling her friends unto her, they
apprehended them both, and delivered them to justice: who quitted them on easy
conditions, for Temporal Judges durst not lay violent hand upon so sacred a
profession, they had so bewitched the world, and so blinded the eyes even of
the greatest Princes, as they forced of no fault, for their superstitious and
proud tyranny was ever a bulwark to all their villainy, which they only
presumed on, by the authority of their Popish liberty, as this example does
manifest the same.

ACurate of Clauenie, in the Duchy of Guyen, did seek to Apo. Ste. Fol. 172.
subborne the daughter of an honest man of the same town, to his lewd just and
pleasure, whom he haunted in all places where she went, notwithstanding she
still flatly and constantly denied him, which bred the greater fire to his
beastly desire. And therefore one day the maid going to her Fathers Farm
(somewhat out of the town) this Minion masked in blew sarsnet, set al over with
little stars of gold, having a fine Lawne over his face, and his arms and
legs bare, but covered likewise with Lawne, in this atfire he appeared unto
her on the way, and (with a counterfeit voice) showed her, yt he was the virgin
Marie, declaring unto her, how sundry afflictions should fall on ye town, for
the Lutheran heresy yt was entered among the^ (against which this Priest was a
great Preacher) with sundry other purposes, touching ye same, and further willed
her to show it to ye town, that they might celebrate her feast with fasting
and prayer, telling her withal how she had refused ye friendship and love of a
holy person, who in the same place (not long before) made suit unto her, for yt
she denied him: and therefore if he sought any thing at her hands hereafter, yt
she should obey him, and there would great happiness follow her by it:
charging her that she should not discover this last part to any Creature.
The simple wench believed all for truth, and delivered it as a prophecy, to
forewarne them of that should happen to Clauenie: for the which cause (at the
first) the inhabitants feared much: and in the mean time this poor soul
yielded to his villainy, which was shortly after spyed, the practice
discovered, and he executed, as well worthy.

In a village near unto Coignacke called Shernes, the person Apo. Ste. Fol.
318.
there abused his own Sister so long, as in the end he gat her with child:
which the Curate so covered, as she (being holden very holy, through her deep
hypocrisy) was taken to be as chaste a virgin as might be: and therefore when
this fault was spied, he shamed not to publishe, that it proceeded of the Holy
Ghost, and that she was a second virgin Marie: the brute whereof coming to the
hearing of Earl Charles of Angoleme, he sent of purpose to see how it was, for
that he suspected some abuse in it: in whose presence the supposed virgin (of
ye age of. 13. years) being solemnly charged by her brother upon the damnation
of her soul, to deliver them the truth (repeating the second time the same
admiration) she answered, I take this holy Sacrament to my damnation before you
all here present, that never any man did carnally know me, or in that sort of
sin touch me, no more than you my brother have done: they hearing so vehement
a vow, returned and confirmed the shameless report that was before: but the
Earl being wise, and noting the order of her oath nearer than they did, found
the fire by the smoke, and therefore sent again, commanding they should be
severally committed, and severally examined, whereby the truth was confessed,
and they both altered into ashes and dedicated to Vulcan. An example of a
horrible incest joined with blasphemy, which witnesses among ye rest of these
histories, the continent and chaste lives of those that were vowed from
Matrimony, approving the godly fury of the Cardinal of Tournon, who hearing
that a Bishop was secretly married, said, I marvel how these villain
Lutherans have given themselves to all the devils to marry, seeing they have
liberty otherwise at liking, to satisfy their lust at their own pleasure,
which he generally spoke of all those that lived then of their holy mother
Church. For what was it, those wretches would not attempt, to perform (after
their insaciat gluttony) their beastlike and tompwood lechery, having this
privilege, Si non cast, tamen caute.

A Friar in Paris, having part of his lewd life so known Apo. Ste. Fol. 509.
as some common speeches went of it, shamed not (in his sermon) to say, my
Mistrisses of S. Martins I am so great a mote in your eye, that you prattle of
me in every place, and for a matter that is less than nothing? Ah good Lady,
is it so strange a case, for a holy Friar, to get his Hostis daughter with
child? I am glad it was no worse, for I perceive you would have made it a more
wonder, if she had gotten me with child. Oh shameless sort of Sodomits, that
would so abhominably abuse the place prepared to preach ye word of God in: but
how could you deliver better matter from you, when there was no better
substance in you.

As is further manifested by the example of a Priest of Apo. Ste. Fol. 545.
Orleance, who having his concubine in a jealousy, called her to a Tavern,
where after he had showed her the countenance of continual friendship, in his
good cheer: he did lead her into a privy Chamber, where laying her upon a
bed, with a razer (that he brought for so wicked a purpose) he cut her throat,
for the which murder he was only condemned to perpetual prison.

A searcher of Venice, seeing two Friars go a board a ship Fol. 254.
with a fardell or small pack, he supposing it had bin some forbidden
Marcha^dize or else some goods uncustomed (which ought by their law to be
forfeited) he would needs see, what it was they carried. But the Friars
(contending with him) would not suffer him by no means to open it, until by
force he was feign to undo it himself, wherein he found the heads of two men
newly cut off, which was suddenly shut up, after they had enchaunted a word
or two into the searchers ears, notwithstanding the matter being after known
it, made a question whether those wares were customable or no. Such was the
secret Merchandise of these holy fathers, and one of the chiefest commodities
they gathered their treasure by. And further, to prove their tyrannous minds,
ye best mean they had to hold al ye world in fear of the^) and at whose hands
there was no redress, except it were sought at the Sea of Rome) I will tell you
of an unthankful and traiterous Prelate, exceeding any spoken of before.

The Duke of Limburge deceassing without heirs, there Fo. 346.
grew great wars between the Duke of Brabant and the Count of Gelderland,
which of them should enjoy the same, both claiming to be next in succession to
it. In ye end, fortune gave the Duke of Brabant the victory, who took the
Bishop of Collen prisoner, (for that he had aided the Count against him) and
delivered him in custody to the Earl of Mount in Henault, where he was kept
captive seven years, until he had yielded to all such conditions as the
Duke demanded of him. After the Bishop was delivered, he requested the Count
to accompany him to Tuits, a village joining to the Rhene, over against
Collen, the which he granted to willingly. But as they passed the Bridge over
the Rhene, the Count mistrusting no falshoode in his holiness, was taken by a
certain ambush of horssemen, that the Bishop had appointed there for that
purpose. And to acquit the Counties courtesy, and good entertainment (which
was every way as honorable as might be) he caused a Cage of iron to be made,
and set it in the Sun: And after, anointing the pore Prince over with honey,
forced him naked to enter into it, where he long time endured the greatest
languor and torment in the world, with swarms of flies that daily fed on him,
and in this sort, with pain and famine ended his miserable life. This was the
Bishops cruelty (a vowed Prelate to the Pope) joined with treason: excelling
the tyranny of Bucris and Phalaris. Apo. Ste. Fo. 347.


An other Bishop of Collen named Henry, having Count Frederike his captive,
caused him to be broken upon a wheel, his legs, his thighs, his arms, his
back, and his neck, Apo. Ste. Fo. 347.
and after laid him out to be a pray to Ravens.

There were two Canons in Collen, that under the color of great friendship,
invited a Lord of the same City Fo. 436.
to dinner (named Harman Grin) whom notwithstanding they mortally hated. And
seeming in courtesy to show him a lion (which they norished for the honor of
their Bishop,) they trayterouslye trained him into the Cage, where the beast
was, to be devoured: But the gentleman seeing himself brought into such
danger, took courage unto him: And wrapping his cloak about his left arm,
thruste it into the Lions throat, and with his right hand drew out his dagger,
and killed him: whereby he saved himself, and the treason discovered.

In the time of the Emperor Otton the great, the Bishop of Magence seeing the
famine that fell in the Country, Fo. 347.
had such a compassion on the pore, as he assembled a great number of them into
a Barn, (the poor souls hoping to have had some relief at the hands of his
holiness in that time of penury) which he caused to be set on fire, and
burned them al, affyrming, that they were but as Rattes and Mice in a common
wealth, that devoured the grain, and served to no purpose. A charitable
tyranny, proceeding from a godly care of a Popish devotion, without any
cause or occasion of revenge, for the miserable creatures deserved no harm of
him.

I had almost forgotten a certain Jesuit in Viena in Apo. Ste. Fo. 317.
Austrie, who made it no conscience to abuse a merchantes wife (whom he had
under confession) before all the Saints of either kind, not simply in the
Church, but behind the high altar, and on good friday, who being taken with
the manner (although the fault deserved as vile a death as might be devised)
yet he was only enjoined for penance, to forbear the saying of Mass three
months: which their Legate (coming from Rome) thought it so sharp a
punishment, as he presently absolved him of it. Whose ordinary Masses were
after found of as good savor, taste, and digestion (to those that willingly
devoured the^) as if they had bin said of the most maydenliest Priest in the
world. So as, if one would search the evils of all sorts, committed by these
ravening rabble that fed on the Church, he should find them innumerable.
But, as touching their punishments, it was seldom, or for the most part so
light, that it seemed (indeed) but a mockery. Where, on the other side, if
any were only suspected to covet the true way to their salvation, fire and
sword was laid upon them, with all the rigor and violence that might be.

Was it not a pitiful condition, that the pore members of Christ dwelled in,
when they were as feign (and with as much fear) to hide themselves in caves,
corners, and other desolate places, for reading of the Bible and ye new
Testament: as those that carried counterfaite money, or committed a worser
crime. For, whosoever was taken with Gods Book (the only Pilote to the Port
of our redemption) either in his hand, or in his house, he was sure to
suffer death without al favor (specially) if the holy Ghost confirmed him in
it. But such was the substance of his blessed word, and the heavenly fruits of
the same: as the more they persecuted, the more zealous professors, and
faithful willing Martyrs increased by it. For, as our Savior Christ says,
they held the keys of knowledge from us, neither entering themselves, nor
would suffer others to enter by them: By which their willing and wilful
blindness, both the one and the other fell into the bottomless Pit of
everlasting darkness: yet in their Pulpittes (to feed the simplicity of the
time) they would give us part of the Text, enlarged by their own gloses. And
therefore to approve their learning to their lines, and their lives to the
learning of those forefathers, upon whose doctrine the Papists depend,
although I have already said sufficient, to terrify the stowtest, to reclaim
the faintest, and to win the weakest in conscience, if Gods grace have not
utterly abandoned them: yet I will Menot. Maleard.
bring in place for their better credit, Oliver Maleard a Frenchman, and
Mychell Menot an Italian, two of the most famous, renowned, and learned
preachers in their time. Whose Paraphrase (or rather sporting toys) upon
sundry textes of the Scripture, word for word (first in Latin, and
English mingled, as my Author in Latin and French has pelmelled) even as I
have read it, so I simply here deliver it.

As for example, we read in the new Testament how Marie Magdalene acknowledged
her sin, washed Christ's feet with tears, and dried them with her hair, etc.
which they have by their glosing discourse, framed into a monstrous Matthew the
27. Chap.
form, as follows.

Quoad primum Magdalena, erat domina terrena, de castro Magdalen, tam sapiens
quod erat mirum audire loqui de sapientiaeius Ser. Me. Fol. 160.
and prudentia: O ergo Magdalena, quo modo venistis ad tantum inconueniens,
quod vocemini magna peccatrix? Et non sine causa: quod fuistis male consiliata.
Data est tribus consiliarijs, qui eum posuerunt in tali statu: Scilicet primus,
corporalis elegantia: secundus temporalis substancia: tertius fuit libertas
nimia. Primum ergo, quid fuit causa huius mulieris perdicionis? Fuit elegantia
corporalis. Videbatur pulchra, iuuenis, alta. Credo quod non erat nisi 15. aut
16. annorum quando incepit sic viuere, and 30. quando redijt ad bonitate^ Dei.
Quando pater fuit mortuus, plena erat sua voluntate. Martha soror no^ audebat
dicere ei verbum, and videbatur ei quod faciebat magnum honorem illis qui
veniebant ad illam. Quicquid faciebat erat viuere at her own pleasure, and to
make banquets, and good cheer Hodie inuitare, etc. And within a little while
after this poor fool abandoned erat in castro suo: The rumor ran through all
Jury, and the country of Galelie, Omnino bibendo and comedendo, loquebatur de
eo, and de eius vita. Martha soror timens Deum and amans honorem of her house,
ashamed of the shame of her sister, videns quod omnes loquebantur of her
sister, and of her miracles, venit ad eam dicens, O soror si pater adhuc viuer
et qui tantum vos amabat, and audiret ista quae per orbem agitantur de vobis,
truly he would thruste death into your teethe. Facitis magnum dedecus
progenij nostrae. And wherefore? quid vis dicere? Heu soror, non opus est vltra
procedere, neque amplius manifestare. Scitis been quid volo dicere, and vbi
iacet punctus. Why do you trouble your self good Gentlewoman? In all the great
devils name, God be praised, nonne estis magistra mea. Quis dedit mihi this
valiant dame to control my life. Vadatis precor ad domum vestram: scio quid
habeo agerei ta been sicut vna alia. Habeo sensum and intellectum to know how
to govern my self. This is a goodly matter, that I should care for none but
my self. Martha rogabat eam vt iret ad sermonem, and consuleret aliquam
hominem bonae vitae. Magdalena dixit Ianitori, non dimittas mihi intrare hoc
castrum, this mad sister of mine, that brings nothing hither, but brawling,
chiding, and unquietness, vbi non consueuit nisi cantus gaudij. And after he
makes a great narration of the means that Martha made to have her come to
the Sermon of our Lord: not telling her what, or who he was, but using
alluring speeches, said he was a fair young man, and of a goodly personage: O
soror essetis valde foelix, si possetis videre vnum hominem qui praedicat in
Jerusalem. Est pulchrior omnibus quos vnquam vidistis, tam gratiosus, tam
honestus, he has so fair a countenance, so good a grace, and so goodly of
body, you never saw his like. Credo firmiter quodsi videretis eum, essetis
amorosa de eo, est in flore iuue^tutis suae. And a little after, illa coepit
pulchra indumenta sua, aqua^ rosacea^ prolauando faciem suam: coepit speculum.
Videbatur quod esset vnus pulcher Angelus. Nullus eam aspexisset, qui non
fuisset amorosus de ea. Ipsa ante se misit mangones portantes many Cushions of
Crimoson velvet, vt disponerent sibi locum. Martha videbat haec omnia, fingens
nihil videre: and sequebatur eam sicut si fuisset parua ancilla. Christus iam
erat in media praedicatione, vel forte in secunda part. After he saw how
they did honor and reverence to Magdalena, every one wondering to see her
come to a Sermon, which when Christ perceived, he began to preach, that
pomp, pride, and bravery, was a most detestable matter. Tunc (said he) ipse
coepit detestare vitia, bragas, pompas, vanitates, and specialiter peccatum
luxuriae: and contra has mulieres, etc. After this he recites how Magdalen was
touched to the quick with that she heard in this Sermon, and then thought on
nothing so much as on Repentance: yet was in danger to be turned by her
companions and customers, and to be brought to her first course of life.
venerunt (said he) galandi amorosi and rustici, these Roysters qui dixerunt,
Surgatis, surgatis: facitis nunc the hipocrite: vadamus ad domum. Quae dixit, O
amici mei, rogo dimittatis me, non audistis quid dixit ille bonus praedicator
de poenis inferni, vobis and mihi preparatas nisi aliud faciamus? And a little
after habebat in suo armariolo aquam of sweet smells, quae vendebatur pondere
auri. Coepit querere de loco in locum, de platea in plateam, de domo in domum.
Quis hodie dabit prandium praedicatori? Dictum est ei quod in domo Simonis. And
then he sets forth the Oration she made before she kissed Christ's feet,
and in the washing of the^ with her tears, and in the end, how she lay under
the table like a dog: and that our Lord said: O Mary, I pray thee rise: And
that she answered, I will never remove from this place, until thou haste given
me remission for all my sins, and your holy blessing. And then he said, my
love, rise, thy sins are forgyuen thee, thy faith has saved thee. And in
the end, he concluded how Martha presented Magdalena to the Virgin Mary:
before whom she fell on her knees, and said, good Madam pardon me if it
please you, that I may speak to you, I have bin of an evil life, and a great
sinner, but now by the grace of God I will do no more so. Your son has this
day forgiven me: Lord, how happy are you to have such a son. Here you may see
how this gentle preacher has disciphered this history, making of the
Scriptures a shippemans hose, or a tale of Robin Hood.

But now let us look into the substance of Maleard, who has with no less
gravity and wisdom paraphrased upon the history of the forlorn son in the
15. chapter of S. Luke than our Menot has done before: which text he has
enriched with all sorts of circumstances forged of pleasure, and couched with
terms, rather for laughter, tha^ for educatio^, as follows.

Pater quidam habebat duos filios, quorum junior se ostendit Ser. Me. Fol. 119.
magis fatuum, quia inconstans fuit. This was a child of his own pleasure,
light headed, a minion, and a roysting gallant. Ipse erat vnus puer, plenus suo
velle, versatilis etc. qui quando venit ad cognoscendum seipsum, sua^
fortitudinem, suam iuuentutem, suam pulchritudinem, and quod sanguis ascendit
frontem, his strength, his youth, his beauty, and that the blood began to
rise in his forehead, venit ad patrem resolutus sicut Papa, and dixit ei, Pater
da mihi, etc. Pater sumus tantum duo filij: ego non sumbastardus: and sic,
quando placeret deo, to do so much for your children, to take you out of
this world, non exhaeredaretis me, sed haberem partem meam sicut frater meus.
Scio consuetudines and leges patriae, quodte viuente nullum ius habeo in bonis
vestris: tamen sum filius vester, and me amatis rogo detis, etc. When this
foolish child, and evil counseled habuit suam partem de haereditate, non
erat quaestio de portando eam secum, ideo statim he sent for a Broker, prised
it, and sold it, and ponit the sale in sua bursa. Quando vidit tot pecias
argenti simul, valde gauisus est, and dixit ad se, ho, non manebitis sic
semper, Incipit se respicere. Et quomodo? vos estis de tam bono domo, and est
aparelled like a pore knave? Super hoc habebitur prouisio. Mittit ad querendum
Drapers, Embrotherers, Mercers, and bravely apparelled himself from the head
to the foot. Quando vidit, emit sibi pulchras caligas of Scarlet, fair drawn
forth with Satin, a fine shirte gallauntlye gathered at the collar, and a
minion dublet of Velvet with his Ierkin of Florence silk, and his hair
painted. Et quando sensit this Damask to rattle about his shoulders, and to
flee upon his back, vt sensit hunc damascum vola^tem supra dorsum, haec secum
dixit, Oportetne mihi aliquid? non etc. Do I lack any thing? no, thou haste
al thy feathers. And after he shows how he said he must go see the
world, and that those, who never were out of the arms of their mothers, were
no better than dolts and patches. And to be brief, he that has not
frequented strange countries, nihil vidit. My father has laid the raines of
my bridle on my neck, pater meus laxauit habenam supra collum. And then he
recites how as he traveled by the way, he made banquets and good cheer to
every man, and that he kept a round Table, having every day in his Innes,
players, Iuglers, and Tomblers. And in the end, Postquam nihil amplius erat
frica^du^, when there was no more to spend: mittitur pulchra vestis domini
braga^tis, caligae, bombicinium: quisquesecum ferebat pecia^ of our young
Masters pride, of hose and dublets every one carried away his part: ita quod
in breui tempore, our gallant was made like a gatherer of Aples, and
apparelled as a burner of houses, or a chimney sweeper: For he was left as
naked as my nail, and as nigh worn to the skin as a worm, having hardely a
shyrte to cover his poor carcass with, which was as bright as a gammon of
Bacon, or like a Lincke new put out, he had so wisely governed and used his
prosperity by his pride, pomp, and glory. And further, to prove his wit, as
one that was never without matter to please his audience: he courseth and
discourses a gallant gloss on the evangelist of S. Matthew Chap. 14.
where the Apostle says he fed 5000. persons, etc. the same Maliard
paraphrasing upon it, affirms, that where ye text does testify of 5000. men
besides women and children: it must needs follow, that the number was much
greater. And first he compares it to the dinner of a Lymosin, who commonly do
eat much, but drink little. Then he makes a question, where Christ learned to
prepare his dinner: adding, that he supposed he had not frequented the
Banquettes of Paris, where they do not forget to drink with their meat. And
after he argues whether it were not in Lent, because every one did eat as
much fish as he would: and where Christ did show his first miracle in a
marriage to provide wine and no bread, so now he prepared bread and no wine:
wherein he commends the wisdom and good husbandry of Christ, for that he
kept a round table for all comers, it is not mentioned that the Virgin Marie
was there, for I believe (said he) if she had bin present, she would have
remembered him as she did at the marriage, saying, they have no wine, and seeing
they feed with so good a stomach, it is pity they lack drink to moysten
their meat with: and truly it is not for your reputation, credit, nor honor,
to call such a company together and give them no wine: but (said he) if any
would make question why our Savior provided not drink, as well as meat, I
would be his Attorney, and answer: Propter aquarum aproximationem, miraculi
maiorem declarationem, Sacramenti Eucharistiae praefiguratio: that is, For that
the water being at hand, he would the better declare the miracle, prefiguring
the Sacrament of the Eucharist: so it is written, they were by the Sea of
Galile, and sat upon fair and sweet grass: so as when they had eaten their
fill, they might go drink as much as they list. I could have enlarged this
place if I had followed ye gross course of Maliard, but this is more than
sufficient, to show how they used both abrupfly and absurdlye to jest with the
sacred Scriptures, profaning them at their doltishe pleasures. And further
Barrelet. Fol. 367.
Barrelet affirmed, that rather than Christ should not have bin crucified,
Marie his mother would have crucified him with her own hands, for (said he)
there was no less charity in her, than there was in Abraham, who was ready
and prepared to kill his only son. And because it may seem incredible that
any would be so lewd to deliver in their Sermons so blasphemous speeches, I
will set it down word for word as he himself did both preach it and write
it. Quia temporepassionis, quanuis suae dolores essent intensi, videndo Sermon.
fol. 115. Colos. 2.
filium afligi, tamen volebat filium suum mori prohumanae generationis salute
Et vt dicit Archiepiscopus, Si alius modus non fuisset ipsamet filium proprium
occidisset. Quia non minor erat charita^ M^^^t affirms the same fol. 169.
Colos. 3. Fo. 367.
sua, quam Abrahae qui filium suum erat paratus occidere.

And the same Preacher shows how the Apostles came to Marie, saying, ho, thy
son did promise to send the holy Ghost among us, and now it is ten days
since he ascended, and we hear nothing of him. To whom she answered, doubt not
but this day he will send him, etc. And these are his own words, Vnde isto
maneiad Maria veniunt, dicentes, Heu filius tuus nobis promisit mittere
spiritum Sanctum, hodie sunt december dies quod ascendit, and adhuc spiritum
Sanctum non misit. Et virgo, non dubitetis quod hodie omnino mi^tet, nec ante
mittere debuit. Et ration, Quando Deus traxit populum de captiuitate Aegipti,
quinquagesimo die descendit informa ignis in monte Sin, dando legem, fuit
figura quod quinquagesimo die resurrectionis suae, nos liberaret and
viuificaret. Vnde ponamus nos in oratione. Petrus cum alijs se ad vnam partem
posuit: Lazarus cum. 72. ad aliam, and Magdalena cum alijs mulieribus ad aliam,
and virgo Maria in medio. In caelesti palatio facta est dissentio inter Patrem
and spiritum Sanctum. Sermon. Bar. Fo. 178. Colos. 1. Apo. Ste. Fol. 368.
O Pater (inquit Filius) promisi Apostolis m^is paracletu^ and consolatorem,
tempus aduenit vt promissionem attenda^. Cui Pater, sum contentus, indica
spiritui Sancto. Cui spiritus Sanctus, Dic mihi quomodote tractauere. Cui
filius vide me per charitem, ostendit ei lat us and manus and p^des perforatos.
Heu mihi. Sed vadam in alia^ effigiem, quod non and^ bunt me tangere. Qui
discendit cum magno strepitu. Factus est de c^lo sonus tanquam aduenientis, etc.

I must desire the patient reader, to hear a little further of this Preachers
blasphemy, more incredible than ye rest, wherein he does profane the
principallest mystery of our Christian religion. And is, Quamuis ab aeterno
Deus praedestinauerit, Sermon. Bar. Fo. 229. Colos. 4.
etc. Although (says he) that God of his eternal power, did at ye first
predestinate ye Incarnation of his Son, and the salvation of mankind, yet he
would (notwithstanding) that ye same should be sought at his hands, by the
prayers of us, and of other the holy Patriarchs, so as the holy fathers with
tears desired ye day, which is manifestly showed us in the scriptures, as by
Adam, Eno, Enoch, Mathusalem, Lamech, and Noe (who lived every one of them so
long time) and yet could^ not obtain that they so much looked for, and
therefore desiring to have an absolute resolution, they sent their Ambassadors,
as first Esai, who says in his. 16. Chapter Lord send down the Lamb yt
shall govern the world, (for he writes Agnum dominatorem terrae) and in his.
45. Chap. you heavens send down your deaw upon us, etc. And the. 4. Chapter, O
that thou would break the heavens and come down. And after the Prophets
they sent Moses, Exodus 4. Chap. Obsecro Domine mittere quem missurus es. I
pray thee (O Lord) send him who^ thou will send, which is as much to say
(according to his gloss) thou have sent me before, but this is but for a
particular deliverance, send now I pray thee for a general deliverance. Then
the kings sent David, who spoke thus, Lord show unto us thy mercy, and grant
us thy salvation. Aaron came after all these and was sent by the Priests, who
said, O Lord bow down the heavens and descend among us. And last of all came
the Church, which said, lift up thy puisance and might, and come (O Lord) lift
up thy self. And when these Patriarchs could not obtain Apo. Ste. Fol. 369.
their requests, they sent women to be petitioners for them. The first was
Madam Eve, who used these speeches: Thou have condemned us for our sin, but
thou (O Lord) have no respect there unto, deliver me out of this dark and
obscure prison: to whom God answered, Eve thou have sinned, and therefore not
worthy of my Son. The second was Madam Sara, who said, O Lord help us: to
whom God answered, thou art not worthy, for thou wast hard of belief,
touching thy Son Isaak. The third was Madam Rebecca: to whom God said, thou
she wedst thy self partial between Jacob and Esau. The fourth was Madam
Judith: to whom God answered, thou wast a murderer. The fifth Madam Hester:
to whom he said thou did (by thy glory) love vanity too much, when thou
so sumptiously apparelledst thy self to please Assuerus.

In the end, they sent a waiting maid of ye age of fourteen Years, whose
countenance was lowly and very shamefast, who upon her knees said, let my
well-beloved come into his garden, and eat of the fruit of the Orchard: The
garden, was the womb of the Virgin. The son hearing these words, said to
his Father, Father I have loved this Virgin from my youth, and have hitherto
searched the means to have her for my Spouse. At the which instant, God called
Gabriell, and said, go thy ways with speed to Nazareth to Marie, and carry
her this present and these letters from me: and tell her that I have chosen her
for my Spouse. And the Son said, commend me to her, and tell her from me,
that I have chosen her for my mother, and that I will take flesh of her
entrails, and I will be her son, and deliver her these letters. After these
two the holy Ghost spoke: I will dwell in her, and she shall be my temple:
and give her these letters from me. Gabriell being come to her, said: Aue
gratia plena, etc. She hearing the Ser. Bar. Apo. Ste Fo. 370.
Angel, was greatly troubled, and having three damsels in her company,
Prudence, Virginity, and Humility, she adressed her first to Prudence to have
her council: saying, my sweet companion, show me your opinion, what I were
best to do: Prudence answered, Marie I consider what is written in the. 29.
Chap. of Eccle. that light believing argues an unconstant and w^^^ering heart.
Marie thinking in her self what this salut^^^n should mean, remembered the.
32. Chap of Eccle. Audi tacens, and pro reuerentia accedit tibi bono gratia,
Hearken in silence, and for thy reverence great good grace shall come unto
thee. The Angel seeing her so troubled, said unto her, Marie fear not, but
show me the cause of your unquiet, and I will satisfy you. Marie asked
counsel of her second damsel, Virginity, who willed her to know of the
Angel, the mean how this child should be conceived, for if he say, it
must be by the seed of man, beat him out of the doors with a cudgel, o
Iunenculae quando vestri amatores nominant impudica, etc. How may this be,
seeing I never knew man? The Angel answered, the holy Ghost shall come upon
thee, etc. And after he affyrmeth there grew an argument or disputation
between the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, who should perform this
redemption of mankind: and in the end, it was concluded, that it should be
the Son, and the reason why, etc.

If I may in pardon pray the gentle Reader to have so much patience to
peruse this one part more of their blasphemy: I will entreat him to read this
discourse of the same Preacher, for that it shall appear, how much it is like
to himself, and to all those, that dwell in the obedience of the Church of
Rome: whereby he shall manifestly perceive, how one error (or rather wylfull
blasphemy) draws on an other. Where he says, Altercatio facta est Ser.
Ber. Fol. 371.
quis debebatire ad matrem nuntiare hanc resurrectione. Adam dixit mihi
incumbit, etc. The effect and circumstance whereof is thus. It was in
controversy and contention, who should go to show this resurrection to Mary:
Adam said, this charge belongs unto me: for, as I was the first cause of
evil, so now I would be a messenger to the contrary: to whom Christ
answered, no, you shall not go, for it may be you will stay by the way to eat
Aples. Abell said it belonged to him, no answered Christ, for thou may by
chance meet with Caine, who will kill thee. Noe likewise presented himself to
the service, saying that that honor was due to him: to whom Christ answered,
thou shall not go, because thou love to drink over much. John Baptist
requested the credit of that message: No truly said Christ, thy apparel is
too base, for thy robe is only of skins, and Herod may hap to know thee
again. The Thief desired to have that office: Christ refused him, saying,
thy legs he broken. So, in the end, there was sent an Aungel, who did sing:
Regina coelt laetare, alleluia, resurrexit sicut dixit: alleluya. And
immediatelye Christ came with all his Saints to the Virgin Mary, etc.

There are many more blasphemous matters that were published and preached by
these great Doctors: whose damnable errors (like unto Mahomets Alcaron among
the Turks) had that credit then in the world, as it was death to reprove them
or control them. And as these Sorbonists by their Romish authority, would scan
the Scriptures to their own lyking, Metamorphosing ye texts into what sense or
form best pleased them, holding the world in that ignorance, as they believed
all they said to be the only true and undoubted word of God: even so the
common sort, chosing ye Pulpit as a place more to sport in, than to profit the
people, would fill up time with all the vanities that might be.

As a Preacher in the town of Iper in Flaunders (named Bonauenture) shamed not
to say in his Sermon, that after Apo. Ste Fol. 441.
Christ grew to some strength, Joseph began to teach him his occupation. And
one day among others, he set him to, saw a piece of Timber, but Christ not
regarding the mark he should have sawed it by, he cut it too short: whereat
Joseph was very angry and would have beaten him, if he had not hastily taken up
the one end, and craving his Fathers help to hold the other, drew it out to
the same length that Joseph would have it, which the Monk justified to be
true: and that he had read it in the Euangeliste of Saint Anne.

Also a Friar (named Bardotte) preached at Bordeaux, the reason why God gave to
the good Thief Paradise, and ye Fol. 441.
cause that he went straight thither, without first passing to Purgatory, for
(said he) I have red in a certain Evangelist, that when Christ was carried to
Egypt (with his mother by Joseph) the same Thief would not suffer his
companions to rob Christ, nor any that was with him: And that he said to
Christ remember this good turn I have done thee: which was then promised him,
and performed, when they met both at one execution.

Whereby you may see, that these holy Fathers could never lack good matter,
having so many and so sundry sorts of Evangelists, as they listed themselves,
taking out of some, pleasant substance to make their Auditors merry: and out
of others; some miraculous matter to bewitch the^ with wonders: having withal,
a ready resolution for any objection should be made unto them. Yet such
whose simplicity delivered the best Jewels they found in the Treasure house of
their judgment, were more to be borne with in respect of their ignorance, than
the cunning knauerie of those, who not alone in words, but by shameless gesture
and deeds prepared themselves of purpose to abuse both place and company.

As a Friar in Bruxels laid a wager to make one half of his Auditors to
weep, the other to laugh: For the which Apo. Ste Fo. 480.
purpose, he put on a garment that was very short behind (and without any
breeches) he entered the Pulpit upon a good Friday: where in the midst of the
Church, he did so vehementlye set forth the passion of Christ, that the whole
assistaunce were in tears at the pitiful remembrance of it. Which our friar
seeing, ye more to aggrauate the matter, laid his hands a cross, and seeming
to show a great devotion, he bowed his head so low, and lifted his tail so
hye, as he discovered his backeside, provoking all that saw it to laughter: a
shameless part to win a drunken wager, and a great blasphemy to Gods
glory.

A Monk of Mantua, named Cossolaro: preaching the passion; Fol. 355.
and seeing his audience to shed abundance of tears, at his pitiful
exclamations upon the cruel death our savior endured (after he had a while
made a maygame of it) he said, hold your peace good people, weep no more,
peradventure it was not true: affirming the blasphemy of Pope Leo the tenth
mentioned of before.

One Roullie a Monkepreached at Orlians, who in his sermon Ap. Ste Fo. 485.
(among other bad matter) said to his audience, he would show them a Cuckold:
and suddenly stouping into the Pulpit, as though he would take up something,
seemed at his rising to cast a stone among them, whereat they all doucked down
with their heads. Oh fayde our devout Preacher. I thought there had bin but
one Cuckolde among you, where now I see you be all of one feather.

A Jesuit (by Baden in Germany) preaching in a meddow, after he had mightily
exclaimed against the Lutheranes, Fol. 485.
he said to his Auditors, that he greatly doubted, least some of them were
infected with that diuelishe doctrine, and therefore desired them, that as
many, both men and women, as were not touched with that hateful heresy, but
were indeed good Catholics, every one to take a blade of grass in their
mouths, for the love and honor they bare to their mother holy Church. Which
when they had with great devotion done, he said in a loud laughter: Since I was
first borne I never saw so many beasts pasture at one time together. When they
were in a chafe, or seemed to be impatient against their parishioners, they
would not let to remember the Devil unto them: As witnesses one Fouet
sometime Vicar of Villers in Tartenois, who said in his sermon: Seeing you
have no more Fol. 485.
regard to the amendment of your lives, the Devil take you all, and me after
you. And also an other preaching to his Parishioners, said: You make no
account of that I teach you, but rather grow daily worse and worse: Fol.
485.
yet notwithstanding, I have cure of your souls, which I would the Devil had
charge of, so I were rid of you.

And seeing I have touched the charge that Curates have of their Patishioners
souls: I should do double wrong to forget one Fo^tanus that sometimes was
Vicar of Peerrebuffiere, in high Lymosine. For this good fellow, the better to
exhort those of his eure to live well (among other grave sentences) said: When
the latter day of Judgment Fo. 485.
is come, God (I know) will have me to make account for you, and will call me,
Vicar of Peerrebuffiere, what haite thou done with thy sheep? but I will stand
mute, and answer nothing: And this I am sure he will say^ to me three
several times, and I not a word, yet in the end I know what I will answer,
Beasts thou did give them me, and beasts I restore them again: which simple
History has not so good a grace in my translation, as it has in the proper
Lymosin language, wherein it is more lively and more aptly couched than in
English, and therefore I will deliver it you in his own nature: Quan se vendro
louiour deu iugamen, Diou me demandero que you ly rendo compte de vou autre:
and me apelero, chapello de Peyrebuffiero, en qual eytat son ta olia? Et you ni
mot. Et eu ma pelaro enquero, and diro, chapelo de Peyrebuffiero, en qual eytat
sonta olio: Et you ni mot. Et eu ma pelero enquero eu mediro chapelode
Peyrebuffiero en qual eytat son ta olio? Iuque a tree viage. Et you
lyreypondray, Seigne, beytia la ma beylaaa, et beytia late rendi.

A Monk at Bloyse named Bastianus preaching on Alhallonday Fo. 486.
somewhat late, and in an obscure place, caused his Nouice (standing behind
him) to lift up the skul of a dead man (upon a staff) with a little light
in it, to the end to make his Auditors have the greater fear of death: which
put sundry women in such a fryght, as some there present (being with child)
fell in still travel, at the fearful sight of it.

A Friar named by Erasmus Robertus Liciensis having a lover allowed him, by the
dispensation of Saint Frauncis, Fo. 481.
who said unto him, that she liked his person, and all the rest well, saving
his habit. What habit would you have me wear (said he) to perform your
whole liking toward me? she answered, the apparel of a soldier: Then fail
not (quoth he) to be at my Sermon to morrow, and you shall see, how I will
please you. The next day, he entered into the Pulpit with a Rapier, and all
other furniture (belonging to a soldiour) under his long robe: where he began
his argument, to persuade al Princes to make wars upon the Sarasens, and Turks
and upon all others, that were enemies to ye Christian religion: affirming,
that it was great pity, ye no person would advance himself, to be a chief
of so honorable an enterprise. But if it rest (said he) only on ye, behold how
ready I am to shake off this garment of S. Francis, and to serve either for a
Captain, or for a simple soldier. and therewithal let fall his Friars habit
from of his shoulders, and remained preaching half an hour after, in the
brave apparel of a Captain. The cause being asked him (of certain Cardinals
his friends) why he used the new fashion of Preaching? he told them the
truth, as you have heard before, and it passed for a pleasant payment among
them.

This Liciensis preaching before the Pope, and all his Court of Cardinals,
considering their pomp and pride, and Fo. 482.
specially how they did honor the Pope: he said nothing in the Pulpit, but fie
Saint Peter and fie S. Paul, and when he had often recited those words, spitting
first on the one side, the^ on the other (as those commonly do that have some
grief at their hearts) he suddenly departed the Pulpit, leaving his Auditors
wonderfully astonyed: wherefore some thought, he had not bin well in his wits,
and other some imagined, he was not sound of Religion: so as they meant to
commit him. But one Cardinal among the rest, that knew partly his humor: caused
him to be called before the Pope, who commanded him to render some reason for
that he had done, and to show what he meant by his horrible blasphemy: he
answered, that (in truth) he was determined to entreat of another matter: but
considering (said he) that you possess all the pleasures of this world at
will, and that there is no state or magnificencie comparable to yours, and
waying again with what poverty, pain, and misery, the Apostles lived: I
thought (with my self) that either they were great fools, to choose so sharp
a life, to go to heaven, or that you were in the hye way to Hell: and as for
you that hold and have the keys of heaven in your hands, I cannot by any
opinion, but approve your wisdoms, commend your judgments, and think well of
you: marry as touching the Apostles, I will never esteem them of any value,
but disdain them for the greatest sots in the world, who might with the like
delicate course of life, come to heaven as you do, and yet would choose so
troublesome, so straight, and so paineful a way unto Fol. 579.
it, approving the sayings of a Paynter in Rome, who had made the Images of
Saint Peter and S. Paul, and a Cardinal coming into the working house, found
fault that he had painted them with too hie a color, for their faces (said
he) were too red, to whom the Painter answered: this redness co^mes of
shame, for they blushe to see the proud state and traynes that you have, in
respect of the low and poor countenance they carried.

A Monk beginning his sermon with these words By the Ap. Ste. Fol. 487.
blood, by the flesh, and by the death of God, we are all redeemed and saved,
did at (the first) wonderfully amaze his Auditors, for they supposed he had
used them for horrible oaths, considering the pause or stay he made between
every word. Which brings likewise to memory, the knauerie of certain
Chanons in Bloyse, who Christened two children of one John Gods (the one a son
the other a daughter) naming the son Death, and the daughter Virtue. This has
a kind of blasphemy in it, which is hateful to the hearer, and damnable to the
speaker, considering with what grace they deliver it. But a Jesuit (named
Hoghsteen) at Hornburge in Apo. Ste Fo. 487.
Germany, used his sermon in playner terms who made it no conscience to
swear by God, in despite of the Protestants: affirming that he would prove,
how they were worse than ye Devil. For (said. he) if I meet with ye Devil, and
bless my self but wc the sign of a Cross, he will straight fly from me: But
if I make the sign of a Cross to a Protestant, by God he will fly upon me, and
be ready to strangle me.

Another Jesuit being sore hurt (by chance) with the stroke of Fol. (...).
a horse: a friend of his, yt knew his blaspheming humor, said to him: this will
make you leave your swearing? who answered, By the body of God I will take heed
hereafter how I swear.

Not unlike to the Abbot who^ Barelet (the preacher before spoken off) friendly
admonished, saying: reverent father many Fo. 734.
have showed me, yt you can not talk without an oath or remembering the Devil:
who presentlye aunsweared, what is he in the Devils name that says so of me?
By the body of Christ it is not true.

A Monk of Bloise in a great rage wished the bloudye flixe to the Ass that
bare Christ into Jerusalem. Fo. 263.


And another Religious abused by his harlot, cursed the Woulfe, and one hearing
him, asked wherein the Woulfe Fo. 264.
had offended him, for that (said he) he devoured not Christ when he was a
lamve. Certain Jews being in Rome and hearing the Cardinals blaspheme Christ
so bitterly, said, they marvelled how they could believe, that he dyed for
the^, and use such outrageous speeches against him, even as though they would
spit in the face of God.

As what Devil could deliver more damnable speeches, than was uttered by a
Priest there (his Concubine putting Apo. Ste. Fo. 354.
him in a choler) Al dispetto di quel can che pendeua nella Croce: In dispight
of the dog that hanged on the cross. Oh horrible and hateful words, spoken by
the Devil in the shape of a Priest: and in that place, where commonly no better
fruit could grow. As Paul the third going on his solemn Procession, in
the honor of their Corpus Christi day, said in a rage (for that his company
martched very slow before him) if they did not make more have, he would deny
Christ and all that come of him.

And the same Paul being told (in open consistory) that he could not with a
safe conscience give to his kindred Parma Fo. 462.
and Placentia, aunsweared: if Paul the Apostle did bear such affection to
those of his nation (whom he called brethren) that he desired to be separated
from Christ, to the end they might be saved: why should not I with like
affection to my sons and coosins, offer my self to damnation, to the end to
make them great and honorable personages? Which kind of blasphemy is not
alone to be attributed to his holiness, but to the whole genealogy of those
triple crowned tyraunts, and to all others of their mark, if we may judge
their hearts by their acts.

The same Pope Paul (to ratify the ruin of his Soul) Fo. 582.
sent word to Charles the fifth (who was not only a favorer, but also a
protector of their superstition) that if he would not render Plesantia, he
would excommunicate him: To whom the Emperor answered, that he would
thunder; and lighten as loud, and as fast with his Cannons, as the Pope should
thunder and lighten with his terrible excommunications: and then (said he) let
those two try who shall carry the cause away.

By these threatening means they wonderfully terrified the world: for the very
breath of those Romish ^eastes, did so Eclipse the bright beams of the truth,
as it became as dim and dark as their dreams. And if any (at any time in
singleness of he art) did arm himself with Gods word to defend his honor
and glory, they would encounter them with cursing, excommunication, fire,
famine; and sword, and with all the torments of Phalaris, Bucyris, and Nero,
being still in the combat both judge and party* And truly they had great
reason, to keep this mighty stull, for they foared (as furious as they were)
that if this little light of ye Gospel should have any way in the world, it
would in small time after quench the gross fire of their greasy k^tchen.

And now seeing I have presumed so far on the eurious folly, or foolish
curiositio of bad Preachers, I will (in pardon) follow the train, and deliver
you as an any as I can remember.

One to whom God (by the witness of himself) had showed Fol. 487.
sundry special graces, delivered these speeches in his Sermon of his own
commendations, I can not tell how it happens (said he) that others of great
countenance and fame, are not so well learned, nor can not preach so profou^dly
or gallantly as I do: some say they lack the knowledge I have, and that they
are nothing so wise, which I believe to be true. For all you can witness, that
it is not yet a year, since I had neither judgment, nor understanding, and
now you see me preach to the pleasing of you all. In which Sermo^n he proved
his chastity, by ye witness of his sister. For (said be) it is reported that
I abuse my continence with some in my house, behold my sister (pointing to her
with his finger) who must needs know it, if it were so, for I pass every
night through her Chamber to mine: and therefore let her speak her woorst and
openly if this be not true. This same Doctor, that in one year was become Fo.
488.
so wise, received a certain scedule or little scroll, from the Bishop of
Paris and the Official, wherein was written the names of sundry yt he should
excommunicate, which (by chance) he let fall into a little hole of his Pulpit,
for remedy whereof he helped himself with this pestilent practice, as one ye
with the loss of the Paper, had likewise lost the remembrance of their names
whom he should excommunicate. And therefore said, I excommunicate all those,
that are within that hole: and yet in the end (remembryng himself better of
the matter) he excepted the Bishop, and the Official, who had subscribed to
the same. This gallant, who gloried not a little in his rotten Fol. 489.
lerning before it was ripe (being but of one years growth) approved in his
Sermon Purgatory, by the example of of his Male horse, confoundyng all those
that would say the contrary: although sundry others had (by great study
and travel) collected many authors, out of great and small Doctors, and even
from the most famous Saint Patricke himself, and by the witness of sundry
souls that returned from thence, and yet the world would scant believe it.
This holy, profounde, and learned Preacher, speaking of the Lutherans, that
sought to shut up all men's mouths, by denying of Purgatory, said, I will
deliver a true testimony of it, yt the proudest of them all shall not reprove.
You know (quoth he) that I am son to old Master Steven, and that we have a
fair place by ye bridge of Saint Antonie, where riding one Evening somewhat
late, my Male horse stayed contrary to his custom, and played puff, puff: I
commanded my man to spur him: he answered so I do sir, but surely he sees
somewhat more than I do: and then I remembered my mothers report, how she had
showed me that there had been seen at sundry times, the appearance of some
spirit, therefore I said my Pater noster and my Aue Maria, but my horse
fearfully treading, would not go forward, playing still puff, puff: and then
I added to my devotion, De profundis, the virtue whereof did lead my horse a
little further, and when the third time he used his puff puff, I had no
sooner said, Auete omnes Animae, and requiem aeternam, but he went praunsing
for the without any stay. And those wretches that will not have us pray for
the dead, and say there is no Purgatory, let them go to my Male horse, and
he shall learn them their lesson.

I would not that this worshipful father should have all Apo. Ste. Fol. 490.
the honor of these subtilties, for a Iacobin (named Diuolaye) used the like
comparison, whereby he proved one point, that all the foregone Doctors could
not find the like Latin for. These shameless Lutherans (said he) will not
believe that the body and blood of Christ is in the Sacrament of the Altar,
unless they see it: when you have a Pastie of Venison, do you not say, it is
a Pastie of such a thing, and yet see not what is in it: here you have (quoth
he) you gross beasts, a manifest example to prove your wilful error.

A Moncke in Paris (named Burdelet) preaching on good Apo. Ste. Fol. 490.
Frydaye at the Parish Church of Saint Germins, showed how Christ being on
the Cross, and seeing his mother weep so bitterlye, said to Saint John, my
good Nephew and gentle Cousin, I commend this poor Gentle woman my mother
unto you: and laying his hand upon his breast, he did swear by the faith of a
Gentleman, that he would be thankful for it. And so proceedyng to the text,
spoke in the commendation of Joseph of Aramathia, how he came to take down
the body of Christ, saying, This was not a man of mean parentage, nor a base
companion, but a Councellor at the law, one of much honor and credit
apparelled in a long gown, and mounted on a Moyle, all covered with black
from the ear to the hoof.

Master Adrian Begwin (a Curate of Saint Germins in Apo. Ste. Fol. 497.
Noyon) said to his Parishoners in a Sermon, my friends you must have
patience, and bear with my brief brawling at this time, for I am bid to
dinner to a fat Pigge, but truly if I had tarried, I would have played the
mad man among you, and have taught you, Ronge, rage en rage with all the rigge
r^gges of round Robin, which because it has a pleasant Emphasis in the French,
I leave it in the proper terms as I found it.

A Prior of the Iacobins in Bloyse, preaching one day in Apo. Ste. Fol. 492.
his Covent, and taking his Theme against the cauillations of the Lutherans,
said, they would have us join with them to the word of God: by my faith I
swear to you all, I know not what they mean by it, but I know well that to
mingle a little water to a good deal of Wine, is a good conjunction: whereat
his audience began so heartily to laugh, that our fatherly Friar was feign to
say, you have laughed enough: and then after he had taken a new breath, he
continued his purpose, saying, I remember that this great King Francis being in
his good City of Roane, a Gentleman of his complained, that there were two
clockes in the town of such discord, that when the one would strike. 8. the
other would strike. 9. which came by the fault of those that kept them. And
therefore the King commanded that the clock keepers should be brought to
drink together, which done, their clockes accorded, and their charge went
orderly. And so my masters, if the King (at the last meeting and conuention at
Poissi) had brought us and the Hugenot ministers to have once drunk together,
I believe, by my faith, we had now bin friends, and at a good unity and
agreement: which made his audience to laugh more than at the first. But such as
desire to hear these kind of comparisons, no doubt but if he address
himself to our aged men that he of good memory here in England, he shall
find of their old store, approved among our foregone Fathers as pleasant as
these.

It was wont to be a common proverb, It is as true as God is in the Mass,
which was so generally used, as the world thought there was no article of
religion so certain, nor that there was any leaf in the Bible or new
Testament, but it made mention of it. And some (to prove the antiquity and
troth of the same) shamed not to preach that Fo. 433.
Cayne resembled the damnable Lutherans, for yt he could never be persuaded to
hear Mass, where his brother Abell would never fail to be at Mass. To the
better confirmation whereof, a Priest of Sauoy, used to admonish his
Parishioners, saying, Take heed you follow not that reprobate wretch Caine,
who would never pay his Tithes nor hear Mass as he ought to do, but rather
follow his good brother Abell, who did both with a good will pay of the best,
fairest and fattest, and never missed day to hear Mass: which argument if
it be true, proves that Massing Priests, were then married: for seeing there
was only four persons at that time in the world, Adam, Eve, Caine, and
Abell, it is to be believed, that Caine said no Mass, for that he hated to
come to it: and Abell could not say Mass alone, and therefore it must needs
follow that Adam was the Massing man, Abell did help him, and Eve held ye
torch, whereby is proved that the first priest was married.

Unto this Curate I may compare as a companion, the Fo. 434.
Jesuit that said in his Sermon, that when the Angel Gabriel came to the
Virgin Marie, he found her on her knees, saying our Lady Mattins: and also
that Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob, and other the Patriarchs, never laid them
down, before they blessed themselves with the sign of the Cross, saying
their Pater noster and Aue Maria. But if one should demand how they know
this to be true, it must pass for current coin, to answer, he heard it of
some great Doctor.

Who doubts of the great superstition, that those dreamed on, who (at the
first) framed ye sundry parts and patches of the Mass: which wrought and
brought to perfect medley, was made more vendible, than all their trashe
besides. By what brains it was devised, by whose cunning augme^ted, and by
what persons performed, sundry ancient authorities do witness: yet truly no
portion of their religion more to be embraced for mirth than this: it has so
many pleasant dumb shows, so many strange mysteries, and so gallantly masked,
that during the play, they stand at a gaze, and are amazed, as it were looking
for wonders, until Ita missa est, Farewell and be hanged.
bids them Valete, and plaudete. Although the glory of this game was so
great, as al knees bowed at the hearing of it: yet in the best world, and when
it had most credit, there were some of al sorts, could say it without Book:
and even the Massing mates themselves would sometimes jest at it.

As a Priest in Louein, (named Sanders) confessed he knew not the division of
Masses, for all souls, and for all saints, etc. But for a common Mass he
could course one, and it were for the Devils good grace. Much like the good
fellow, yt bad Fo. 357.
sir John come and say Mass, in the name of a hundred thousand Devils: for his
Master was angry. And as a Gentleman of Loraine, who loved the Mass well,
and knew his son did not greatly like of it, said to him: To Mass in the
Devils name, to Mass, his son believing that his Father spoke truer, than he
winned for.

A poor Priest in a village, not far from Amsterdame Apo. Ste Fo. 592.
(in Hollande) findyng in an old Almanac, Sol in Cancro, written with red
letters, supposed it had been the name of some solemn Saint: and therefore
endeavored to search out what Mass should serve for that day. But in the
end, when he had well turned and returned (twice or thrice) his Mass Book
over, and could find no such Saint there, he said, what a Devil is this
for a Saint? Whereupon he concluded (in choler) thus, Sol in Cancro, Sol in
Cancrus, nec est virgo nec martyrus, venite adoramus: which because it has no
good grace in the English, I leave it to master parsons exposition, and will
for his better credit accompany Fo. 651.
him with his own Country man, a Priest of Dort, whose ignorance was such,
as he knew not what was meant by the name of Lutheran, whether it were the name
of a man, or of a beast, or of any thing else: for being so called, (because he
said In nomine Patria, and filia, and spiritua Sancta) he so grieved at it, as
he desired his friend to show him what that name might signify, who
persuaded him, it was a disease ten times worse than the Leprosy: whereat
he took such a conceit (supposing it to be some unknown malady) as he
sent his water to the Physicians, willing him in any wise to send him word if
he were not sick of a Lutheran, and to show him the remedy.

These morrow Mass mates (who commonly had more good fellowshippe in them,
than either wit or learning) were endowed with one special condition, worthy
to be commended, for they had Masses of all sorts, for all diseases, of all
prises, and for the humors of every man: and therefore they knew (if they
did not vnbrydle it with speed, to those that loved a short grace) what
favor they should have of them. As certain Gentlemen of France, blessed
their Chaplain, who having have of their journey, desired the Priest (in lieu
of a hunting Mass) to give them the Mass of a Souldior, supposing it to be
one of the shortest. The Parson perusing his Portas, could not find any
Gospel that made mention of men of war, except in the Passion, where it is
written. Cum fustibus and armis, with Clubbes and other Weapons, etc. And
therefore brought the whole Passion in his Mass: which made his audience in
such a rage at him, as they cursed both the sacrifice, and the sacrifycer: for
they were booted and spurred, and their horses ready to founder at the Church
door, staying for them. The only madness that holds the world in this
Massing Frenzy, consists in the vain hope they have to free their friends
out of Purgatory: whereunto they have some reason, when the Memento of one
Mass alone (and at one instant) delivered. 99. Souls from thence. And the
Parson being asked why he left an odd behind, Fol. 620.
answered, that if the clappe of the Church window had not so suddenly started
him, he would have performed the just number of a hundred.

And if it may be tolerable (among so many bad matters) Fo. 463.
to recite one part played by a Provost in France, yet persited by an opinion
of the Mass, I will show you the history. This Magistrate meaning for money to
save a notable Thief, and to avoid the slander in justice, caused an honest
poor man to be brought before him, whom he said he had long sought for, and
that he had committed such and such sundry crimes worthy death: the poor
soul standing upon his innocence, stoutly denied al. But this Provost
resolved in his wretched purpose, persuaded him, saying, if he did confess it,
he would cause so many Masses to be said for him, and so his soul should be
sure of Paradize: but if he denied it, he should notwithstanding be hanged and
go straight to ye devil, for he would suffer no one Mass to be said for him:
the poor man hearing of hanging and going to the Devil, was greatly afraid,
and supposed if he must needs die, it were better to gain those Masses and
go to God: so in the end he answered, that he did not remember he had
committed any such faults as they charged him, but if they knew it better than
himself, and that they were assured it was true, he would (so the Masses might
be said for him) take his death in good part: who had no sooner spoken that
word but he was carried to execution in the place of the thief. The persuasion
of the Masses to keep him out of Purgatory led this innocent to his death.

To the maintenance whereof Erasmus recites how a Fol. 147.
Priest on All Souls night fastened to the bodies of sundry small Creuices
certain wax lights, scattering them among the graves in the Church yard
(which seemed very terrible to behold in the dead of the night as all the
lookers on were astonished at ye fearful and strange sight of it, whereupon this
Priest in his Sermons published that they were the spirits and souls of such,
as sought to be delivered from the pain they endured in Purgatory, by Masses
and almesdeedes, which craft was shortly known, for some of those spirits
were found with their Candels cleaning to them: and that unripped the pack of
this Popish knauerie.

And the same Erasmus in the two and twentieth book of his epistles, shows
further how a night ghost was consured: Erasmus lib. 22. of his Epi.
sor (says he) there was a certain Priest that held his Niece in the house
with him, who had good store of money: and to the end to draw somewhat from
her, he lapped himself in a sheet, and toward midnight entered her Chamber,
counterfayting a spirit: the woman yt was wise, perceived in part the mystery,
and therefore caused another of her kinsemen the next night to come and lie
secretlye in the Chamber by her: who in lieu of a coniuring book brought a
good cudgel, filling his head with drink to be the hardyer: the spyrite
appearyng (as before) began with his fearful noise pitifullye to cry, when
the Coniurer (who had not yet disgested his Wine) suddenly set upon him,
and so basted him on both sides, saying if thou be the Devil I am his Damme, as
he had utterly spoiled him if he had not the sooner discovered himself.

In the year. 1569. there was in Ausburge in Germany, Apo. Ste Fol. 147.
certain servant belonging to one of great worship, who made no accounte
of the subtle sect of the Jesuits. Whereupon a foul of the same feather,
promised their Master he would easilye remove that opinion from the^, to the
performaunce whereof, he disguised himself into himself, and put on the
habit (of his first founder) the Devil: And after hyding him in a corner of
the house, to the which place one of the maid servants by her Masters
appointment was sent, this Jesuit in the form of a devil so feared her, as
she had like to have gone out of her wits: which she presently reported to
one of her Masters men, persuading him in no case to come near that way. The
fellow notwithstanding thought to prove whether her fear proceeded of any
assured cause, went to try it: upon whom this Jesuit devil, or Devil
Jesuit (in the most horriblest manner he might) fastened his counterfaite
tallants. The fellow partly provided before (looking for some such matter) drew
out his dagger, and wrought a miracle, by killing of the devil.

Thus you may see, that the opinion which every one had in their holiness,
furnished them with all diuelishe inventions to maintain the same: And
therefore we ought greatly to rejoice (in God and our Queen) that the true
profession of the Gospel has so opened the eyes of England, that we may
behold all their abuses, in their perfect kind. For now God will not suffer,
that such (which purely (in faith and sincerity) call upon his holy name in
Jesus Christ his son) shall fear or doubt any of those damnable devises:
where before they were wont (by their daily familiarity with the Devil (to
have him continuallye conversant among them:) p^actising by spirits (his
instruments of darkness) to hold the world in blind errors. Which a
Protestant alleging to a Papist, for the better sign and token of our true
profession, said: You may the sooner understand by this, that our re^igion
is good and sound doctrine: For since Gods word was preached among us, we have
not seen nor heard of any night ghosts to trouble us. The other supposing this
argument to serve best for his purpose, replied, saying, it is rather a token
that God has taken his grace from you, for that now the Devil has no more
to do, considering he does account you al his own. Alleging this example,
written by Eneas Siluius sometime Pope Pius the 2. which he took out of the
Legend of Saint Benet, and the history is thus: Saint Benet travailed to a
Covent of Monks, where he found a heap of unclean Spirits combatting with
the holy Fathers of that place: and all to remove them from their good works.
Saint Benet at another time returning to the Abbey, found an evil spirit
sitting idly wagging his legs, and beating his heels together with cold:
whom he coniured to show him the cause of his idleness: he aunsweared, we are
to make wars with Cloystermen and such as be the servants of God, and not
against those whose dreams, trumperies, and blasphemies do already serve the
Devil.

This was well applied, if Saint Benet had been by to have paraphrased further
upon it: for none will deny but that the suttletie of the Diuil is such, as he
seeks to increase his kingdom by all the means he may: and how can his
glory be greater, than to keep that carefully which he has gotten cunningly:
And also it is a general rule, that a conqueror does triumph in nothing more
than in holding in due obedience, those that are become his vassals, which must
be by the presence of him self, or by his chiefest ministers. And seeing the
Devil wants no experience, having as much foresight as so proud a Spirit
may have if we be so assuredly his own as that Papist would make us, he would
not be from us in person as a friend to favor us, or in power as a iealious foe
to lose us, considering ye holy league (so termed) by the consent of so mighty
Papists, have promised to make us revolt (if it be as ye petie Papist says)
from him. But, as it is only natural reason that those gross creatures of the
Popes desire to be satisfied by, so in reason they know it is as much wisdom
and policy to keep, as it is praise and glory to get, which in my opinion,
ye feend would foresee as a principle, if he held us so dear, as this his
darling (winning yt gole, in his own conceyt, with one stroke) alleges he does:
and therefore it is to be believed, ye Devil will not dwell but where he has some
interest, and may be welcome: And ye which is most true, the Pope his best
beloved, as he cannot forbear him, so he dare not spare him so far of, seeing
Gods warriors are coming with a rolling crench toward him. And as in all
martial marches, there are ever some straglers, who care neither for Country,
Captain, nor cause, but follow only to pray upon the spoil of others: so the
Papists of present time, that seem to muster under the banner of true
Christians (vexed with the frenzy of these forlorn spirits in the image of
Englishmen) come rogyng and straggling among us, (as a new found Jesuit of
late did) who covet nothing more than the ruin of their Country, that they
might (with the Devil their Master) have a part in the bloudye booty. But
to prove indeed, how Satan the chief Master of sin, dare not be where the
word of God is truly taught, the sacred Scriptures in every text do
testifye: As in Matthewe the 8. Mark the 5. Luke the 8. Paul. 2. to the
Corin: 6. Chap. etc.

Although the invention of man be great, whose proud judgment has presumed
on many things: yet truly, his iniquity (in his own nature) did never devise
a more damnable blasphemy against God and his Saints, than yt book entitled
Legenda Aurea. Wherein there are many passages so far from Decorum, that if the
reader be tender hearted or squeamish stomacked, it will make them Seasicke to
peruse them.

As for a first example: Friar Iuniperus (whom Saint Francis held for a very
holy and most perfect godly man) would to show his singleness in devotion be
cook one day to the whole Covent: where setting a great Caudron of water over
the fire, he put thereinto certain Pullets, neither plumed, drawn nor washed:
and al other kind of flesh as well fresh as saulte, with sundry sorts of
Herbs, and with Pease, beans, and al manner of Pults, picking nor clensing
any thing. And having boiled all this brave broth together, he served it in the
same comely sort to his company: which was taken for simplicity sake to be the
true part of a saint.

The same Iuniperus, being (in respect of his devotion) laid in a good bed
and a fair pair of Sheets, did so dungnifie them with dirt, as his hostess
was feign to take it for payment, without a farewell. These two religious
parts, were to his singular praise (for simple holiness) set forth, in the
Conformities of Saint Frauncis, in the 62. and 63. leaves. Which honest
histories are there recited, to show the humility of this holy Friar. And it
may be there was more mystery in the natural course of those Crucifire
Cormorants, than in any other common creatures: For Friar Ruffin (mentioned of
in the same Book) made the Devil more afraid, by threatening that Fol. 95.
Where it is shamefully recited in plain^ terms.
he would untruss a point in his throat, than with all the holywater he had:
which argues, that those gross mates fed on some sacred substance: otherwise,
the Devil would never (with such fear) have fled so filthy a perfume.

Pardon me good Reader, for my indecent speeches, for I must accommodate my
terms in part to the purpose: And it is an o^de Proverb, that it is hard to
apply honest words to dishonest works: and as Chaucer says, a plain tale
must have plain terms. Who can forbear to laugh and read the life of Saint
Dominike, how he besieged certain Devils within the body of a man, from whence
he would not suffer them to depart, before they had given him pledges to
return no more thither? And how Saint Frauncis to prove his virginity did
strippe himself In confor. 211.
starcke naked before the Bishop of Assise, and gave the Bishop his breeches
for a relic.

Even as he was, so were his Disciples: for Friar Leonard coming to the gate
of Viterbe, pulled off all his Fo. 62.
apparel, put his breeches on his head, and his shyrte, with the rest of
his clothes, he bound up in a fardell and hanged it about his neck. And in
this brave beastlye sort he passed through most places of the City,
enduring (in the mean time) all the shameless mockes that might be. And in
the same naked show he went to the Abbey (a fellowship of his own Fraternity)
where they cried upon him for this most impudent part: But this good friar
was so clothed in Holiness, as he made no account of all their reproaches. You
shall likewise findethe great wisdom and gravity of that Arche Saint
Francis himself in the 114. leaf of his Conformities, how he saluted fleeing
foul, spoke to them, and called the^ his brethren, commanding them to hear
the word of God, whereat they rejoiced so much, as they stretched forth their
necks, and opened their villes, and beheld him very attentively: And after the
Sermon, he passed through the midst of them, and then gave them leave to
depart in peace: which they did with great devotion, dividing themselves into
four parts, whereby they did signify, that the orders of Saint Frauncis
should pass, and be placed in all quarters of the world: and that he should be
renowned on the earth above all other professors. Also that Saint Frauncis and
a Nytingale did sing together a whole day the one aunswering Fol. 149.
the other. And in the leaf 114. is mentioned, how by making of the sign of
the Cross only, he charmed a mad Wolf, that had hurt many, and concluded
this bargain with him, saying, my brother the Wolf, thou shall promise me,
that thou will be no more so ravenous, as thou haste bin, and I will warrant
thee, that those of the City shall feed thee: which the Wolf affirmed to
hold by enclining his head to him: and for his more faith and credit, he gave
his right foot into Saint Francis hand, who commanded the Wolf (as his good
brother) in the name of Jesus Christ to go with him, which he did. We read
likewise of many other Saints that had a special felicity to be conversant
and to devise with beasts, but I believe that the fraternity and fellowship of
Wolves, was only peculiar to Saint Frauncis. Is it not a mockery to read,
that Saint Macaire did 7. years penance among thorns and briars, for killing
of a flea? And who can forbear to laugh at an other part of Saint Dominike
recited toward the end of his legend? which is, that a Nun named Mary,
having a grief in her thigh, that had greatly troubled her the space of five
months, (and in the end acknowledging her unworthiness to pray to God, or to be
heard of him) she prayed to Saint Dominike, that he would be a mediator
between God and her, that she might recover her health. After which devotions,
Saint Dominike came to her in her sleep, and with an ointment that he took
from under his Cope (which was of excelling savor) he anointed her thigh and
made her whole: And when she asked the name of so sovereign a remedy, he
answered it was the ointment and balm of Love. For the further judgment
thereof, I leave it to the discretion of the reader, whose imagination, I
suppose, will join with mine: which truly is no worse, than ye same that was
between friendly S. Frauncis, and loving S. Clare mentioned of in the 84. leaf
of his Conformities.

We have the like history (though more blasphemous) Sprenger.
published by one Sprenger, an Almaine Writer: who shamed not to put in print,
ye where a Iacobin named Alaine, did forge our Ladies Psalter, she, in
recompense of it, came to his chamber, and made him a ring of her hair,
wherewith she married him, and how she kissed him, and offered him her paps to
play with, and that she was as familiar with him, as any wife could be with
her husband. In the Legend of S. German is showed how the king of Denmark
denying to him and his company lodging, he was fain to seek it at the
Neatherds hand, who received him gently, brought him to his house, and having
but one Calfe did kill it for S. German and his company, that were like to
perish with hunger and cold. But after supper he caused the skin and bones of
ye Veale to be brought together to him, whereupon when he had made his prayers,
the Calfe did rise into his first proportion of life again. And the next
morning he went to the king, using great and gross speeches unto him,
commanding him out of his kingdom, and established the cowherd in his place,
which he and his successors enjoyed for ever after. He that desires to hear
more of these fables, shall find his fill of them in the Legend of ye Saints
lives: where this, and much worse matter is written for a truth of them. And
also Nicephorus recites, that many years after Nicephorus.
the death and burial of S. John Chrysostom, his body did daily speak, and
would both ask and answer to questions. And that the Emperor Theodosius did
write letters to him. But the Book called the Conformities of S. Francis with
Jesus Christ, mentioned of so often before, was never compiled without the aid
and consent of the Devil himself: For, one of the greatest miracles that
Christ here on earth did, was the raising of Lazarus from death to life:
which was as common and easy to S. Francis and his Disciples, as it was to
drink a glass of Wine. And S. Francis used it as a sport, to kill: to the
end he would show his power to quicken again, as is recited in these proper
words, in the leaf 120. Locus est dictus de Nuceria, in quo beatus Franciscus
fecit illud insigne miraculum, quod cuiusdam medici filium primogenitum prius
occidit, and contritum suscitando restituit. The valor say they of Christ, was
nothing comparable to the miracles of S. Francis for Christ was transfigured
but once, S. Francis 20. times: Christ changed water into wine but once, he
thrice: Christ suffered the grief of his wounds but a little while, he whole
two year together: And as concerning miracles to make the blind to see, the
lame to go, and to drive Devils out of the possessed, Christ cannot compare
with S. Francis and his followers. For they have given sight to more than a
thou^a^d blind, they have restored the limbs to more than a thousand lame (as
well men as beasts) and they have forced the Devil to fly out of more than a
thousand men and women. Is it possible that any Christian ear could hear
them preach these horrible blasphemies in open Pulpit, and not spit in their
face, or rather tear them in pieces? Yea, when they were not ashamed to
conclude, that Christ was but a counterfaite to S. Frauncis, and in these
damnable terms, that he was not worthy to pull off his hose: affirming with
full gorge, that he did far excel and surpass ye Apostles, the Saints, and all the Angels: And in the 17. leaf it is said he was a Patriarch, a Prophet, a
Postle, a Martyr, a Doctor, a Confessor, a Virgin, an Angel, and a Saint most
conformed to Jesus Christ. And in so. 49. they name the 12. Apostles of S.
Francis, Petrus Chatanei, Johannes de Capella, Philippus Longus, etc. And as
Judas Iscarioth was rejected out of ye fellowship of the Apostles, for betraying
their Master Christ: so Johannes de Capella was dejected from S. Frauncis,
because he was proved to detest his profession. And further, they do ascribe
unto him the title of Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews: For first they
invested him with the title of Jesus, because he was in nature, quality,
condition, and conformity, most like unto him: And of Nazareth, for that he
was a most pure virgin: They called him King because he kept both the inward
and the outward laws: And for that he was full of melody and joy, soliciting
all the world to the praise and honor of God, they said it was a special
signification of the Jews.

Behold the conclusion of this most diuelishe and infernal invention of the
Popes Saints, which ascended to ye highest degree of most ungodly blasphemy.

It is no marvel though they held him (and others his like) in that curssed
credit: when they so bewitched the wits of all men, as they thought no
reverence too much, to be (with great devotion) done, to any part or parcel
of them: yea, and it were but to a patche of their apparel. As at Tryer in the
Abbey of S. Simon, they held the Pantaphles of S. Joseph for a great relike:
And at Aix in Germany his breeches, and our Ladies smock: The smock great
enough for a Giant, and the breeches too little for a Dwarffe: And in some
places they reverenced for relikes their pottes and their spoones: And at
Gennes they honored the Asses tail that carried Christ: and in Loraine the
holy Hay that was in the rack where Christ was borne: At Arles among the
Augustines, at Vigand in Languedock, and at Florence the stones that stoned S.
Stephen were had in great price: They also honored the Arrows that were shot
at S. Sebastian in Poictiers, and at Lambeske in Prouance. And in my opinion,
seeing the Stones and arrows were accounted so holy, the Archers and
Stone-casters were worthy some glory.

But to the end the Reader shall not muse over much upon these suttleties, to
show that the world had no eyes, neither in their heads, nor in their
understanding, but as willingly or wilfully blind suffered themselves to bed
led into all absurdity: I will recite a certain history, whereby you may the
better behold their simple folly.

When Nicodemus took our savior Christ from the Cross, he saved so much of
his blood as filled one of the Fol. 612.
fingers of his glove: with the which he wrote sundry miracles. By reason
whereof, being hardly persecuted by the Jews, he was compelled in the end to
convey it away by a marvelous means. For he did write in a piece of
parchment, all the miracles he had done, with the whole circumstance how the
mystery should be used, and closed the blood with the parchment in the bill
of a big water foul (for my Author makes no mention of his name) and having
bound it and trimmed it in the best manner he might, he cast it into the
Sea, and commended it to God. Whose blessed will was, that after this Saint Bill
(by the time and term of 1000. or 1200. years) had sailed through all the
Weasterne and Eastern seas, it should in the end arrive in Normandy, where
at this day does stand the Abbey of Bill: And being by the boisterous billows
cast ashoare among other baggage, on a heap of bushes, it happened a good Duke
of Normandy (one that was a founder to such follies in those days) to be
hunting of a Heart in those quarters, where suddenly he had lost both Dear
and Dogs, til at last he spyed them before this bushe all on their knees, the
Heart first, and the hounds hard behind him: and as some write, they were at
their prayers. This sight moved the Duke to great devotion, who reuerentlye
sought the place, where he found this precious Bill with the contents thereof:
which caused him to build an Abbey in the honor of it, naming it the Abbey of
Saint Bill, where this beautiful miracle is yet to be seen, adorned with such
sundry riches, as this Bill does now feed a number of bellies.

Here is to be noted, how euidentlye and impudentlye they did mock the pore
Idiots in that age: For, when they did open the shop of their shameless
relikes, how boldly would they brag of their rotten merchandise? As behold here
in this viole the blood of our savior Christ gathered together under the
Cross by the virgin Mary: And in this other viole, is the tears of our
Redeemer, that he did shed on the Cross, when he beheld his pitiful
mother: Here is the milk of our Ladies breasts, the hair of her head, and
the sooadling bands wherewith she first rolled Christ at his birth: And in
this bottle (which may not in any wise be opened) is the very breath of Jesus
Christ curiously kept by his mother ever since he was a little one.

As a Priest at Gene, returning from Iewrie, affyrmed he brought with him of
the same breath, and from Mount Synay the horns of Moses. These shameless
shows of their trumperie, if any did find fault or speak against them, be
was condemned for an heretic: For it was (they would say) allowed and confirmed
by the Popes Holiness, to be most true, and therefore damnable to think the
contrary. I leave to recite their infinite store of trash, which by their
runnagate Pardoners were made as vendible as these.

As one that carried about the relikes of Saint Hubart (to Fo. 555.
justify the virtue of them) bashed not with most blasphemy to affirm, that
if the holy Ghost were bitten with a mad dog, he would come to Saint Hubart to
be healed. Among this rabblement of Relickes, I must needs intrude Fol. 559.
one miracle performed in the person of a Jesuit, who, to observe the straight
laws of their religion, had his Concubine close in his bed to help him say his
Mattins at midnight: And his boy or Nouice coming up in the morning (by chance
they both asleep) he saw four naked feet hang out of the bed, whereat he was
so amazed, as he suddenly put his head out at the window, and mainely cried:
ho, come see a miracle, for my Master has four legs.

And further, to show their authority for the proof of their Images, which
they honored with reverence due only to God, it will every way appear to be as
bad and as absurd as ye rest. For a Legate of the Popes to the oriental
Churches, did allege for Saints, the text of Moses: God created Man to
his own Image: and therefore he affirmed, we ought to have Images. An other
to prove that Images must be upon the Aultare: brought in the 5. of Mathewe
for a witness: where Christ says, that none lights a Candle, and covers
it with a bushel, but sets it upon a candle stick, to light all the house
with. An other alleging, that the sight of Images was profitable, brings
the 4. Psalm for proof: The light of thy countenance, O Lord, is marked
upon us. And Theodorus brought in this suttletie, It is written, that God is
marvelous in his Saints: And therefore he would have us to contemplate his
glory in Images: And one affirmed this similitude, that as the Patriarchs used
the sacrifice of the Infidels, so Christians ought to have Images, in lieu of
their Idols. Here you may see their fair allegations, approved by some of
their general counsels and preched in their common sermons: by which places of
Scripture they abused sundry of good capacity and judgment: And yet the
simplest might see how far they erred from the true meaning of the Text.

A Sorbonist Doctor named Demochares (of late years at the Conuention of
Poissi in France) pleading in the defense of Images, against a minister of
Gods word, when he was set agrounde and saw his own overthrow, he shamed
not to take hold on this allegation: gation: That the Church of Saint Benets
in Poissi was builded in the time of Saint Denise, and there was images in the
glass Windows: Ergo there were Images in Saint Denise time: you have well
aunsweared said the Minister, with a good grace like a Doctor, and with matter
sufficient, pertinent to the purpose: but that the best substance of your
brittle authority is altogether of glass.

With what sorts of superstition did they lead the world when they made so
dear sale of these fantastike sightes, or rather infernal vanities,
compelling the simple people sometime, to honor the presence of his image here,
whose soul was with the Devil elsewhere: As an auntiente Doctor writes,
Multorum corpora adorantur in terris, quorum animae cruciantur in infernis How
were they blinded with the filthy and most stinking sin of Idolatry, when in
time of most peril, and at the instant of their deaths every one had some
peculiar Saint to call upon: and such they were commonly, as in their lives
they did most devotion and honor unto: clean forgetting God in the merit of
his son Jesus Christ. As Erasmus making mention of a shipwreck, shows,
that when the master of the ship saw no remedy Erasmus Coloq.
but the loss of all, and willing every man (passengers with him) to prepare
to dye, declaring the assured peril they were in, some called upon one Saint,
some upon another, every one according to ye hope he had in their private help:
and one among the rest desired his S. Christopher to remember him, promysing,
that he would present him with a Taper light, as long and as great as the Maste
of the ship: another standing by and hearing his offer (who knew his terms and
state very well) said, how can thou perform thy vow, when al ye wealth thou
have is not worth so much wax as ye Mast is big: to whom he replied, speaking
it softly (that S. Christopher should not hear him) saying, hold thy peace
friend, I will promise much to have his help now, but if I get once to shore, I
will scant give him a Candle as big as my finger.

Not much unlike unto this was ye pleasant part of a Tailor of Florence, who
had a long time (with great devotion) Apo. Ste Fo. 118.
honored the Image of Saint Baptist, and one day on both his knees, he humbly
desired to know whether his wife (at any time) had wantonly abused him, and
what fortune should follow his only son. A young Nouice (trained up to al
knauishe toys) happened to ouer-heare his petition: who stepped behind the
Altar, and fayning the voice of Saint John, answered him: My dear friend and
faithful follower, for thy long reverent worshipping, and devotion thou haste
done unto me, I will truly tell thee: thy wife has often horned thy head, and
thy son shall be shortly hanged: wherefore depart in peace, since thy Prayers
be heard: whereat our Florentine entering into a great rage, did rise and took
his leave without a farewell, but when he was a little past from him (using no
reverence of Cappe or knee) he turned and said: what art thou for a Saint? the
Nouice answered, I am thy Saint Baptist: My Saint (quoth he) thou art the
devil, a lier, foul mouthed, and a slaunderer, which thou have used from the
beginning. For that babbling false tongue of thine, caused Herod worthyly to
cut off thy head. I have prayed Matthew the. 14. cha.
to thee this 25. year and have offered more light before thee, tha^ I am
worth: But now holding up his fist toward him, and offering him the Italian
fig) I will see thee hanged, as ye wast headed, before I will come to thee again.

A certain Cook in Florence, accustomed to make his ordinary prayers and
Candle offerings to a very young Image of Apo. Ste Fol. 576.
Christ, entertayning himself in his grace the space of xx. years: about
which time, it fortuned a Tilestone to fall from the house upon his child's head,
and wounded him to the death, which the Father perceiving, came to his young S.
Christ, and brought him a fair wax light for a present (where he was wont
to offer only a tallow Candle) using this prayer: my most sweet little Lord
Jesus Christ, I pray thee restore my son to health, thou know it is now more
than xx. years since I first faithfully served thee, during which time, I never
desired any pleasure of thee, but now, seeing my son is in danger of death, I
am come to commend us both unto thee, desiring thee to help him, as well for
the devotion he bears thee (being young like thy self) as for the continual
service I have done thee. After he had ended these prayers, he went home,
where finding his son dead, he returned in a surie to his little Christ, to
whom (without any knee or courtesy) and with his cap on his head he said, I do
utterly renounce thee, with assured promise, that thou shall never see me more:
I have with true devotion served thee long, and never required any good turn
at thy hand til now: and thou have both denied me and deceived me. I confess
I ouer-late find my own folly, for had I done half the service to the
gentleman that good old Roode thy Father that sta^ds by thee, as I have done to
thee, I am sure he would not so childishlie have refused me. And one thing more
I will promise thee, it shall be a warning for me for ever hereafter, to have
to do either with thee, or with any boy for thy sake, adding this proverb Chis'
Apo. Ste Fo. 577.
vnpaccia confanciulli, confanciulli siritroua: He that has to do with
children, shall be childishly handeled, which may well agree with this that
follows: For where one praying to our Lady (with her little infant Christ in
her arms) had his answer made in a childish voice (by one that stood
behind her Image) which lyked him nothing, and iudgyng by the voice that it
was not the mother that spoke, but her son, said, hold thy peace pretty
babe hold thy peace, and let thy mother speak who has more wit than thy self.

But the Burgonion used brauer speeches to a young Crucifixe, son to an old that
had almost killed him, for he coming Ap. Ste. Fol. 577.
into the Church, and seeing a fair young Crucifixe made with a smyling
countenance, and set in the place of the old, he said to him: it is not thy
dissembling face, nor all the flattering shows thou can make, shall deceive
me, for I will never trust thee: And I warraunt^ if thou live to the age of a
man, thou will prove as false as thy father, that meant to murder me. Not much
unlike the speeches that a Fle^ming used to a roode in Rochel, though in
another sense: for he coming thither to sell Herring, and finding a badde
Market for his purpose, he went into the Church, where seeing the Roode with
his head hanging on the one side, and looking very pitifully, he said: ah good
Lord, did thou (likewise) bring hither Herring to sell? These Histories do
witness, that as the Pope and his prelacie, brought all the world into damnable
Idolatry, touching the worshipping of Saints, so it seemed that some in all
ages, would show those Idolles their Lessons, when they pleased them not.

As not long since the inhabitauntes of a village called Neutonne by Paris, for
that their vines were frosen on Saint Fo. 578.
Georges day: did not alone speak bold and opprobrious words unto him, but
presumed on his person, and threw him into the river of Seine, to the end he
should be as well frozen as their Vines, which act was so much the more hardye,
for yt they durst attempt it against him, who is a Mars among all the Saints.

And a Friar in Artoys in Henaulte, Preaching of the statue of gold, that
Nabuchodonozor caused to be set up, Fo. 467.
whereof Daniel makes mention in his third Chapter, he said, this Image was
as great a villayne as our Saint Eust^ce is, but he was all of Massy gold, I
would to God our Saint Eustace were so to.

Whereby, as we may see that some would be sausie with their Saints, so truly
in all worlds there were that would touch their Hypocrisy with terms apt for
them.

For Laurence de Medecis who knew the best honor due to Apo. Ste Fo. 578.
their desert, being asked by the Turks Ambassador how it happened he could not
see so many mad men, fools and Idiots, pass through the streets of Florence,
as were commonly to be seen in Caire and other Cities of his Country, he
answered, we hold them all enclosed in strong houses, every one according to
the quality of his madness or frenzy: whereupon the next day (accompanying
him out of Florence) he showed him a number of Monasteries, which he said were
ye places for their fools and mad men of all sorts, and were called Monks,
Friars and Nonnes. All this is nothing, nor that which has bin published by
our predecessors, against the petty sort of the Clergy, in respect of ye
which has bin spoken against the Popes their own persons.

For Pasquin from the beginning and even at their doors would touch them so to
the quick, and descipher every small Fol. 580.
artier or vain of the^ so naturally, as no Anotomiser could do better: whose
skill was the more, for that he was acquainted with the best witted, gentillest
spirited, and most of judgment in all Rome. This Pasquin to show in one word,
what the whole Etimologie of the Popes virtue and name did signify, fained to
die in despair, of an unkindness, yt one had slaundered him. Why (quoth his
friend) have they called th^^ Thief, murderer, or poisoner? he answered no,
but they have termed me much worse: have they called thee a robber of Churches,
a killer of thy Parents, a Bouggerer, or an Atheist? Alas no said Pasquin, they
have touched my credit with a worse report tha^ all this. His friend grieuing
to see him in that woeful case, deuined at all the greatest and most infamous
names that could be devised, he still affirming it was worse, and so bad, that
I know you can never guess at it: Why then said his friend, I pray thee show
me what it is, that has brought thee into this despair? In the end Pasquin
delivering a deep sigh, answered: alas and twice alas, they have called me
Pope: confirming the sayings of Pope Leo the. 10. before mentioned.

For the same Pope, reproved by certain of his Cardinals Apo. Ste. Fol. 457.
for his evil government, and hateful life to all men, (as one that was
wonderfully changed, after he became Pope) answered: if I be evil given now,
it is you that are in the fault, for it is your selves that have made me as I
am. They wondering at these words, desired to know how that might be: Because
(quoth he) you have made ine Pope, and I have in my own person by proof tried
it, that it is impossible to be Pope and a good Christian together, and to
dwell both in one skin: which is easy to be believed by the course of their
whole lives, who would profane (as well by their works as their words) those
things they accounted most holy.

As Pope Iulie the. 12. who did cast into Tyber the keys of Saint Peter, and
took in hand the sword of Saint Paul, Fol. 586.
justifying that the keys in regard of the sword was of no value or force,
to maintain his wars with. According to these verses following.

Quum tibi non aetas habilis sit Caraphe bello,
Et castris habeas cognita claeustra magis:
Quum decet miles bellique pecunia neruus,
Quis te praecipitem, cogit ad arma furor?
Infirmis humeris damnata quid induis arma?
Quae tibi quum libeat ponere, non liceat.
Cur respirantem and curantem vulnera mundum
Concutis, and Martem solus ad arma cies?
Da miseris requiem, and spacium concede malorum
Si nobis Pater es si tua cura sumus?
Conde Senex Gladium, and Christi reminiscere verbi:
Quod dixit Petro, dixit and ille tibi.
RESPONSIO.

Quod dixit Petro Christus, nolim esse putetis
Dictum (pontificum pace Petri) mihi.
Nam neque sum Petri successor, nec quoque talem
Agnoscit bona pars Christicolarum hodie
Pauli ego (successu caeptis meliore deinceps,
Dij faueant) sumpsinomen and arma simul.
Et Christi verbi memor intrepidusque minister
Non veni pacem mittere, sed gladium.
What greater mockery could there be, or rather damnable blasphemy (to their
own profession) than the same yt Gregory the. 7 (first named Hildebrand) did:
for he, because his Altar God (called the Sacrament) would not answer to ye
he demanded, he cast him into the fire in ye presence of Apo. Ste. Fol. 587.
a number of his Cardinals, and in great despite said, there was no substance
in him, yt could not do as much as Apollo the God of Infidels, who answered
every man by Oracle.

This your Pope and visible God on earth (to obtain the Papacy) gave himself,
his soul, and all to the Devil, which appeared by his skill in co^iuring,
witchcraft, and sorcerie.

If the Pope, with all his company of gross creatures, had believed any
heavenly virtue to have bin in that mystery, where unto they made all the
world (with bowed knees) to do godly reverence, and to believe it was God in
deed upon their damnation, how could they have been so full of impiety to
profane it as they did.

For a Priest of Loraine holding in his hand a great box of these Wafer cakes,
not yet consecrated: shaking them together, said, ho you pretty knaves and
false harlottes which of you shall be a God to day?

From Loraine I must come to Prouance, where a Priest at the elevation, did
hold ye feet of his God upward and the head downward, and being asked ye
cause, why he did so? answered: for yt I would not have his breeches fall
about his heels. Confirming the report of a Sacrificer in Sauoye, who vau^ted
in his mirth, that they used their God, as the Cat uses the Mouse, for when
they have sported and played at their pleasure with him, they devour him.

A Gascoine named Gotrene, saying Mass, and seeing his gossyp (who then served
the turn) very slow to answer Amen, he said, say Amen in the name of the
Devil, to whom he answered Amen in the Devils name: adding more, ye Cankar
consume you gossyp, for if you had not spoken so hastily I had taken a Mouse:
which you must suppose came either to hear Mass, to be canonized, or to seek
his pray, as at Lodoue in Gascoine a Mouse came upon the Altar, whilst ye
Priest slept in his Memento, and stale a piece of his God from him, for ye
which he was canonized, and called Saint Mouse.

An other Curate being in the best part of his Mass (when his Altar God was
aloft) spying a boy clyming his Therrie tree, he cried aloude, come down in
the Devils name, come down, his Parishoners supposing he had spoken to him
between his hands.

Whereunto I must add this short remembrance of a Fo. 593.
Curate of the City of Aubnias in Viuieres, who saying his high Mass in a
Church which was not well covered, by reason whereof the wind blew away his
Wafer God from him, the Priest being badly sighted, sought him about the
Altar, and patting with his hands to feel him, said, where the Devil art
thou become, or whether the Devil art thou gone? Which argued there was some
affinity, or else some great league of amity between the Devil and their
Idol. And yet here rests a question: for if they had bin of such friendship,
how durst every Priest at his pleasure, to have threatened him with the
Devil? As for example, A common mate having a good mind to beat a Priest in
Loraine, the first time he met him, he was going with his Wafer God a
visitation. Well (said this companion) and it were not for reverence I owe to
that in your hands, I would conjure you. The Priest standing in terms of his
valor, answered, I am ready when thou dare, and therefore forbear me not
for him, for behold my God is on the ground (which in deed he had set down
to be judge between them) and I give him to the Devil, if he take part either
with the one, or with the other. By which threats it should appear he stood
in awe of the Devil.

There was also a Vicar of a village called Felniag (besides Bonne in Sauoy) to
whom his Parishoners came and requested him to cease a storm, for that he had
often vaunted he could caulme the worst weather that might be: and therefore to
approve his credit, he first used certain coniurations, which he had by heart:
then he brought forth his Portas, and his Mass Book, wherein he did read the
most cursed sentences he could find, himself being in the mean while under
a tree, which kept him from the force of the storm. In the end, when he saw
none of those charms would serve, he fet forth his holy Sacrament, whereunto
he used these speeches: Courdi, se te ne ple fort, que le Diablo, ze te zetera
de guen placo: that is, By the heart of God, if thou be not stronger than the
Devil, I will cast thee into the dirt.

What horrible blasphemy was this of a Priest, and in despite of that, which
they all seemed (with divine reverence) so much to honor?

These examples (in my opinion) are more than sufficient, to prove that the
same which our Papists call their holy mother Church, did not hid their
wickedness to our predecessors, but so manifested it by their daily doings,
that those which were not willingly deaffe or blind, must needs both hear and
see them: showing withal, how they did specially profane that which they held
for a true, sound and holy religion. Notwithstanding where one found fault at
their false doctrine, a thousand were offended at their wicked living, for the
whole world complained of their ordinary crimes, being nothing to ye they
otherwise most hatefully committed against the Majesty of God, in their daily
blaspheming him in the horrible abuse of his holy word.

For the disordinate and cursed lives that they continued and kept in the Court
of Rome, was such, so hateful and abominable, that Petrach spoke of it both in
his Italian and Latin Epistles: affirming that Christ was banished from
thence, and Antichrist received, and made camp master among them: and that
under the banner of Christ they made wars with Christ: for the Pharaseis (says
he) did never so much villainy to him as those daily do: showing by their
words and works, that they hold the assured hope of eternal life, for a
fable: for he that was the man of most mischief among them, had for honor and
praise the highest and chiefest place. And touching their covetous catching and
gathering of gold, it was so vnsaciat, as they set to sale their own souls:
and made vendible Merchandise of the Church of all the Saints of heaven and of
Christ himself. According to the saying of Pope Leo the. 10. whose confessor
in ye time of death, persuading him to fear nothing, considering that he had
ye keys of Paradise, and the managing of all the meri^es of Christ and of the
Saints, at his pleasure: he answered, you know yt he which once sells any
thing, is no more master of it: and I yt have sold Paradise and all the rest,
how shall I acceu^t to have any part or portion in them? Approving ye su^me and
substance of these verses following, which shows their monstrous impudency,
joined with most abominable impiety: and were graven with Gothicall letters in
a table of stone, which not long since did hang in ye Church of S. Steuens in
Burgis, at a pillar hard by the Altar where the Cardinal was wont to say his
solemn Mass.

Hic des deuote, coelestibus associote.
Mentes aegrotae, per munera sunt ibi lotae.
Ergo venitote, gentes a sorde remotae.
Qui datis, estote, certi de diuite dote.
Te precor, accelera, sparg as hic dum potes era.
Et sic reuera, secure coelica spera.
O si^u scires, quantum dataprosit ibires,
Tu iuxta vires, donares quod dare quires.
Te miser a poena, dum tempus habes, aliena.
Huc dare te pena, veniae sit aperta crumena.
Consors coelestis fabricae quiporrigit estis.
Ex hoc sum testis, hic vos mundare potestis.
Fratres haurite de trunco pocula vitae:
Hic aliquid sinite, very velut Israelitae.
Creed mihi, creed, coeli dominaberis aede.
Nam pro mercede Christo dices, mihi cede.
Hic datur exponi Paradisus venditioni.
Current ergo boni, rapientis culmina throni.
Vis retinere forum? mihi tradas pauca bonorum.
Pro summa quorum, reserabitur aula polorum.
Hic si large des, in coelo sit tua seeds:
Qui seret hic parce, parce comprendit in arce.
Cur tardas tantum? nummi mihi des aliquantum.
Pro solo nummo, gaudebis in aethere summo.
Denos sum quater, vnum semel, haec sacra matter.
Annos condonat, sanctus pater ista coronat.
Tot quadragenas, dat and abluit hic tibi penas
Mill missis decies socius, si des, ibi fies.
These verses, for yt they be in Latin rhyme, I cannot frame any good grace to
them in English: but ye effect and substance consists: in yt, who so ever did
offer or give to their wooden image, should go into Paradise: and ye more
they gave ye better place should be prepared for the^: and those ye gave
nothing should be assured never to come there. For Hic datur exponi Paradisus
vendi^ioni, is as much to say, as here is Heaven or Paradise to be sold. But
to the end the unlearned Reader shall not loose the knowledge of so good a
market, (the sum of all consisting in these two verses)

Creed mihi, creed, coeli dominaberis aede:
Nam pro mercede Christo dices, mihi cede.
I have translated them as near as I can to the true sense word for word.

Believe me, believe me, thou shall for money govern heaven, And in recompense
of that thou give, thou shall command Christ to give thee place. See here the
fair less^n these scholemaisters of perdition would learn us, according to
the sayings of Plutarch, that if Judas came to Rome with his. 30. Pence (the
price of our Saviors blood) he should be received and Christ rejected,
affirming further, that truth could have no credit or countenance there, where
the air, the earth, the temples, yea their Palaces, houses and buildings, was
full of treason, urther, falsehood, blaspheming, and lying.

Now our Romish Catholics (whose conversion to Christ in heart I crave)
that so much desire by wilful ignorance to suppress God and his glory, and
to advance the Pope and his Prelacie, and would have these Tragical parts
(beautified with gluttony, adorned with lechery, and de^ked with all sin
and iniquity) to triumph upon our English Stage, before the play begin,
consider ye infamous falsehood, and the traitorous trumperie, that those of ye
Church of Rome do hold you in: and gather into your memory, ye sum and
effect of these examples, which I have rudely and disorderly dispersed in this
book, to ye better understanding of the simplest sort of you: and look into
the infinite number, that sundry others (most learned Authors to your behoof)
have collected and published: where you shall see (if God have not utterly sealed
up the eyes of your judgment) the manifest abuses of that Romish beast, how he
seeks your deaths in the error of your lives, and would have you devour
your selves, in the wicked works of your hands.

For is it not a marvelous folly, and a quintessence of blasphemy, to honor
flesh and blood, a man, a sinful creature, one that stands with us all under
the sentence and curse of God (if it were not for the merciful redemption of
our Savior Jesus Christ) with that divine reverence, that his heavenly
Majesty has reserved only for himself? And to believe that so base a person
sometime proceeding from poor parentage, that after he be once a Pope, (which
consists only in man's election) to be straight a God? Further, to believe
that he has the keys in his hands of heaven and of hell: how he can place
and displace in either at his pleasure: and that for money he can sell both to
those that will buy them of himself or of his Ministers? What weakness can
be more, than to believe, that it is less sin to kill a man, than to eat
flesh on a Friday or on a fasting day, or to break any of the least
commandments of this earthly God: If you also (in the bowels of your
conscience) consider the substance of your Mass Sacrifice, and the great abuse
that is hidden under the pretext of that Popish devise: you cannot deny, but
that you have (from the beginning) bin covered with the cloud of iniquity: for
how has ye whole world bin stra^gely bewitched (the most part yet continuing
so) to believe that there was a Purgatory, from whence no souls could be
purchased or chased but by the battery and blows of their masking Masses: and
to build their salvation on the sentence of an ignorant Idiot: that after he
had pronounced certain Sacramental words over many Cak^s of one mark, to
make so many Gods of them, which should (in deed) be holden the more
suspected, for that both the flesh and blood of them, if any were, have bin
instruments of poison: The blood to William Archbishop of York, in the time of
Pope Anastasius the fourth: and the flesh to the Emperor Henry the
seventh, by a Iacobin named Bernarde of Mount Politaine, one of the faction of
the Guelphis? But I have too long dwelled in these Tragical discourses, and
therefore I will no more remember them: trusting that I have to your good
contentme^t, performed (in some part) my first promise for examples.

Yet to the end you shall not object (without reply) that I fetch my
authorities from far, and set the honor of other countries to common sale of
slander, as one that mayltaine on foreign nations what he list: I will openly
confess that more than abominable abuses (remain in record) committed by our
forgone holy fathers of the same mark here in England. For at their first
visitation of the Monasteries, Couents, Churches, Colleges, and other
professed places of this Realm, their villainies, whoredoms, aduouteries,
incest, buggeries and murders, were found so manifest, as they noted infinite
numbers by name, which were convicted in all the sins that may be named. And
seeing ye same is already extant in print, I leave the particularities to ye
search of those, that desire to know every one in his colors.

At their suppression (which surely was Gods secret judgment upon them) they
were accounted four hundred Eouents, of sundry sorts of Monckes and Nuns,
besides the Friar beggars, near in number to two hundred houses, whose lewd,
lubberlye, letcherous and lazy lives, was so hated and abhorred (of the better
sort of men) as he withheld his holy and heavenly word from us, until Henry
the eight (of sacred memory) did put his hands to Gods plough, and stubbed up
all those rablement of most filthy and styncking weeds, pretending truly to
have proceeded, and to have tilled it with good corn: but he in whose judgment
refresh the foresight of all things, who knows the end before the beginning,
prevented his princely purpose, in no worse sort, than as his mighty Majesty
dearelye loved his seruante David, yet reierued the building of his holy
Sanctuary, to his son Solomon: even so, our godly late king Edward, (seeing
the worthynesse of his Fathers work and having so happy a way prepared)
entered on Christ's husbandry: where finding the weather fair and seasonable to
sow, be slacked no time (by his heavenly hyndes) to put Gods word into the
ground of all true english hearts. But, before the same could grow to his
perfect rypenesse, the appointed time of our continual comfort by our savior
not yet come, or our unthankful sin, or both, caused that careful husband, to
be taken from us: whereby both Cockell and Darnel, with all other sorts of
sour weeds, so ouerlayed ye corn, as the thousandth grain come to no profit.
The field of this flourishing realm (enclosed with the pale of safety) was
made common and cast open: wherinto entered droues of devouring beasts,
consuming all before them, and whole herds of vnringed swyne: who dug deep
to turn up the roots of our conscience, by altering our earthly bodies into a
fiery Element.

Then the Bulls of Basan over ran us al, Rome tryumphed upon our English Stage,
and who but the Pope and his Prelacie? what grauing, what cutting, what
caruing, and what gil^ing was there of Images? where no cost was too much, to
welcome this Antichrist.

The poor Gascoigne might then have had entertaynment, who hearing a Monk in
his Country preach, that when Apo Ste. Fol.
Antichrist came he would bring infinite treasure with him, and to win the
hearts of the worldlings, he would so we gold and silver every where, which
bountiful speeches, made the water flow so freely to ye Gascoignes mouth one of
his auditors, as he cried, Ediu quan biera ed a quet bon Segno ^^ Antichrist. O
God, when will yt good gentleman Antichrist come?

Thus this Idol had once more (with his gloss of golden show) the principal
place among us: whose worldly whelps crept out of every corner, and like Adders
that had long line hissing in the hoales of dunghils, came ^^^tining abroad:
And who but Master person and his Portas? for the constant were crucified, the
simple and weak bewitched, God in a strange language mocked, and the light
of English prayer (the pathwaye of the ignoraunte) clean extinguished.

But Christ in his mercy, beholding our sundry mournful minds, who (in
patience) continued al perserution and punishments, and having a special
regard to the place, of his elect, as Saint Austine long since prophesied of
us, when he saw certain children to be sold in Rome, asking of what Country
they were, was aunsweared of England, he said Been dicuntur Angli, quia nitent
vt Angeli, in quo regno Euangelium deiflorebit. So his heavenly Majesty loking
into our obedient misery (for his own sake) did cut off the cause of our
calamities, and called our Serenissima, our most sacred sovereign into her
right, to revenge his wrongs, and to redress our general afflictions. Now you
graceless Papists, that have been an eye witness to all these wretched woes,
among your brethren and Countrymen, what true replye can you make to these
heaps of enormities? If my learning and condition, were Divinely, as my
profession and arguments be Naturallye (the chief Rules and precepts you
covet to be persuaded by) I doubt not but I would (in pardon of my far
betters) so deliver you your own ignorance: as either you should yield to
your errors, or stand mute to defend them: yet as I am (the more to your shame,
that Martial minds can show you, on which foot you halt, as finely as you
seem to tredde) I must show you that you will not see how God performs in her
Princely parson, the same he denied to her predicessors.

She has reedifyed the walls of Jerusalem, and raised his holy temple to the
highest: not she, but God in her government, has made a brazen wall about you:
her early rising and late watchyng (I mean in the Image of her honorable
instruments) preserues you, keeps you, defendes and protects you from all
peril, you need not languishe in uncertainty of life, as other nations do:
your house is your Castle, your Beds your Bulwarks, your goods your glory,
your wives your worship and comfort, your daughters not ravished, and your
selves not slaued at the tyrannous pleasure of strangers: all these blessed
gifts you forget, and seek by secret sedition a hateful innovation among us.

Wisdom wills you to look into your own safety, and reason shows you no
rule surer, tha^ to dwell in duty: The Lords of her majesty's Counsel.
by the one you are taught foresighte, by the other obedience: which
considered, kept, and followed, you may triumph among good subjects. To love
God sincerely, and your Prince faithfully, is the assured protection both of
body and soul: then if you offend the first, how can you justly say you
favor the last? when you know her Majesty only seeks to set forth his
glory, do you desire the days of the Popes victory (a common calamity to
your Country) which cannot be, but by the overthrow of our soueraign? does
private malice by the provoking of Satan so possess you, as you are contented
to commit al to hazard? Will you willinglye lose one eye (and doubtful in the
end to keep the sight of that) to have your Country made blind? Do you
thyrste for her death, whose life has been and is a safety to us al? you will
deny it, and yet your practices approve it. What hope is to be had of you,
when neither her Majesty's goodness, nor your own danger can drive you from
your devises? They are daily discovered, and no sooner pardoned, but a new
mischief is a managing. Her great clemency hitherto, must sharpen her sword
of Justice to correct you: You brag there is no law to touch your lives, and
that makes you so bold and venterous as you are. You consider not, that the
soul is more precious than the body: And what is not in prescription against
you, by the Princes favorable proceedings, may be your destruction, by the
secret judgment of God. But if it were offered you, you would say with Menot:
Can we be more assured of salvation than Saint Paul was, who was chosen by
Christ, and rapt up into the third Heaven: and that he said, I desire to be
delivered, and to be with Christ: yet when there was a question of his death,
and that he should dye, he appealed to Caesar: So I doubt not if death were
offered you, you would appeal to the Pope. Or if any such desperate humor
should possess you (as God forbid) I trust you would send his Holiness the
same commendation the Italian did to the French King, being ^laine in his
wars, who utterly forgetting God, commended both his body and soul to the
King, saying, he had lost a good servant of him. But to free you from any such
frenzy, and the better to perceive your true duty: In Christian Charity
look into this that follows, where you shall see your own shame, which may
with speedy repentance mollify your Pharaos heart, and make you reclaim
your selves from your dangerous obstinacy. Consider the state of our Queens
most royal Majesty at the first (a mirror within your own memory) pace the
paths of her Pilgrimage hitherto, and accompany with discretion her famous
acts and years by degrees, beginning at the time when her Princely person was
in most hazard of persecution: and you shall find how she has bin
preserved, kept, continued, called, and restored: more by a heavenly
providence, than by any man's foresight, a or worldly diligence.

Who was her Bulwark, when (like a Lamb among Wolves) she was wrongfully
suspected, falsely accused, innocently committed, and the hour of her slaughter
most tyrannously appointed? did they not seek by all secreate sort to have
bereaved her blessed life from us? But she (most nobly) dwelling in tears,
as well for the pitiful persecution of others, as for her own imminent
peril, appealed with heart and mind to him, in whose heavenly hands rested
the redress of all. She wofullye wept with Hester for her people, in whom
she knew she had some interest. She bewailed with Jonas in the deapth of the
waves, and in the forrowe of her soul mourned for our distress. Was it the
might of man, or the providence of God, that (in the midst of all these
miseries) delivered her from devouring? Was it worldly policy, or the
foreknowledge of his heavenly Majesty, that wrought so mightily for her? Your
selves can witness, how she was freed from the Lions den like Daniel, called
like David to kill Golias, and placed in Salomons seat, to restore the living
child to his true mother. After her sacred Majesty received Iudiths sword, to
take the head from your Romish Holofernes, if you discipher all her doings in
true order as they are, and make question of every point and part of her
proceedings, the worst minded among you (though he would set aside al duty)
cannot deny, but that her gracious government, even to this hour, has bin
miraculous.

When she first entered the stage of her triumph, did she not find every corner
of this realm infected? some smoked, 1558. 17. Nouem. ^^eare.
some scorched, and some smoothered, with burning of poor Martyrs? were not
all your martyred men and holy Fathers (with most of the better sort)
embrewed with the bl^ude of innocents? did not sundry of honest life and good
credit (in sorrow of heart) abandon their Country? was any subject in
safety, when some were privily pyned, some secretly strangled, and no torment
(openly) left unexecuted, the glory of God defaced, Christ (in his chosen)
continually crucified, his word utterly banished, and the Popes trash made the
best ware among us?

In lieu of all these calamities, liberty for bondage, faynnesse for fear,
solace for sorrow, life for death, and mercy for tyranny, entered with her.
And where she found the holy Sanctuary with sin and pride p^^luted, served
with blasphemy, decked with Idolatry, and adorned with all kind of
Hypocrisy: she began her at the Church, and joining her manly indgemente to
her maydenlye mercy, (aided by the highest) so purely purged it from all
degrees of superstition, and that without persecution, blood, fire, or any
other force, as some of your selves, then seemed greatly to rejoice at it. Was
not this a ioyefull change, to be brought from the bondage of Satan, to the
liberty of the Gospel? from the fear of Hell, to the faynnesse of Heaven? from
the sorrow of our minds, to the solace of our souls? from the death of the
sword, to the life of Gods word? and from the tirannie of the Pope, to the
mercy of her Majesty?

And such as dwelled in their obstinate error (co^firming yt Apo. Ste Fo. 355.
constancy of Cardinal Andreas to his holy Vicar) who being in the terms of
death, and persuaded by his confessor, to honor one only God, answered I do
so, but that is the Pope, for seeing he is our God on earth, and that it is an
absolute commandment for me to honor but one, I will rather worship him that
is visible, than he that is invisible: his confessor replied that the Pope was
neither God nor Christ, although the world held him for his Vickar: how so
said the Cardinal? if you account the Pope to be only Christ's Vickar, it must
then follow that Christ should be greater than the Pope, and that cannot be:
for if God come visibly to Rome, the Pope will not know him, nor receive him,
before he have humbled himself unto him, and kissed his Pantophel.

According to the Sermon of a reverend Father Apo. Ste Fo. 355.
at Toures, who in a brauerye said, these villain Protestauntes, do utterly
reject the Pope, and would have us to hold only on Jesus Christ: but for my
part, I assure you, if they were both here present to command: it is ye Pope
above all that I would obey. Even so, those headstrong Papists, who continued
in the like damnable determinations, and could not by mild admonition be
removed from their wilful errors, were (to the hoped time of a more grace) only
committed, and not by rigor of death hatefullye murdered.

Consider the due course of all, how it was begun, confirmed, proceeded, and
how it is continued (your secret conspiracies, and open treasons, practicing to
pull it down) you can not otherwise truly say, but that God is the supporter
and protector of the one, and the discouerer and ouerthrower of the other.

Thus the glory of the almighty established, all offenses pardoned, private
malice reconciled, and a general unity confirmed: to show her motherly care
over us, to heap all her blessings upon us, and to manifest the message of
him that sent her, which is most laudable peace: she established a common
concord between France and this our Country 1559.
her Realm of England, to the unspeakable joy and comfort of al her loving
subjects.

Since which time, what Strange stratagemes, what Martial mischiefs, and
what unnatural parts have bin practiced, almost within your own view? with what
mournful Massacres, with what pitiful persecutions, has al our ears been
daily filled? no news but brought his bloudye report: for fire, famine, and
slaughter, was the continual occurrances of every foreign Packet. The
remembrance whereof might suffice to sink your Souls in sorrow, to see so
many of Christ's congregation cut in pieces. If it, were cause to procure a
trembling fear to any Christian heart that only heard it in what condition of
cruelty (suppose you) did those innocents dwell, that endured the terrible
execution of it.

Oh lamentable state, who preserved you, who protected you, who defended you,
and who has hitherto covered you from all these calamities, but God and our
Queen? She is still in Vtrumque paratus: her forsight, pierces into all
perils, she makes you hearers, and not feelers of these afflictions: she has
set you upon a sure Rock, to be seers and not sufferers of these barbarous
broils: and you forgetting all these good parts in her Princely person,
misusing her mercy, and contemning your own safety, seek to fall with
Satan, to be his children of perdition, and to become Butcherly instruments to
your brethren and Country. You deny to be of Caines kindred, and yet persist
in the persecutition of Abell, has not that triple Crowned monster, (to whose
devotion you are vowed) set this Royal Realm, to the common sale or rather
sacking, of any tyrant that dare intrude upon us? Is it not a manifest sign of
suspicion, and a plain argument of pretexed Treason (and therefore a warning
to all faithful subjects that love our Sovereign, to hold you in jealousy)
seeing your are under an oath to suppress her religion? how can you then be
true to her Majesty unless you be false to your Master? But it may be you
are of the poor woman's opinion of Perigourde, that offered one Candle to S.
Michael, to the end he should do her good, and an other to the Devil, to the
end he should do her no harm. So you seem to be Christians yt the Queen
may favor you, and you honor the Pope that his curses may not hurt you: for
otherwise (I fear) there is no trust at all to be had in your duty.

How much you dishonor God, break his commandments, and blaspheme the
blessed Trinity (by your wilful dissembling with him, who sees the secrets
of all hearts) your consciences do accuse you, your deeds detect you, and
your words do witness and bewray (so far as you dare utter) the sum of
that you seek. Is it not her Majesty's person, and (this shouell full of earth
as it has pleased them to term it) her Realm of England, that they have
vowed to correct and root up? Is not the sentence of their cruelty concluded
and pronounced as well upon you as against us? how can you then shun their
sharp tyranny, but taste the edge of the sword with us, if their Romish
pretenses should prevail? but I doubt you would for a shift say, Non noui
hominem, and deny both Prince and profession. Be it that the same would serve
for a vizard on the sudden to mask your Hypocrisy: in the end you should
be accounted traitors, and with the hateful horror of your conscience be
accompanied with all cursed calamities to your grave.

The most eloqu^nt Cicero after he had discovered the secret conspiracies of
Catelin, before the body of the Senate and in open counsel, to his face
delivered him the devises and driftes of all his treasons, approving his housed
practices to tend to encampe robberies, to the murdering of the nobility, and
to the burning of their City, and showing how his confederates attended his
coming. What cause could procure swifter justice? they knew it they had him in
hand, and yet then (in Princely policy) they willed him to depart the City:
supposing it more peril to have him among them, than in the field with
displayed ba^ner against them. Catelin a Pagan, provoked by poverty, kindled
by private grudge, and heaued up by an Ethnic hope, to better his wretched
state, as a desperate man conspired against men: But you Christians, pressed
with no penury, wallowing in wealth, freed from all cause of contention,
sitting in safety, and dwelling in that happy condition as no age did ever so
florishe nor any of your innovation can continue the like for all degrees,
conspire against God, against your loving and most favorable Queen, and
against the foil and seat that first gave you ^ire and fustenance, which
surely so long as you continue under the servitude and yoke of Papistrie, is a
most true principle of your pretense.

Therefore (in the bowels of our Savior Jesus Christ) I humbly desire you, as
brethren by one Father, servants to one Maistresse, and children of one
moulde, to search the Scriptures, to look into the mercy of his heavenly
Majesty, to remember her Graces sweet and reclaiming countenance to you all,
and in pity to behold your most dear mother, on whose knees you have bin
dandled, and at whose England.
breast you have bin nourished even from your birth.

But if you be minded to persist in your perverse opinions, and that no milk
or meat can please your pallets, unless it come from Rome: if you cannot
abide the blessed light of her Majesty's life: if you cannot endure the
heavenly countenance of her joyful regard: or if you account her Princely
Person to be the eye sore to your sorrow: I say with Cicero to Catelin, fly to
your Pope, leave both Court and Country, and shun the light of the Sun,
that so much does dazell your sight, and let good subjects enjoy the benefit
of that you are so much unworthy of. Your own experience shows that no
practice will prevail to harm one hair of her head whom next God you hate
most: for the Lord of hosts does keep her, he has set legions of Angels
about her, they houer over her, they march with her, they go before her, and
guard her from all treasons: they make known your ways, they deliver her your
drifts, and they discover your very thoughts unto her. This you assuredly see,
that the whole course of her Majesty's life is myraculous: and yet your Pharao
like wilfulness will not observe any part of it. When you have turned the
hour Glass of your own errors, you shall find how many sands of sorrow
does run in mischief to the last minute. But God of his mercy make you to
know him, to love our gracious Queen, and in the duty of true subjects to
honor her and obey her, and to give her a Mathusalems age to govern us. Amen.

FINIS.

