THE LYVES, Of Philosophers and Orators: Written in Greek, by Eunapius, of
the City of Sardeis in Lydia. Brought into light, Translated into Latin, and
Dedicated to the Queens most excellent Majesty, our most gracious Princess
and Sovereign, Queen Elizabeth. By the great learned man, Hadrianus Iunius
Hornanus. 1568. And now set forth in English, at his request: and Dedicated to
the right Honorable, the Lord Chancellor of England. 1579.

Wherein may be seen,

The deep knowledge of Philosophy.
The wonderful works of secret Arts.
The marvelous effects of perfight eloquence.
The singular gifts of natural qualities.
The envy of the ambitious, against the learned.
The daingerous days that then befell for faith.
The one of Christians, the other of Infidels.
Imprinted at London by Richard Iohnes, and are to be sold at his shop over
against S. Sepulchers Church without Newgate. The, xx. day of May.

To the right Honorable, Sir Thomas Bromley, Knight, one of the Queens
Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel, and Lord Chancellor of England.
MAy it like your good Lordship. The renowned sentence of divine Plato, so often
celebrated in Dedication of Books to Princies, and great personages: wherein
he affirms, that those States dooflorish, where Kings be Philosophers, or
Philosophers be Kings: seems not so sound to some, that are professors of
the Doctrine of the same Plato. For they that are occupied in public
affairs, be wont to leave the studies of learning, because the life, full of
business, takes away the leisure of the learned. And the nearer we approach to
Jupiter, who is Lord of government, the further we straye from Mercury, who is
Prince of learning.

Moreover, the Sun, signifies, Magistrates and Honors, and Saturn
betokens Philosophers and Letters: whose kingdoms and houses in heaven, be
contrary one to another. The^, what Prince ca^ be a philosopher, or what
Philosopher shall be a Prince?

To this, an answer is made by Plotinus, who is the first Philosopher that is
spoken of in this work. That the mind of man is more mightier, then the
nature of the Heavens and earth, and so brings to pass, that the one does
not promise, nor the other permit.

Then, to let this stand as it did. They have been accoumpted to be
Philosophers, that studieth to know the causies of divine and human things,
to teach and follow the way of good life, of the which they were called
Masters of virtue, and Divines of the earth: who, as sacred Ministers should
speak and do nothing, but that should tend to godliness.

Of these so rare men, Eunapius, has written, the second race of the chief
learned, flourishing from the reigns of Galienus and Tacitus, xiii. hundred
years past, unto the time of Theodotius, or there about.

This Book lay hid in Hungary, till Hadrianus Iunius, a great learned man,
did cause it to be Printed in Greek, and Translated it into Latin: and a
eleven years since, Dedicated it to the Queens most excellent Majesty, our
Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, and brought it over into England: where, having
continued thus long, is now become English, and under the protection and
authority of your Lordship, he sueth and beseeches that it may be made of the
English nation, And so being accepted, remaining, also, a faithful member: he
may, with fervent mind, pray to the Lord of Lords, for the long preservation
of your Lordship, in continuance of Honor and good lyking, to the glory of
God, the contentacion of the Prince, and commodity of the Country.

H. I. H.

The Epistle of Adrianus Iunius, to the Queens Majesty.
To the most gracious and mighty Elizabeth, of England, France and
Irelande, Queen.
THe saying of Plato, is commonly spoken, and used in every man's mouth: and
yet I doubt, if it be of every man, so well understood, (most Gracious
Queen:) that kingdoms are happy, where, either Princies be Philosophers, and
given to Learning, or Sapient and learned men, do govern Kingdoms. The which
saying, contains more inwardly, then it shows outwardly, as I think. For
whereas Plato, the fowntaine of Wisdom, does propound, Plato.
two officies and chargies of Philosophy, that is, to know divine things, and
to govern human matters: he meant, that then, Commonwealthes, and Kingdoms,
should be happy and blessed, when Princes should have the knowledge of God and
heavenly things. And being instructed Pindarus, borne at Thebes, the which
City was spared of the Lacedaemonians, and his offspring of Alexander, for his
virtues sake Diotimus.
with that knowledge, would minister the law purely, study for the public
weal, and keep the people in obedience. These be the two Anchores which the
Thebane Poet thought meet to be cast, to stay the ship, that is tossed with the
tempest. These be the two Nurses, which Antiquity assigned to Jupiter, Ite,
and Adrastia. The one moderatrice of right, the other distributrice, of holy
and just. Diotimus thought these to be necessary ministracies, to the
government, and preservation of kingdoms. Justinian the Iustinianus.
Emperor being instructed by great plenty of learned men, knew none other
Philosophy, when he comprehended the prudence of the law, within the compass
of her bars, and affirmed it was the knowledge of divine and human things.
This Philosophy, the most learned Poet, joins together, in Anio, whom,
when, he makes both a King and a Priest, by the example of the King Anius,
both a Prince of ^ Country, ^ a Priest of Apollo. ^hilippe of Macedon^e.
Jews, what else does he mean to show, but that he had knowledge of divine
things, and ruled his people justly, by laws of authority. These arts, (which
be surer and stronger Locke^, then those, wherewith Philippe of Macedonie,
said, he held Grecia) being given to you from God, does maruelously bewtifie
your Kingdom, most gracious Queen: for as much as being so instructed, you
know how to rule and maintain both parts. And for as much, as after the
example of Chrysanthas of Xenophon, Chrysanth^^
making no difference between a good Prince, and a good Father, you bear and
show the affection of a parent toward your subjects, and being constant in
cleamencie, you are clear from crudelitie. In this, following Agis Agis, King
of Lacedemonia, after his noble acts, was killed in Prison, because he would
have renewed Lycurgus his Laws*
King of Lacedaemonia, who said that a King might govern his Realm, without
force of arms, if he would govern his Subjects, as a Father does his
Children: in as much, as by the divine arts of peace, you adorn, enritche,
(and that I may use the sacred word) you do sanctifye your most flourishing
Kingdom. Hereof it is, that among the chief ornaments of this world, you are
accounted the only Queen, and exalted with most exceeding praise: Plato, the
Prince of wit, and fountain of pure Philosophy, did think, that to proper
names, their was a certain divine strength, agreeable to nature, and that
most truly: For what name could more aptlye be given, to the nature of your
Majesty, then that which she has: as in the which does shine a most certain
and undoubted testimony of God, even that same, which the word signifies with
the Hebrews that is, An wholesome and sweet study of peace, a friend of
Heaven, coming from none other place, but from Heaven: engrafted to you in
your birth, to the which, straight from the Cradell, succeeded the help of
singular and rare learning, as a seasoning of the mind, and a quiet Repose of
Musies adhibited: with the which, natural eloquence, the companion of peace,
did so grow, and plentifullye increase, and is so great in diverse tongues, as
the greatest learned Ambassadors of Princes, be astonished and amassed at it:
And I am of opinion, that in a Royal race, nothing can be procured, or wished,
more ample, glorious and excellent, then these your two ornaments: that is,
testimonies of God, chiefly in this troublesome tempest of states: By these two
gardes I think, that kingdoms are best and most surely defended: that is, by
peace and by eloquence, which makes minds to agree. But why do I (most
gracious Queen) stay in your praise, the which the more I extol, the more I
diminish.

But because I see the Dedications of books, by a received and confirmed
manner, commonly to be directed to Princely persons, for two causes* either to
get and deserve thank of such as they be, or to provide an help against
enme, and poisoned tongues of slaunderers. Of the which, the first
consideration, seems to proceed from God, to whom, antiquity, as it is well
known, being mindeful and thankeful of their benifits, did offer the first
fruits of their increase: The second, to rise of preservatives: of the which,
great plentye was in great price, with men of the old time, whose minds were
light of belief, and possessed, against poysonings and enchauntments: I being
persuaded, yea compelled by both ways, have presented to your most gracious
Majesty, Eunapius, an old wrighter, (of whom I have spoken at large in his
life,) both that I might gain you, by invocation, to my vow, with a reward,
not great, but rare and of old money, the which now, ca^ abide the light, by
the benefit of the Press: and also, the mouth of lewd detractours, (to use
Catoes word,) that which thinks nothing well done, might be stopped by the
glory of your name. May it please your Majesty to accept this labor, and
defend it, with a gracious mighty hand, and a cheerful countenance, of a
Stranger: but in time past, an inhabitour long time of your kingdom, whom
God, most good and mighty, long preserve in safety, to your Realm, and to the
Musies of Learning.

From Harlem, the Kal. of March. 1568. Hadrianus Iunius Hornanus.

A Verse called Acrostichis. To the Queens Majesty, By the Author.
EXcelling far the blasing beam, of Venus Star so bright,
LYghtning most clear of Virtues flame, and plat of Pities form:
INuiolate glistring stoure, and joy of Pallas praise,
SEnt down to us from starry Pole, to stablish equal right.
ANd laws to men, that are enclind, to arms of mighty Mars,
BY beating down Bellonas force, to spread to all the world:
EXquisite increase of vvitte, immortal honorsure,
TO whom is given so great a zeal, good learning to augment.
Heavenly O Princess pure, and only Phoenix of all Queens,
Above the Stars and both the Poles, your fame is so enhaunst:
AS by the gift of sugared mouth, you mount above the skies,
NEctar the drink of Gods, do flow, from your most eloquent tongue.
GReece may hyde their Aspasia, and Rome their Gracchus mother
Leaving of, to praise the paterns of their flourishing style:
Jove would use none other speech, nor yet the Musies nine,
Eternal same, to ancient Brute, posterity shall give.
FOr, from the furdest part of Spain, unto the race of Rome,
Renowned is in you, the grace, of passing natural phrase:
ACcept this book even now drawn from the well of Grekish spring
NOble is the work, and of Eunapius learned hand.
CItisine of Sardis, royal seat of Craesus land,
IN which he does extol the minds, with fame and rote from heaven
ETernally, of worthy men, toflye above the Stars,
HIstory of his time he writes, with quick and perfect course.
IOying that he is released, from dark and helly den,
BLeamished with putrefaction, and spild with worms and mothes.
Esteem the mind, though simple, be the gift for such a Prince,
RVde Incense, and Sacrifice, does please the Gods sometime.
NO fault they find with homely stuff, so seasoned be the heart,
Embrace therefore with gracious hand, and eyes of princely look:
EQually, even as the Sun, does shine upon the world,
QValifying the gift, according to the gyuers will.
Using to send, his light at large, to all the other Stars,
EXamine our endeavor, by measure, not by weight:
Royal Queen, honor of the state, and fort of Brittons wealth,
EXempt our work from Momus wrest, and people of evil tongues
G'Ard us from their bitter galls, by your most sacred speech
INconquerable, so Pallas, you make against your foes:
Natural pearl, of nourishing peace, the Gods you so maintain,
ANd cause you for to live above, Sybillas ancient years.
Hadrianus Iunius of Harlem, D. in Physic, to the gentle Reader.
CYrus in Xenophon, being at the point of death, did admonish his Children,
that the most wholesome and best doctrine was to be gathered of examples passed.
They can be found in no place so purely, as in Histories (which some have
called the Mistress of Life, and the soul of truth:) wherein, both the matter
and acts of private men, and also universal affairs, be propounded to be red,
as in a Glass before the eyes. I being wholly addicted to this labor, whiles I
make an History of my Country, to instruct the present age, and our posterity,
I was the first that took in hand, to enterpre^e Eunapius, a Greek wrighter
by leisure, pulled out of darkness: yet maimed and spotted in many places, and
as obscure as might be, for the short Phrase of speaking, peculiar to the
nature of that age: Notwithstanding it has pleasantness, instilling an higher
purity of doctrine in the mind, and delivers knowledge, of things omitted
and unknown of other wrighters. Also more destrous, to express the sentence,
then the style and conduct of the words, and rather to clean to the ears,
then over varely to leave them.

And though be inueieth somewhat sharply against Monks, in whose
contemplations, the foundation of Christian Religion, was laid and taught in
the time of Constantine the great: who would not suffer that an Infidel, and
an enemy, of the faith and truth? Seeing we suffer, read, carry about, and
wear with hands, both night and day, Porphirius, the adversary of
Christianitye, Luciane, the obstinate scorner of our Savior, and Iuliane, the
reuolter, persecutor of the Galilees: (for so does he call the^ that profes
Christ) whom, if he had had longer life, he would utterly have bestroyed.
Therefore good men shall take an iniurye spoken of a common enemy of Christ's
name, as not spoken: and cast it forth and contemn it: Yea, shall rather turn
the scorn into their glory.

Farewell and enjoy.
An Ogdoasticon, that is, eight Greek Versies. Written by Gerarde Phalcepurgie
of Nimega, touching Eunaplus, and his Craustatour Hadrianus Iunius.
To this senc^.
Blind darkness held Eunapius long yt truly wrote y^ lives Of many
Philosophers, Physicians and Orators:
Whom, Sambucus, worthy of praise, and ready to do well,
Has brought to light, and let at large, from Du^geon dark and deep,
But Iunius a Physician, and the Philosopher good:
Has him translated, and made appear, to all that list to read,
More worthy praise it is, to be a Translatour faithful,
Then to make a Paraphrase, or to invent a book.
The life of Eunapius, chiefly gathered out of his own writings.
EVnapius was borne at Sardies, the chief City of Lydia, and from a Child,
Scholar of Chrisantbius, a Philosopher of Sardeis, and a sacred Prelate in
Lydia, and his kinsman, (for he had married Melita, that was Eunapius Cousine)
by whose persuasion, he wrote the lives of certain Philosophers, Orators, and
professors in Physic, not resisting his Masters authority: He Sailed from
Asia to Athens, to get learning, when he was sixeteene years of age, at the
which time, he says he had a curled and thick heayre, somewhat white by many
hoarye heayres, appearing with the other, resembling the brightness of Silver,
after the manner of the foming Sea. In that passage he was taken with a
vehement ague, gotre^, as it should seem, by the tossing of the Sea, which, in
short time, did so enfeeble and diminish the strength of the young man, that
not being able to go a foot, he was borne by the hands of his Countrymen,
that came with him in the journey, from Piraeo, the Port of Athens, to
Proaeresius house: whose fame brought him forth. Where, the disease
increasing, and at length, almost in desperation, one Aeschines of Chia, a man
of that sort, that proves practice by men's death, opened the young man's
mouth, with certain iron instruments, and put in a medicine, by the which,
the body was well, purged, and the patient began to amend: All the which, were
more happelye done then was hoped, and not known to Proaeresius, although the
thing being straight known, and a great fame of his recouerye. Proaeresius,
hearing the young man to be of great hope, did praise him openly, in a public
audience, and whiles he lived, used him as his dear Child, and he likewise,
honored him as a God, with great reverence for the admiration of his virtue,
and singular learning. He entered to the state of man, (as himself says) when
Iulianus was slain in Parthia, and Valens and Valentinian, were Emperors. The
fyft year after he came to Athens, he would have gone into Aegipt, taking
example of Plato and Eudoxus, but he was forbidden by his parents, and called
home to Lydia, whether he returned: as I can perceive, against his will.

He was right well learned in Physic, by his own testimony, in so much as
he was chief in that order, when old Chrysanthius was let blood, before
Oribasius, that was most excellent in Physic was come, being called to it.
He wrote also a Chronicle, in the which he she weth the lives of the Emperors,
from Heredianes time, to his age, the which (I here) is kept in the Library
of Ven^se, as a monument: it appeared he was not much desirous of glory, for
he never names himself, being content to call him self, the wrighter of this
Treatise.

He was much given to the Gentiles sect, ennemy to the Christians: which, as a
Rat, bewraying himself, he utters every where, chieflye when he reprooueth
Constantine the Emperor, for overthrowing the noble Temples of the Gods,
thorowghout the world, and erecting howses, of Christian men: And where he
lamenteth, that when the Gods Temples were put down, Monks were brought
into holy places, and Martirs and Saints heads, (as he scoffith) being salted,
were showed and worshipped for Gods. It seems he was professed to the secret
mysteries of the Goddesses Eleusines, and of the chief Pr^^st of the place,
(whose name he had rather pass in silence, then bewraye wickedly) admitted to
the order of the Eumolpidan^s, and that he had the room of a chief Minister,
(whom they call Hierophanta,) although he were not that Countr^y man, contrary
to Eumolpus law, by the which, it was forbidden. He seems to follow, not the
manner of the speech of Asia, which is superfluouse, and full of words, but a
pure, and as it were, a painted kind, which was then peculiar to the sect of
Sophistes, which do not shadow the things, but rather express them with
liuelye colors, and so sets them before the eyes, as a man would think he
saw them presently, yet is he brefe: and beside he gathered in every place, the
learned flowers, of Poets and Philosophers, and as stars places them in his
Style.

Moreover, as touching the title by the name of Sophistes, (which was evil
thought of) they are to be understood, that were learned in art, especially
in Eloquence: And can sustain public profession with praise. Who now for the
most part are honored with the name of Masters. So as they be Philosophers,
whom Tacitus, calls teachers, and Fabius professors of Sapience. And
Sophistes, readers of liberal arts; or otherwise of great name.

The lives of excellent Philosophers and worthy Orators. Written in Greek by
Eunapius of Lydia. etc.
XEnophon the only Xenophon in Philosophy, contented with Plato, and in arms
might compare with the best Captains.
Philosopher, that expressed the study of Sapience, both in words and works,
did wright moral virtues in books, and practiced manlye virtues in deeds, in
so much as by his examples, he made skylfull leaders of Armies.

Alexander the great, had not been made great, if Xenophon had not affirmed
that the byactes of forward The word is (...) which signifies Superuacanea
and perfunctoria, things ouerly and lightly done which be called bymatter.
men, ought to be put to writing. My travel shall not be to wright the light
acts of some fingular men, but the very worthy acts in deed. For if the
pastime of virtue, must be declared, it were amiss to keep in silence the
earnest work thereof.

My treatise shall not be to the Reader as an undoubted matter, (for of al I
cannot be a witness) nor such a one as shall make a choice of the best
Philosophers and Orators, but to attribute to every one his singular
profession. He that is described to be best and chief in this declaration,
shall be perceived by the report that shall be made, of him that will judge the
same.

The Writer means to describe them by exquisite memorialles, by the which if
he misseth of the truth, either he lay the fault, as a good Scholar does
upon an evil teacher, or reprove them of error, that were deuisers of notable
wonders. So that his work may be pure and irreproouable, seeing he followed
them, whom it was fytte to follow. And for as much as they be rare and very
few, that have written of this matter, a man may say this only, that neither
the things written before, shall be hid from the reader, neither that our
selves have hard, even to this present, but decent order shall be kept in both,
not altering things before written, and establishing by wrighting, that we have
hard, by turn and chainge of time, and so make the thing firm and stable.

Who they be that have written Porphyrius w^^ at Rome in Aurelianus time, and
Scholefellow with Origines a vehement adversary of Christ.
of Philosophers lives.
POrphyrius and Sotion, have written the history of them tha^ were
Philosophers in deed. But it seemed good to Porphyrius, to end with Plato and
his time. Socion, was of Aristotcles scet: And wrote the book, entitled,
Cornu Copi^, ^ull of varyety of learning, as Aulus Gellius shows Ammonius of
Origenes and Porphyrius time.


Sotion, as appears, went further, though Porphyrius was of later days.

The time between, not being sufficiently set forth, for the worthiness and
diversity of the Philosophers, and virtue of the Drators, Philostratus of
Lemnus, did briefly run over the lives of the best, with singular grace.

But none did write eractly of them, among whom was Ammonius of Egypt, the
master of divine Plutarche, and Plurarche himself, that was the beuty and
armony of all Philosophy. Also Euphrares of Egypt, Dion of Bithyn^a, who had
the surname of Golden mouth, and Appolonius Tranaeus, not a Philosophex
Plutarche in Traia^es time in Rome, and in Iulianus time, at Athens.
only, but a mean thing between the Gods and men, who being a lover of
Pythagoras doctrine, did teach it most diuiuely and effectually: of whom
Philostratus of Lemnius, did write exquisitly, intituling Dio^, clad in a Lions
skin, and great with Traiane.
his books. The life of Appolonius, where he should rather have termed it. The
coming of a God to men. In the which time, Carneades was famous among the
brutish sect, that was called Cynickes. Apolonius had so great knowledge, as
being at Ephesus, told the very instant yt Domitian was slain.


If any regard is to be had of that sort, of the which was Musonius, Demetrius,
and Menippus, with some other: but these were most notable. And albeit, yt no
man, as far as I know, have so set forth their lives, as they may be known
plainly and perfectly, yet their writings may sufficiently express their
lives, Philostratus was at Rome, in Scuerus time.
being so full of learning and knowledge, searching moral virtues and natural
causes, as they may expel ignorance out of the mind of their Scholars, as
Carneades* Cy^ykes* of their behavior like Dogs.
a certain darkness.

Divine Plutarche, noting his own life and his Masters, in his Books here
and there, says, that Ammonius dyed at Athens. And although the chief of his
works, be called Lives. Compared, of most worthy men, according to their acts
and deeds. Yet he sprinkleth his own life and his Masters, in every several
book. So as if a man will look narowly upon them, and search how every thing
fell out, and circumspectly examine each part, he may collect a great process
of their lives. Lucianus* Demon^ctes a despiser of the world in Adrianes tym^:
he lived one hundred years.


Lucian of Samoseta, a man made to move laughter, did write the life* of
Demonactes, a Philosopher of his time (...) An that book, using persyt
diligence, which he did n^^^ wether My meaning is to bring matter to memory,
not ignorant that some things paraduenture be hydden from us, and some be not:
bestowing all my care and study in this poinct, that I might form a continual
and exact description of the lives of most excellent men in Philosophy and
cloquence. And if I do not obtain my desire, I shall have the luck that
carnest and fervent Lovers has. For they beholding their Lady, and leeing her
bewty evidently, look down, their eyes being daselied, not able to fasten
their sight. But if they see her trim face, her brave color, and gaye
eareringes, they gather heart, and they fix their eye, and spend the time upon
that show, abiding and continuing rather in delyght of Ornaments to bewty,
then of ^ewty it self. Likewise I, having directed mine earnest endeavor to
this kind of writing, what I could hear or learn of men of mine age, would
not let them pass with silence for any contrary affection, but to my power,
honoring the entry and door of the truth, that I might deliver it to them
that shall come after, that either will hear, or can follow that which is best.

Thorough common calamities, the time has had a cutting and a breaking off.

At the first, there was great plenty of learned men, but after Platoes time,
great want is showed to be Plato.
of all, even to the reigns of Claudius and Nero. As for those unhappy that
had but a years space, as Claudius. Nero. Galba. Vitelius. Otho. Vespasian.
Titus.
Galba, Vitellius and Otho, they are not to be written of: But Vespasian and
Titus, and them that reigned after them, that we should not seem of purpose
to prosecute that, but rather to speak ouerly and at once: that the best sort
of Philosophers continued to Seuerus time: and had their History happily
ioygned Seuerus.
with the Emperors, that excellent virtue might be accompanied with favorable
fortune.

Let no man find fault, if we so describe the time, as we might be the better
able to make conjecture, and take a convenient be ginning to proceed in the
process, that we have ^nterprised.

Plotinus.
PLotinus was a Philosopher of Plotinus. In Probus and Tacitus time, subject to
the falling sickness.
Egypt, and because I name the Country. I will add also the City, where he
was borne, which they call Lycopolis, Although divine Porphyrius did not wright
it, affirming he was his Scholar, and spent either all or the Plotinus an
interpretor of Plato, and Marsilius Ficinus, of him in. 54 books, with Coments
upon. 18. of them.
most part of his life with him. The Alters of Plotinus be yet warm, and his
books, in the hands of the learned, more then Plato, and the common forte
though they read not his precepts, yet they form their lives according to the
same.

Porphyrius did express every part of his life so, as no man can say more. Yea
it seems he did interpret many of his books.

But the life of Porphyrius, no man, that I know, has hithertoo written.
Therefore as much as I can gather by tokens according to my knowledge, thus
much have I learned of him.

Porphyrius.
TYrus was the Country of Tyros. Porphyrius, an interpretor of Plato, in
Aurelianus time, an extreme aduersarye to the Christians. Longinus. Cassius.
Porphyrius, the theife City of the ancient Phenitians. His parents were of
good estate. He being brought up in learning, proceeded and continued, till he
was Longinus Scholar, and in short time, was an ornament to his Master.

Longinus was at that time a lively library, and a flourishing study, to whom
authority was given to judge of the former learned me^, as before him diverse
Dionisius.
others, and Dionisius of Caria, most notable of all. Porphyrius was first
named Malcus, after the Sirian Malcus.
tongue, which, signifying a Prince, Longinus called him Prophirius, turning
the name of a King into the purple color that kings did wear. With him he
was trained with singular learning, not inferior to him, neither in humanity
nor eloquence, yet he passed not of that, but gave his whole study to
Philosophy.

Longinus was accounted with the most extellent Longinus.
men of his time, and his books were so plentiful, as they brought an
admiration to him. If other men did reprove any of the ancients, his sentence
was not approved, till Longinus confirmed it.

Porphirius being thus instructed; and in great expectation of all men, had a
great desire to see Rome, that was Lady of the world, that he might win
that City to the study of Sapience, being come, and entered into society with
ye great Plotinus, he refused all other, and gave himself wholly to him: of
whose doctrine being greedy with out sarietie, as himself said, he spent the
time in hearing of those divine lessous, that issewed from that flowing
Fountain. At length being overcome with the vehemency of those speeches, it
grieved him he had a body, and was mortal: he sailed into Cicilia, by the
rock, Carybdis, where, they say, Vilisses passed, but he could abide to see no
City, nor here men's voices. So did he leave delight and dis^^se and went to
Lelibaeuin, Lelibaeuin.
one of the three Forelands of Cicilia, toward Africa. There he lay in pain
and passions, refusing all meat, and forsaking all men.

The great Plotinus was not deceived herein, but either by following his
steps, or seeking for him, Plotinus, recouereth. Porphyrius.
found him out, where he was laid, and by good words, so comforted him, as he
called again the life, that was going from the body, and made it able to
retain the same. So as he recovered and was safe, and after, wrote the talk
that was between them.

But the secrets of Philosophy, being hydden, as Poetry in Fables,
Porphyrius, finding the remedy to make them manifest: with praise of his
experience, did write a Treatise of them, and gave light unto them. Then he
returned to Rome, and renewed his study, showing proof of it publicly. The
glory of Porphyrius, redounded to Plorinus, by whom, both the Senate and the
people knew, he was enstructed.

Plotinus seemed hard and dark, for the divine and obscure subtlety of his
words and works. But Porphyrius, as a Cheane of Mercury, full of variety of
learning, sent among men, declared every thing, firmly and plainly. For he
says in a place, which, paradventure) he wrote when he was young, that he had
Philosophy by Oracles
revelation of more divine knowledge, then the common sort. And in the same
book he writes how a man should apply his diligence upon such matter. He
says further, that he drove a devil out of a Bathe, whom the inhabitaunts
called Causanthan. His Causanthan
chief Scholefelowes, as himself writes, were Origenes, Amelius, and
Aquilinus, and that they wrote Origenes. Amelius. Aquilinus.
some Books, but their style was barren, though their precepts were good, and
aptly set forth in words. Yet Porphyrius prayseth them for their gravity, he
receiving all the thanks, and only celebrating and setting forth his Master,
being endued with all kind of knowledge. A man may doubt and maruayle wherein he
did most excel. Whether in the Art of Rethorike, or exact knowledge of the
grounds of Grammar, in the science of numbering, or in Geometry or Music. For
Philosophy, neither left he any thing unknown, neither could he well
express what he knew. For natural and divine knowledge, I leave them to
Religion and Mysteries. Such a general knowledge had he in all manner of
virtue, that a man may doubt, whether the pleasantnes of his Orations, or the
pithinesse of his precepts, or the vehemency of his speeches, deserves more
praise.

It seems he was married to Marcella, for there is a Book directed to
Marcella his wife: whom he says, he married, being mother to live Children,
not to have Children by her, but to teach her Children which she had by a
friend of his. It seems also he lived till he was old, whereby he left some
works contrary to his former wrytings. Of the which I can not judge the cause,
but that in time he thought otherwise. They say he dyed at Rome, at which time,
Paulus and Andromacus of Syria, were rectors Paulus.
of Rethorike in Athens. And it is very like it was Andromacus.
about the time of Galienus, Claudius, Tacitus, Aurelianus, and Probus. In
whose days, Dexippus lived, Dexippus.
that wrote a story of that time, a man fulfilled with all learning and good
virtues.

Jamblicus.
NExt these, Iamblicus was the Philosopher of most fame. He was of Iamblicus in
Constantinus Magnus time.
good birth, from wealthy and fortunate Parents. His Country was Calcide, He
answered maruelously to many hard questions of Porphyrius.
which is a City of the hollow part of Syria. He was familiar with Anatolius,
who, after Porphyrius, was most esteemed, and passed him far, and atteyned to
the heyght of Philosophy. After him he ioygned Anattolius.
with Porphyrius, to whom he was not inferior, but in purity and pyth of
style. For he did not use his speech with sweetness and delyght, nor had any
clearenes, nor ioyed in neat phrases. Yet was he not utterly obscure, nor
faulty in his style, but as Plato says of Xenocrates, he did not sacrifice to
the graces of Mercury. Therefore he does not deteyne his Auditor, X.
nor allure him to read, but rather affray him, and turns him from it. For
his keeping of Justice he was so fauord of the Gods, as multitudes resorted
unto him from every place, to be partakers of his doctrine: of whom, who was
the best, it is hard to tell.

For there was Sopater of Syria, who was most eloquent in word and writing.
Sopater.


Aedesius and Eustathius of Cappadocia. Theodorus and Euphrasius of Grecia,
which excelled in virtue, Eustathius. ^up^rasius.
and many other not much inferior in eloquence. It is a wonder how he could
please all. He was sree to every of them. He did little for him self without
his Disciples and fellows, and that for a respect to God. He accompanied much
with his friends. His diet was simple and alter the old manner. He cheered
his guests, and filled them with his sweet talks. They that were not weary,
nor full of his discourses, were his common guests. They that durst best
speak, would come forth and say. O most divine Master, why art thou so
alone? Why do thou not imparte thy rare Sapience to us? A talk is told us
by thy servant, that when thou art at thy prayers, thou art taken up ten
cubytes high, and that thy body and garment, is turned into color of fair
gold. And when thy prayers are done, thy body returns to his old estate, as
it was before thou dyddest pray, and comes to the ground again, and than
thou l^ttest us have thy company. At these words Iamblicus laugh^d, not being
very prone to laughter, and said. He was no fool that has deceived you thus
But from henceforth I will do nothing without you. Thus he showed himself, and
it came to the writers knowledge by Chrysanthius, Chrysanthius Schoolemaister
to (...).
his Scholemaister that was of Sardis, and he was very samiliar Scholar with
Aedesius, and Aedesius one of the chief with Iamblicus, and of them that used
the above written words to him.

Furthermore, he showed great demonstration of his divine knowledge, after this
sort. The Sun did show upon the extreme parts of the Orizon, when he
enters into the sign of the Dog, at which time a Sacrifice was wont to be
made in one of the Suburbs. And when all was well fynished, they returned into
the City, going leysurely, for they had a talk of God, agreeing with the
Sacrifice.

Than the voice failed, and he fyxing his eyes on the ground for a time: looked
upon his friends, and cried to them. Let us go another way: for a dead body is
carried not far of. When he had thus said, he took another way, as he
thought, more pure. Some followed him, thynking it a shame to leave their
Master. But the more part, and youthful sort, among whom was Aedesius,
thought it a superstitious point, and like Hounds that hunted after their
game, went on their way.

They had not gone far, but they met with the buriers of the dead Corpse, and
did not leave it so, but asked them if they went that way, they said, they
must needs, for there was none other. This did ye more testify his divine
knowledge, as there was no use of sight, but a secret knowledge by odor. They
would have tried it in a greater matter, but Iamblicus told them it was not in
his power, but at time of opportunity.

Not long after, it seemed good to them to go to Gadara, the season serving, to
ye Bathe of Syria, in goodness Gadara.
next the Romans Bathe of Baia, with ye which, Baia.
no hot Bathe can compare. They use to go to Gadara yearly. And so being in
the Bathe, and they with him, reasoning of ye same, Iamblicus smiling, said.
Although I am forbidden by God, to open this unto you, yet for your sakes I
will utter it. He wylled his companions to learn of the dwellers, what the
ancient name was of ye two little Baths yt were of most price. They did as he
required them, and understood that the one was called Love, and the other Loves
Contrary, (...). Anteros.
without any further knowledge of the original. He by and by styrring the
water, for he sat in the mouth of the Bathe, where the water runs out, and
having spoken few words, he raised a Child from the bottom of the Fowntaine.
The Child was white and of mean stature, his hear yelow, his shoulders very
white, and altogether like one that washed, and had been washed. His
companions being amassed, let us go said he to the other Bathe. He arose and
went before, as in a muse. And doing there as he did before, he raised the
other Love, like to the first in all respects, saving his hears were black
and red, hanging over his shoulders. He embrased both the Boys, and they
cloue to him, as to a gentill natural father, whom he restored to their former
places. When he was washed, he went his way, his friends maruailing much, from
that time, left asking of questions. And being drawn with the evident signs,
as with a bridle that cannot break, gave him credit in all things. There is
other matter more strainge and monstrous, told of him, of the which, I will put
none to wrighting. Thinking it to men, to be hurtful, and to God hateful, to
commit to syrme and stable history, vain and strainge tromperie: yea, I wright
this fearfully, only following such men, as not believing others, were
compelled to these by plain sense. None of his friends wrote these, that I do
know. Aedesius telling it modestlye, neither he wrighting it, nor any other
being bold to do it.

In Iamblicus his time, lived Alypius, most persite in Alypius.
the art of Logic, whose body was most small and little bigger then a
Pigmey? The body apparent might be thought a soul and a spirit, the
corruptible part not growing great, was distributed into divine matter. For as
the great Plato says. Divine bodies have a contrary being, to them that be
mixed with minds: so may a man say, that he was transformed into a soul, of
the which he was possessed as of a God. Alypius had many followers, but his
manner of teaching was only by familier spech. No man brought a book.
Therefore they gladly made recourse to Iamblicus, as to draw and drink of a
flowing Fowntaine, not containing it self within the brinke. The same of them
both increasing, it happened that they met together as two Stars, and being
beset with an audience as in a great Schole, and Iamblicus, staying to be asked
rather the^ to ask, Alypius, beyond al expectation, leaving Philosophical
matter, in the mydest of the audience, said unto him. Tell me, O Philosopher,
whether a rich man be unjust, or ye heir of an unjust person, for in these,
there is no mean? He, not liking the subtlety of the question, said: O rare
man, it is not the trade of our teaching, what is superfluous in outward
things, but if a man do follow inwardlye, with virtues meet for a
Philosopher. And thus said, he departed and all the audience with him, as he
went, merueling at the subtility of the question, he procured talk with him,
privately at sundry times, and so loved him for his wit and learning, as when
he departed, he wrote his life. For he that wrote this treatise had that book,
which was very obscurely written, and ouerlaide with deep clouds, not so
much, for the hardness of speech, as sor that it contained tedious matter of
Alypius doctrine, whereof there is no memory, how the disputations were used.
That book spoke of a going to Rome, of the which there was no cause showed,
nor no great quality of the mind, but that many had the man in admyration,
but what he said or did, there is no mention. This singular man Iamblicus
seems to have that fault that Painters have, who when they painte them of
flourishing years, and will set forth the picture with somewhat of them selves,
they do mar the form they would express, and swerve from the plat and be
auty of their example. So he, propounding to praise the truth, falls into
the sharpenes of punishments and misfortunes, exercised in his time: but the
causes and occasions he neither did particularly express, nor went about it,
and did confound the pattern of his whole life.

Hardly, this he left to be perceived, of them that can, with great cunning,
gather, that he did wonder at the man, and allowed his constancy in
adversity, and the finenesse and deapth of his Oration. He was of Alexandria.
And thus much of Alipius, who dyed in his Country, when he was old, and after
him Iamblicus, leaving many Fountains and foundations Death of Alipius and
Iamblicus.
of Philosophy. He that wrote this, was of their company, and other of their
rehearsed Scholars, were dispersed thoroughout the whole Roman Empire: and
Aedesius abode at Pergamo in Asia. Aedesius.


Aedesius.
Aedesius of Cappadotia, took Iamblicus office, and taught his Scholars. A
woman also of this name of rare virtue and chastity.
He came of a good house, but of no great substance. Therefore his Father sent
him to Athens to learn some Art of profit, being returned, and his father
thinking to have gotten gain by him, and perceiving he had spent his time in
Philosophy, he put him out of his house as unprofitable, and pursued him,
saying. What does Philosophy profit thee? Very much father, said he, turning
and kneeling down: which, when his father saw, he called him home again; and
marueiled at his constancy, and minding to be ruled by him sent him again to
his study, which he had discontinued. He sent him before and followed with
rejoicing, as a father rather of a Divine creature, then a mortal man. He
going before all other that then were famous, or of whom he had bin Auditor,
and having gotten knowledge of Philosophy, went to ye singular Iamblicus, no
long way, from Cappadocia to Sytia. Whom when he did see, and hard him speak,
he did depend upon him, and could not be satisfied with his words, so as in
the end, Aedesius was not much inferior to Iamblicus, except in Divination, of
the which I can write nothing, for that Aedesius kept it secret for the time:
Constantine being Emperor, and in every place destroying goodly Temples, and
erecting Christian Churches: wherefore, it may be, yt the best Disciples keeping
those mysteries in secret, did incline to the sacred taciturnitie of that
circuit^. For he that wrote this being a Child, and Disciple to Crysanthius,
could scarcely learn the truth in twenty years. So great a labor it was to
bring Iamblicus Philosophy to our understanding, and to frame it to our time.
When Iamblicus was dead, some went one way and some another, and there was
none without fame and estimation.

So pater, the eloquentest of the rest, of his lusty nature and courage, could
not abide to live among other Sopater.
men, but went to yt Emperors Court: that he might repress and mitigate the
vehemency and tiercenes of Constantine by reason. And he came to such dignity
and power, as the Emperor was won by him, and in public assemblies, would
have him set on his right hand: a thing incredible to be heard or seen. The
great men repyned that the Court should learn Philosophy: And as Cercopes,
fought time not only to take Hercules sleeping, but also the waking Fortune
void of reason: Even so they, in secret Cercopes, crafty men.
counsels and meetings, omitted no part of deuillysh device, to bring their
purpose to pass.

In Athens, there was none, though it were a popular state, that durst accuse
the ancient and great Socrates, whom all the City thought a perfyt man of
Sapience: till by dronkennes and intemperance, and feasts of Bacchus all night,
they were led with laughter and tryfles, and staynd with vain and corrupted
affections.

Whom Aristophanes did first infect, drawing Aristophanes.
their minds to scoffing, and leaping songs, and brought the whole audience
to behold the skipping of Flees, and dancing of Clouds, and such other toys
in the steed of instruction, which Commedy is wont to device for pastime.
When they saw y^ people so inclined to pleasure, they framed an accusation, and
durst bring a wicked Oration against him: for the which, all the people was
plagued, when he was dead. For he that will consider the times: shall find The
death of Socrates, cause of calamity to Gretia.
that after Socrates was violently put to death, the Athenians never did any
notable feate, but the City decayed, and through it, all Gretia was destroyed.

The like may be seen, by the malice that was borne to Sopater. For
Constantinople that before was called Byzance, did serve Athens of Corn, and
Byzance.
it is uneath to be believed, how much was brought thither. But now all the
Ships of Egypt, Asia, Syria, and Phaenitia, and other Nations that brings
abundance of Corn by every wind, can not serve nor satisfye the droonken
people that Constantine have brought thither, by destroying of other
Constantinople populous.
Cities, to make shoutes and surfettes in the Theater about him, seeking
praise of the rude sort, and a memory of his name, of them that can scarcely
sound it, but by use.

It chanced so, that Byzance being so situate, as no Navy can well enter the
Port, unless a vehement southwinde blows, which happens often by reason of the
site of the Mountains. The Commons, being styrred by famine, a rare praise of
a dronken people: assembled in the Theater, whereof the Emperor was abashed.
Then the old enuiours having got a very good occasion, said: Sopater, whom
thou honor, has tied the wyndes, by his exceeding wisdom, which thou
do so praise, and for the which, thou set him in royal place.

Constantine hearing this, and moved at it, commanded Sopater to be put to
death: which, by his evil willers, was sooner done then spoken. Ablabius,
Sopater judged to dye. Ablabius.
great master of the Court, was Author of all this mischief: because Sopater
grew in more credit then he.

I, minding to show the lives of notable men, as I said before, which I could
learn by Fame, may not omyt to show the hard haps and mifortunes yt they had.
Ablabius, that wrought ye murder, was of very base lynage, and touching his
Father, one of the lower sort.

There is a tale in men's minds, and no man does reprove it, that an Aegiptia^,
coming from that part of Egypt, that is called Mendesio, to Constantinople:
and as all Aegiptians are learned to be impudent in their iourneys, in common
ways, and he had learned to play that part at home: He entered into one of the
Iunes, and being very hungry and thyrsty, with his long way, commanded sweet
Wine to be brought him, and showed silver. The Hostess of the house, being
glad of gains, went for it speedely. The wife was one of them that brings
Chyldwomen a bed. While she brought that Cup to the Aegiptian full A Mydwyfe.
of sweet Wine, one of her neighbors came running to her, saying: Your friend
and kynswoman is now in danger of her third birth, except you come and help
her. When she heard this, she left the Aegiptian, till she had done her office,
with the laboring woman: whom, when she had brought a bed, and washed her
hands, she came to her stranger, who was very angry with her, for her tarying.

But when she had told him wherabout she was, he d^syred ratherto hear of y^
Chylds birth, then to aslak^ his thyrst, that he might tell the Fortune of it.
When he had learned the instant, he cried alowde, go and tell the woman, that
her child shall be little inferior to a King: when he had said this, he drank up
his drink, and told his name to the woman.

The Child was called Ablabius, and proved a ball of Fortune: for he might rule
the Emperor, and caused Sopater to dye for a matter of less weight the^
Socrates did, as one yt ruled an unruly people. This Constantius honored
Ablabius, and was plagued for it: how he died, it is written in his life. He
left his son Constantius to be governed of Ablabius, and he reigned in his
Fathers kingdom, with Constans and Constantine his Brethren, which is more
plainly set forth in ye life of divine Iulianus. Constantinus, entering his
raygne and receiving such portion, which was from Ellyria to Nisibe, put
Ablabius from his authority. He lived in Bithynia, at a place, which he had
princely builded for rest and quietness, men marueling that he had given over
his authority. Constantius sent certain soldiers from the City that
bears his Fathers name, commanding the former, to deliver his Letters with
reverence, which is to kneel after the Roman manner, when they speak to the
Emperor. He receiving the Letters with great pride, desired Ablabius looking
still for honor is killed.
the Purple Robe of ye soldiers, with severe countenance, and terrible look.
They answered, they had it not, and that the bringers of it, stood without.
He, with hauty mind, and proud behavior, did bid they should be brought in.
They came in, and in steed of a red Robe, gave him a red bloody death, cuttyng
him in pieces, as an Ox that is killed to be eaten publicly. Thus this happy
Ablabius was punished for the wrong he did to Sopater.

This coming to pass, and divine providence not forsaking men, only Aedesius
was left of great name. He trusted to a divination, which he had by prayer,
which was after this sort by dr^ame.

A God came down to his prayers, and vttred his divine sentence by verse of
six feet: at the which he being amassed, and his sight failing him, studied to
remember the words. But the obscure and heavenly matter was out of his memory,
therefore he called his Child, minding to wash his face and eyes with water.
The Boy told him that his left hand was full of Letters. He saw and
understood it was a divine thing: And so worshypping his hand, he did see
writing, which was an Oracle after this sort.

By destiny, this life is given to thee,
Eternal Fame, if thou a rule wylt be:
Oracle showed to Aedesi^^.
To young men's minds, that Cities does frequent,
And to the school, of Sapience are bent.
But if in fields, an Heardman thou wylt be,
The Gods that way, will also honor thee.
He choosing to follow the better way, found out a little house, and followed
Shepherds trade. Scholars that were desirous of his learning, understanding
where he lay, came thither with an unpleasant noise, like the howling of
Dogs, and besette the same house with threatenings, that they would tear him
a pieces, if he would not impart his knowledge to them, but suffer it to be
hydden among Mountains and Forrestes, as though he neither was a man, nor had
the shape of a man. By this violence he came abroad among men, and took the
worst way. He left Cappadocia, delyuering his charge to Eustathius, Eustathius.
a man no way alyed to him, and went into Asia, the Country requiring him, and
making his abode at Pergamo, whether the Gretians and borderers resorted to
him, his fame was so great.

Touching Eustathius, it were a sin, not to tell the truth. Every man
confessed that he was of good conditions, and of great eloquence. For in his
tongue and lyppes, was such a pleasantnes, as it seemed to be a poynet of
wytchery, such a sweetness was in his words, and wrought so much, as they that
heard Lotos, a Tree, whose sweet fruit makes men forget their Country.
him, forgot them selves. Even as men that eat Lotos, and were carried away
with his speeches, as Sailors be with Syrenes songs.

Wherefore the Emperor, albeit he was given to read the Christians works,
sent for him. He was like now to have busynes, for that the King of Persia
moved war, and besieged Antiochia, and at a soden Antioche besieged of the
Persians.
assault, had gotten the Tower of the Theater, and with shot, killed an
infynite number of the beholders. In this case there was no Gretian, but
commended Eustathius to the Emperor.

Notwithstanding, the former Emperors were w^^nt to send of their great
Cou^sellours for Ambassadors, or some of the mighty Capitaines, or other of
authority. But in this extreme necessity, in all men's judgments, Eustathius
was thought most meet. Wherefore being sent for of the Emperor, he obeyed. And
such an eloquence proceeded from him, as the Emperor rewarded all them with
great honors, that moved him first to call him, and them he used with more
good will. Some, voluntarily accompanied him with their presence, in the
Embassadge, to have more experience of him: or to see the effect of his
eloquence, among the Barbarians. Being come into Persia, the acc^sse to the
King was as dangerous Sapores King of Persia.
and fearful, as it was reported. Yet at length when audience was given, as
commonly is wont to Ambassadors: the King marueled at ye sobernes of his
usage, and the sweetness of his language. And though he wrought al ways to
affray him, hearing his tempred and pleasant voice, and seeing his sober and
modest look, he wylled him to proceed. He did so. The Tyran being moved with
his eloquence, and going to meat, caused Eustathius to be called by some of
his Chamber, whereunto he obeyed. And as he was by nature, created to express
the force of virtue, he was admitted a guest at the Table. And did work so
with his perswason, as it lacked but little, that the Persian King did not leave
his Diadem and purpose, his precious Stones and Iuels, and put on the simple
Cloak of Eustathius. So great a fall had it made of the pleasures of the body:
as he thought them unhappy, that used them. But they yt were allied with y^
king, did stop it. Saying, he was a Mytch, and that he should answer the
Romain Emperor: he marvelled, he would send men that differed nothing from
rytch slaves, having so many worthy men about him.

But this Ambassador was beyond all hope. For this I know well, yt all Gretia
desired to see him, and prayed God for his return. The Oracles did agree with
these misfortunes, when their prayers failed, for he did not return. The
Gretians sent unto him, and chose most wise men to be the messengers. Their
mind was to talk with the great Eustathius, which thing came not to pass,
according to the tokens.

He hearing so shylfull and learned men, considered deeply of the matter, and
did examine the magnitude, the time, and form of the Stars. Then smyling, he
came among them, and when he had heard them, to whom he would not feign,
neither by conference, nor cloquence, he said. But these did not promise my
return. Yet I think God answers contrary to men's request. For he shows
that the tokens were less and slower, than could do any good. This Eustathius
so notable a man, did marry Sosipatra, who excelled Sosipatr^ an excellent
learned woman.
her husband so far in knowledge of Sapience, that she made him obscure and
of no name. It is meet to speak of her in the life of learned men, so great
was the glory of this woman. She was of Asia, about Ephesus where the flood
Cayster flows along, and gives a name to the Region. She was come of rych
Cayster, a flood full of Swannes in Lydia.
and wealthy Parents, the which she augmented from her chyldhood: So great
beuty and favor had she in her tender years.

When she was five years old, two ancient men, being past all the terms of
youth, and the one elder then the other, came into the Manor of Sosypatras
Father, with their skryppes and bags. And obtained of the Farmour to have the
ouersyght of the Vineyard, which was easily granted them. The increase growing
above all hope, and the owner being come with his Daughter, he wondered at the
abundance, thinking it to be done by miracle. Therefore he commanded the
Farmour to bring them to y^ Table, where he made them good cheer, and rebuked
his servants, yt they could not do the like. The two old men being so well
used at a Gretians Table, and maruelously delighted with the beuty of his
daughter, said. Other things we keep in secret: and this praise, of goodwyll,
as a tryfle and jest, with a contempt of the things that we have increased. But
if thou wylt be rewarded of us for this cheer and hospitality, not with money,
nor thanks that may quail and corrupt, but with a celestial gift that shall
flow from the stars, upon thee and thy life, give us this Hosipatra, as
Nurses and Fathers indeed. And for five years, fear nothing for thy child,
touching death, but be quiet and at rest. Care not for the tylling of the
ground these five years, by the course of the Sun. For of it self, riches
shall grow of this ground and increase. And thy Daughter shall not be as an
human woman, but thou shall conceive a greater opinion of her. Therefore, if
thou have good will, receive with both hands, that we have offered. But if thou
have any suspicion, we have said nothing. The Father in fear and silence,
delivered his daughter to them, and calling his Farmor, said. Whatsoever these
old men require, let them have it, and meddle no further.

When he had thus said, he departed before day, as forsaking both his house and
his Daughter. They receiving the child, whether they were wise men, or
Spyrites of rare divine kind, with what mysteries they brought up the young
Maid, no man can tell, and it is in certain, though the search be great, with
what divination they inspyred the Child.

The time appointed was come, and every thing proved of the ground, as was
spoken. The Father was come, and knew not his Daughter. Neither for the growth
of her person, nor for the increase of her beauty. And she knew not her
Father, he saluting her so reverently, as though he had saluted a Stranger.
When the Teachers were come, and the table covered, they said. Ask the Virgin
what you will. Ask, O Father what has chanced all your journey. He giving
her leave to speak, she told him all the happes that he had had in his
Chariot, The divination of Sosepatra, to her Father.
the words, the rebukes, the fears, as though she had been in Chariot with
them, and brought her Father into such a wonder, as at the first he was in a
maze, more then in a maruayle, and believed the Maid to be a Goddess. Then
kneeling to the men, prayed them to tell who they were. They hardly, and at
length, (for so it might be Gods pleasure,) said. They were of the Sapience
called Caldaicall, not profane. And not without some mystery looked down.
Then he kneeled again, and prayed them to be Lords of the ground, and to
keep his Child with them, to instruct her further in divinity. They nodded,
that so they would do: saying nothing. And he, as having a promise and an
Oracle, had good comfort in himself, yet knew not the secrets, and with him
self praised Homer, that has showed of such divine deeds, that cannot be
understood, for the strange and divine matter.

The Gods be turned to diverse shapes, as please them now and then: Odyss. 17.

When Cities they will cause to seem, a race of new found men.
For he thought that Gods would be turned to strange men. And being
ravished with the thing, he fell a sleep. They going from Supper, and taking
the Child with them, delivered unto her very gently, the Robe wherewith she was
invested with knowledge, to ye which they added diverse other ornaments. They
wylled her to lock ye Casket, wherein all these things were put, and gave her
certain books beside. She honored them no less then her Father.

Day being come, and the doors opened, and men gone to their work, they also
went out as they were wont. The Child ran to her father, carrying her Casket,
and good news. He having learned of his servant what increase he had, and
what was to be done, called for the men: But they were gone, and no more seen.
Then he said to Sosipatra: what means this, O Daughter? She staying a while,
said. Now I remember what they said at their delyuering of me these things,
weeping. Look daughter, for we must go to the west Oceane, and shortly return
again. The which does manifestly declare that they be Spirits. And whether
soever they be gone, thus they went from me.

The father esteeming his child to be sacred with divine modesty, suffered her
to live as she would, not, much moved with her, but for her silence. When she
was come to ripe years, she had without book, the books of Poets, having
none other Teachers, and of Philosophers, and Orators. And that, which others
can hardly get with labor and travail of mind: she, without study, did
express with pleasure. Mynding to marry, she thought Eustathius only fyt for
her. Therefore, thus she spoke to Eustathius, and them that were present. Hear
me Eustathius, and be you witness that be here.

I shall have three Children by thee: and as touching Divination of Sosipatra.
the world, they shall be all unfortunate. Against God, no man can be. Thou shall
have before me, a fair and a worthy seat. And I, peradventure, shall have a
fayrer. Thine shall be about the Moon.

Thou shall not teach, nor play ye Philosopher, fully five years, for so thy
Phisnognomy tells me. But under the Moon thou shall have place with good and
quiet motion. I would say somewhat of my self, but that I see the time would
be to short for my speech: and my destiny does forbid me.

When she had thus spoken, fate so forcing, she was Sosipatra married to
Eustathius.
ioygned to Eustathius. The success did differ nothing from her words, so
certain was her divination, as all had been done before. This is to be added
to the other things, that after the death of Eustathius, she came to her own
in Asia, and remained at old Pergamo.

Aedesius for good will, taught her children Philosophy, Sosipatra returns to
Pergamo.
albeit she had instructed them in her own house. And after Aedesius resorted
to her, no man esteemed his learning so as they did, but every man honored the
divine knowledge of the woman.

Philometer her Nephew, being overcome with her Philometer in love with
Sosipatra.
beuty, and also with her learning, fell in love with her. Her rare gysts so
surprised him, that he could do nothing for that. Likewise she was in love with
him Wherefore she went to Maximus, who was most familyar with Aedesius, and of
his kyndred. Maximus (said she) take order for my grief, that I be not
molested. Maximus.
He asked what ye matter was? She answered. What if it be Philometer? Then it
is he in deed, who differs not from any of you. Yet when I see him depart,
my heart burns, and turns at his departure. Therefore deal friendly with me,
and tell me what is best for me.

Maximus was not a little proud, as being spoken to from a Goddess, that such
a one should commit such a matter to him. Philometer continued in his
purpose. Maximus sought out the matter by Sacrifice, and took great pains in
a trifling cause. When he had done, he went to Sosipatra, and asked her, if she
were still troubled. She said no: And told his invocation, his Sacrifice, and
all the doing, and time, as if she had been present at the appearing of all the
visions. Then he fell to the ground astonished, and said she was a Goddess.
Arise, Son (said she) for the Gods love thee, because thou honor them,
and do not esteem the worldly and vain riches. When he heard this, he went
forth with great opinion of him self, that he had the praise of so divine a
person. Philometer with his companions gladsome, met him at the gate. Maximus a
far off spoke to him. O friend Philometer: leave to burn wood in vain, as
though he knew what Sorcery he went about. He thinking he heard God speak,
honored Maximus, and left his practice, despising the purpose he had taken in
hand. From henceforth, Sosipatra loved him purely, and so did he, her.

And chauncing, that they being all with her, except Philometer, who was at his
pastime: they fell into a disputation of the soul, of the which, diverse
arguments were made. When Sosipatra spoke, she confuted the former opinions,
with evident demonstrations. Then she entreated of the soul generally. What
part was punishable, and what, immortal, like one that had been rapt with a
divine fury. And as she had said, suddenly she held her peace, like one in a
trance. And staying a little, she cried: Alack, my cosyn Philometer, ryding in
his Chariot, is overthrown, in a very slippery and unequal place. He was in
danger of breaking his legs, but his servants were diligent and saved him:
yet is he hurt in his hands, and his shoulders, but without danger, he is set
up again, and calls on the Gods. This she said, and it was so. All men
thought, Sosipatra was in every place, and knew every thing, as Philosophers
affyrmeth of the Gods.

She dyed, leaving three children. Of two of their Death of Sosipatra.
names I shall not need to write. The third named Antoninus, was worthy of his
Parents, and lay about Canobus, one of the mouths, of the flood Nilus,
Canobus.
and applied the trade of that place to be as his mother had pronosticated of
him. Young men that desired to purge their souls with Philosophy, resorted to
him. The Temple being full of persons, and he occupied about the holy things,
as a man that served God, yet no God: told them, that after his death, there
should be no more Temple. All the goodly holy things of Serapis, should be
defaced, and turned to confusion and deformity. And that the rude darkness,
which had been thought a Fable, should have great power upon earth. All the
which sayings, time did confirm: and the effect showed the violence of the
prophecy to be true. Of this sort, some have been left, (for I will not write,
the morning moouinges of Morning influence of Hesiodus.
Hesiodus,) as certain influences of Stars, and did enter into another kind
of Philosophers, and there remained. To whom that study was a profyt, being
always at the bar, as Socrates in Athens, at the Porch royal, and by that
means contemned money, He seems ^o (...) of (...).
and lost rytches. The plain Roabe of Philosophy, was to remember Sosipatra,
and often speak of Eustathius. Men might see so many Chests of Books, ^ull and
st^ff^d, as might ouerlade Camels, all the which they had learned, and not
written of the ancient Philosophers, but Testaments, Copies, and notes of
their actions, and all things which are wont to be praised by this life, full
of error, frailty, and misery. And of them, the prediction of Sosipatra, was
not vain. Whose names I mind not to recyte, for this Book is to speak of
good men, and not of evil.

Yet one of her Children, Antoninus by name, of whom I spoke before, remaining
at Alexandria, was Antonirus son to Sosipatra.
so delighted with Canobus, that he gave himself wholly to the Ceremonies of
secret sanctity, and the worshipping of ye Gods, neglecting his body, and
the pleasures of the same, embrasing Philosophy, that was hyd to the people. Of
whom we might write at large. But he, touching matter of Religion, vttred
nothing strange to the common sense of men: paraduenture, suspecting and
fearing the proceedings of the Emperor, tending to other matter. His
conscience, patience, and stability, every man reverenced: and they that came
to traffyke at Alexandria, came to him by Sea.

Alexandria, was a populous City, and for the Temple of Scrapis, an holy
habitation, unto the which they Alexandria.
flowed by multitudes, from all places of the world: and when they had done
their devotion, they repaired as fast to Antoninus, taking recreation by water,
to go to a man of worthiness: They that were admitted to his company,
propounded some question, and were freely and fully instructed with the
Sapience of Plato. They that propounded problemes of divine matter, spoke to a
picture, for nothing was answered them. But, with stable and vnmouing eyes he
looked up to heaven, not easily to be brought to such disputations.

It was seen not long after, that there was a divine knowledge in him. For he
was no sooner dead, but the devotion of Alexandria, and the Temple of Serapis
was destroyed. And not only the Religion, but the houses and all things was
fordoone. As in Poetical Fables, of the force of Giants. And the Temples at
Canopus, suffered the like. For Theodosius, Theodosius Theophilus
being Emperor, and Theophilus his Lieftenant, as Eurimedon.

Who among the cruel Giants,
Was one of all the chiefest Tyrants. Odyss. 7.

And Venereus, civil governor, having the charge of the Roman army in
Egypt, wreaked their te^ne upon stones, and workers of stones: destroyed the
Temple of Serapis, and spoiled holy things, making war without warning, and
getting victory without resystance. Thus they warred against pyctures and
paintings, not only beating them down, but ransaking them, making it a
discipline of war, to hyde every stolen thing. Only the pauement of the
Temples remained, which they could not carry away for heap^s of stones. Thus
these valiant warriors, kept their hands without blood, but not without Gold.
Glorying, they had overcome Gods, and boasting in committing of sacrilege and
imp^ety. They brought into these holy places, them that they call Monks, in
shape, men: but in life, beasts.

Openly committing and doing wicked euylles, not to be spoken. And it is a
poynct of their holiness, to destroy holy places. Every man now, had
tyrannical power, that would wear a black garment, and be seen abroad in
unseemly array. To such an opinion of virtue were men brought, of the which we
speak in the most part of our History. They did place Monks at Canobus, that
mortal slaves, should be honored in steed of immortal Gods, and men's mynds
be entangled with ungodly matter. Some of their heads yt were punished for
their great offenses, were saltyd, and showed as Gods to be honored: although
as thieves, they had been punished.

Men thought them selves the better, when they erred in going to the
Sepulchers. They were called Martyrs, Deacons, and Legates of the prayers that
were made to God, being vile slaves, and branded for their faults, carrying the
scarres of their whyppings, as marks of their lewdness. Yet the earth
brings forth such Gods. This did confyrme the great diuinatio^ of Antoninus,
saying: that Temples should be made Sepulchers.

The great Iamblicus, as we wrote in his life, when one had raised Apollo, and
every man afraid that saw him, he came among them and said, maruayle no more
good friends, for this is the Image of a Sword player. So diverse is it to see
a thing with the mind, and with the deceyptfull eyes of the body. Iamblicus
told the present evil. But Antoninus, the things that were to come. Which
thing only was cause of his grief. For he came to a quiet end in old age,
without any sickness: but it was grievous and heavy to good men, for the
ruins of the Temples.

Maximus.
WE have made mention of Maximus before, and the writer hereof did see him: and
came to his company when he was old, and heard his voice, which was, as if one
had heard Homers, Minerua, or Apollo. The balls of his eyes were rollyng. His
beard was long. His look declared the vehemence of his mind. It was a joy to
hear him, or see him. With both senses did he pearce his company, that could
not abide the sharpness of his eyes, nor the swiftness of his tongue. There
was none so well learned or eloquent in his company, that durst speak against
him. But being sylent, they depended upon his words, as an Oracle. So great a
sweetness sat in his lyps. He was come of good house and wealthy. He had
Brethren, whom he would not suffer to go before him, he being the first:
Claudianus, who taught at Alexandria, and Nymphidianus, who professed with
praise at Smyrna. This man was taught by Aedesius, Claudianus Nymphidianus.
by whose Sapience he was caught. And when Iulianus raygned, chosen to be
Schoolemaister only, all the other being sequestered by Constantius: as we
Maximus Schoolemaister to Iulianus.
will show plainly in Iulianus life.

Constantinus house decaying, only Iulianus was left, who for his tender age
and weakness, was despised. The Kings Uncles did keep him, and observed that
he should be a good Christian. After the which time, he showed the docility of
his nature. Docilitie of Iuli^n the Emperor.
For he had in memory every book, so as they could not bear with the
swyftnes of his wit, not having what to teach him. When they had no more to
teach him, nor he to learn of them, they desired his Cosyn Constantius, to let
him study Rhetorique, and Philosophy. Which, by the will of God, he did permyt.
Minding to have him wander, and to be idle in books, rather then to have any
mind of kingdoms. When this was granted, and a great reuenew, and princely
train appointed to him, he went whether he would. And came to Pergamo, being
moved with the fame of Aedesius, who was now waxen old, and weak in body.
His chief familiars, was Maximus, of whom we now write: Chrysanthius
Chrysanthius. Priscus. Eusebius.
of Sardis, Priscus of Thesprotis or Molossus, and Eusebius of Caria, of the
City of Mindo. Iulianus, in whom was a sage youth, was admitted to
familiarity with Aedesius, being ravished with the sharpnes and excellency of
his mind, and would not depart. Being like to them that be stong with the
Serpent Dypsas, with insatiable thyrst and desire, Stynginge of the Serpent
Dypsas, breadeth thyrst vn^uench^l^e.
he would receive the doctrine. He sent princely gifts unto him, which he would
not receive, but calling for him, said. Thou know my mind, thou have heard
me talk. Thou see the disposition of it, if thou wylt do any thing, being a
loving child of Sapience, for so do I gather by the tokens of the mind, go
among my gentle scholars, of whom thou shall be filled with all kind of
learning and knowledge. Thou know ye mysteries, that shall make thee wysh
thou had not been a mortal man. I would Maximus were here, but he is sent
to Ephesus. The like I might say of Priscus, but he is gone into Grecia. The
rest of my good Scholars, be Eusebius and Chrysanthius: whom if thou will
hear, y^ shall not need to come to me. When Iulianus had heard this, he did
not therefore leave him, though he meant to spend his time with Maximus and
Chrysanthius. Chrysanthius was lynked with Maximus, in the works of marvelous
science by inspiration, leaving lyberal arts. And Eusebius, when Maximus was
present, would not meddle, with the finenes of Logike, and Rhetorike. When he was
absent, he did shine like a glittering Star, such pleasantnes and grace was in
his words. Chrysanthius praised him, and agreed with him, and Iulianus honored
him. Eusebius made this conclusion, yt those things had being, that were in
deed. But they that deceive their senses, be works of Sorc^rers, and of them
yt dally with matters of the earth, with mad persuasions. When Iulianus had
heard this determination, he called Chrysanthius aside, and said. If thou
love the truth, tell me the effect of this conclusion. He considering the
matter deeply, said. You shall do best, not to learn this of me, but of the
Author himself. Which when he heard, he did so, and made great accoumpt of
Chrysanthius for this answer. When they met again, Iulianus spared not to
deliver ye matter, and boldly asked him, what he meant by yt conclusion: Then
Eusebius with sweet words, said. Maximus, one of the most ancient and best
learned Auditors, for the sharpnes of his nature, contemned these lessons, and
gave himself to a certain Magike. And suddenly called us to Hecates Temple,
where many Hecates was honored with Sacrifice of. 100.
of us were witness of his fondness. When we were come and had made reverence
to the Gods. Sit down good friends, said he, and mark what you shall see, and
if I pass the common sort of men. When he had said this, we sat down. He made
a piece of Insence clean, and whisperi^g a certain prayer to himself, wrought
such a feat, as y^ goddess smiled, as if it were a smili^g indeed. We being
troubled with the sight, he said. Let none of you be afraid of this, for by
and by, the Lamps shall burn that she had in her hands. He had no sooner
spoken, but the flames flushed from her fyngers. We maruayled at this cunning,
and went our way. Do not you maruayle at this, no more then I, that by purity
of reason, think it no great matter.

When divine Julian had heard this, he said. Farewell, and apply thy book, for
thou have told me what I thought. Having thus said, and kyssed Chrisanthius,
he went to Ephesus. Where he accompanied with Maximus, and earnestly studied
his doctrine. But Maximus called to him the learned Chrysanthius, being
scarcely able to teach the young man sufficiently in the knowledge of Sapience.
Who being instructed of them, and understanding that there was The Goddesses
were Ceres and Proserpina.
more to be learned in Grecia, of y^ Goddesses Priests, went thither with
speed. What name the Priests had at this time, it is not meet sor me to tell.
For he gave the wrighter orders, and brought him into the ^umolpidaes ^ kind
of Priest^, bearing name of their king Eumolpus.
fellowshyp of the Eumolpidaes.

He foresaw the destruction of Grecia, and the defasing of Temples, in the
presence of this writers hearing, and affyrmed he should be a Priest after him,
although it should not be lawful for him to use his office, because he was
sacred to strange Gods, and should swear solemnly not to serve them: yet he
said he should be a chief in the Clergy, though he were not an Athenian
borne. And so much did he foresee, that in his time, he said, Temples and holy
things should be destroyed, and he see it, and be contemned for his obstinacy,
though he used his duty to the Goddesses, and should be deprived of his
honor: and neither be Priest, nor dye an old man. These Ceremonies were
called, Mithriaaes, of Mithra, whom the Persians, calls Apollo.


When the father of Apollos Ceremonies, had thus said, and unspeakable
troubles followed: some are told in other histories, and some shall be showed in
this Volume: When as Alarichus passed ye streyghts, as an open and plain
fyeld, with Barbarians. The sect that wear black apparel, which came with
him, breaking all duty of obedience, opened the Alarichus King of Goths.
strayghts of Grecia to him. This happened after: though for occasion, the
matter is touched before.

Iulianus had been conuersaunt with this divine Priest, and greedily learned
his doctrine, and with speed went to Constantius, a partner of the Empire.
Maximus was the^ in Asia, and Aedesius was dead. And Maximus increased in
learning abundantly. Iulianus got, not what he would, but what he could, for
the Iulianus Apostata.
necessity, for he was sent into France, not to live like a Prince, but to be
cut off, and so perysh. Yet he prevailed by the providence of God, not being
known that he honored the Gods.

He passed the Rhene, and subdued all the Barbarous Nations there, and escaped
many trappes and traynes that were laid for him, as is told in his life. He
sent for the Priest out of Grecia, and after secret conference between them.
They conspyred to destroy the tyranny of Constantius. To this was privy
Oribasius Oribasius.
of Pergamo, and Euemerius of Lybia, which the Romans calls Africa, and is
more plainly written Euemerius.
in the life of Iulianus. When he had put down Constantius, he sent the Priest
into Grecia, appearing as God, and doing what he would. And with him he sent
royal gyfts, to renew the Temples of Grecia.

Then he sent for Maximus and Crysanthius, making one calling for both. It
seemed good to them to learn of the Gods. And they being men of great
experience and learning: conferring together, and proving all their knowledge
and cunning, found evil and unhappy tokens. Which when they both did see,
Chrysanthius was afraid, and with he auy countenance did byte his tongue, and
said. Here is no abiding for me, friend Maximus, but must rather seek to
flee. The other with a better courage, said: It seems Chrysanthius thou have
forgotten what we learned, when we were children. That it is the part of wise
men, endewed with that doctrine, not to be afraid of the first show, but to
recyte and use the help of divine nature, till thou may find help for thy
self.

Then said Chrysanthius. You p^raduenture are bold and have heart so to do, but
I will not strive withthese tokens. Maximus making continual practice, came to
his purpose. Chrysanthius remained as an Image immovable, not intending to be
drawn from his sentence, taken at the beginning.

Now in Asia, all men resorted to Maximus, as well they that were in authority,
as they that were not: the noble Senators and vulgar people, repaired to
Maximus, and made noise with shoutes, which the people is wont to do, when
they will honor any man. Yea, ye women at another gate, went to Maximus wife,
and gratulated her felicity, that she might be good to them: and she seemed so
well learned, as Maximus was not of any learning. Thus Maximus with this great
honor in Asia, went to the Emperor. Chrysanthius remained at home, to whom
God had sygnified that verse of Homer in his sleep.

God hears their request, Iiad. ^.

Whose trust in him does rest.
When Maximus with his pomp, was come to Constantinople, in short time he was
notable there. For the Emperor and the Princes, were with him both day and
night. Such a felicity thought they to be sent of God. It came to pass that
Maximus began Maximu^ insolent.
to be insolent in the Court, using more fine apparel then became a
Philosopher, and waxed more hard to be spoken to.

The Emperor not knowing of it, commanded that Priscus should be sent for.
And Maximus required that Chrysanthius might be called also. So they were both
sent for, Priscus from Grecia, and Chrysanthius from Lydia. So much did divine
Julian depend upon Maximus, as he wrote gently to them both, desyring them as
friends, and praying them as Gods. And hearing that Chrysanthius had a wife,
called Melyta, Cosyn to this writer, whom he loved dearly, Melyta wife of
Chrysanthius.
he withdrew himself, and wrote to the woman with his own hand, no man being
privy to it, using all the fair words he coulds, that she should persuade
her husband not to deny to come. And requyring the Letter that was sent to
Chrysanthius, he put in the other, and sealed both, sending it by the
messenger, as one, adding to it further by words, what he thought good to
bring the matter to effect.

Whereby Achylles mighty mind,
Might be subdued and vnderminde. Iliad. 9.

Priscus came and behaved himself modestly. And although there were inowe that
would have puffed him up: yet he remained after one sort, not proud of the
Court, but seeking to bring it to more Philosophical form.

Chrysanthius would not be allured, with all the devises, but trusting in the
Gods, and that their determination was unremovable, he minded to obey them.
He wrote again to the Emperor, that for his cause he tarried still in Lydia,
and that he did it by the counsel of the Gods. The which thing the Emperor
consydering, he made him chief Bishop of Lydia, with his wife, and gave them
authority to place other.

The Emperor went to the war of Persia: Priscus and Maximus following him.
Other did the like, fylling the number, and boasting their virtues, because the
Emperor affyrmed, he honored the other, they would have it thought, he
esteemed them also. But when that glorious expedition came to a dolorous end,
(as we will show in Iulianus life:) Iouinianus that followed, honored them: but
he had Iouinianus, reigned only eight months.
but a short reign, as many more have had.

Than Valentinianus and Valens ruled, and Maximus and Priscus, taken to a far
contrary vocation: Valentinianus and Valens, Emperors.
then Julian called them. For that was for honor and evident joy. Thus from
honor to dishonor, such disgraces did appear, in the things that were
apparent. Priscus had no hurt, being well reported of all men, and returned
into Grecia. At the which Priscus escapes.
time, this writer was a child, and went to school. But Maximus, of whom so
many exclamatio^s were Maximus ^ormented.
made abroad in the Theaters, and privately to the Emperor, was yet marueyled
at, for patience in his troubles. For grievous torments were put to him: and
such a penal pain, as a man given to Philosophy never heard of the like
sum, they thynking he had had the goods of all men. But afterward a less
pain was put, and he sent into Asia to pay the money, in the which he was
condemned. The pains that he suffered passes all Tragedy. It will be hard to
find one of so good a voice, or so reioysyng of others evil, as can express
the infynite The punishment of th^^ boats, (...) to tear a man a pee^ces,
betwee^ two boats: it is called Scaphismus Maximus, his wife dies of a
drink, that he wylled her to buy, to dispatch him self. Clearchus.
Thesprotis.
tortures of this man. For the punishment of the Boats used in Persia, was
nothing to his torments, beside the scolding scorninges of the tormentors,
when they wrested his body. His Wife so syngular a woman, being present to
lament his case. And when there was none end of these afflictions, he prayed
his wife to buy him an exequisyte potion, that it might rydde him of his
pains. She did so, and brought it to him, and drank it before him, whereof she
dies presently, and her friends buried her. Than Maximus would not drink it.

Now all eloquence, nor all the rowt of Poets, will not suffice to show the
act of Clearchus. He was of Thesprotis of wealthy and famous house. When the
fate was changed, and the Emperor Valentinian had the rule in the West, and
the Emperor Valens in much danger, not only of loss of his state, but also
of his life. For Procopius rose against him, and with mighty forces pursued him
in every place: Clearchus Procopius Tyranne of Constantinople.
at that time was president of Asia, that reaches from Lydia and Phisidia to
Pamphilia. He governed well, and offered among the first, his body to p^ryll,
against the Lieftenant of the war, the which strife was not unknown to the
Emperor.

The Capitaines name was Salutius, who floryshed in Iulianus time. Clearchus
blamed his babbling, a Salutius.
fault of age, and called him Nicias, saying: at those Nicias.
y^ares he ought to instruct his mind with knowledge and Hystories.

Things coming well to pass, Valens advanced Clearchus: not only, not taking
from him, but enc^easing his office in Asia, making him President from Pergamo
to Caria, the hill Tmolo, determining the Tmolus, (...) an hyl (...) a flood i^
^ Lydia.
bounds to Lydia. And it is a fair and a rytch country: not subject to the
President of the Court, but that now all things being in confusion, the same is
also disturbed. Clearchus having Asia in good order, he sound Maximus in
torments.

Now must I speak a work of God. For such an incredible chance cannot be
ascribed but to God. He made all the soldiers that thus misused him to flee,
he brought him out of prison, he cured his body, and set him at his table. So
great a security had he in the Emperor, whose mind was so bent, as he allowed
all thing^s that Clearchus did. So was Salutius deposed, and Exonius put in his
place. Clearchus punished all those seuldiors of torments, or that had Exonius.
taken any thing from others, by payment, or by death. And he was in every man's
mouth, as an other Iulianus to Maximus. He showed public benevolence unto
him, although he was not given to the Theater, nor greedy of glory. He sayd^ no
more but he bare him upon his shoulders. Much of his possessions he did
recover, that we are taken away by other, so that he was soon made ryt^^, as
if h^ had been called to Iulianus Court. So he went to Constantinople with
great honor of them, that saw his Fortune changed to the better.

Than was he tried in matter of divination, which did very much increase his
fame. Of the which glory, grief did grow. They of the Court conspyring
together, to know a secret mystery, that every man could not tell, came with
it to Maximus, and because they could not agree among themselves: they would
have Maximus declare the Prophecy, for it was thought that he knew the
counsel of the Gods, and could utter all their secrets to others.

He perceiving their mind, and waying the words, did perceive where the
difficulty lay, and told it as surely and truly, as the mystery was true:
Showing also, that the showing of it, would undo him, and all that should
hear it.

And that many by it, should be put to death, that deserved not. And so told
by the Prophecy, that the Emperor after great slaughters of others, Valens
was burned in a house.
should straungely dye him self, and not be buried: And so it came to pass,
as we declare in our History.

The conspyratours were apprehended, and killed in every place, as pullen for a
feast or banquette, and among them Maximus was taken, and carried to Antioche,
where the Emperor was.

Yet they were ashamed to kill him, because he reproved in Judgment, them
that accused him: and that he had said nothing but truth, so as they believed
there was a God in Maximus body. Therefore they sent one Festus, a man of cruel
nature, with him into Asia, thynking that place worthy for such a man.

Who being come thither, did execute his Commission, and some what more of
himself, following the brunt of his cruel nature.

When he had executed many guilty, and not guilty: Cruel Festus, executes
Maximus.
at last he dispatched the great Maximus. This end had that divination. But
the rest came to pass.

For the Emperor in a fight in Scithia, dyed so strange a way, that a bone
was not found to be buried Valens dies myserably.
: And fortune showed another great thing. For Festus, as the writer hereof did
know, and was present at the example, being put from his office, and Festus.
going to Theodosius, who was chosen Emperor, married a rich and princely
wife. And that he might Theodosius
show his pomp, and put away his fame of evil doing: proclaimed his feast to
the best and noble sort. It was the third day of the Calends, that the
Romans call January. At which time, all came to the feast, to honor Festus.

He went into the Temple of Eumenides, not wont to serve the Gods. Having
put all that he killed to death for that cause. Being there, he told his
dream, and in talking, the tears fell from his eyes: which was thus. He
thought that Maximus drew him with an haulter to hell, to answer before Pluto.

They that were present, remembering his former life, wept every one, and wylled
him to pray the Gods for himself. He obeyed, and prayde. But going forth,
he fell to the ground, and two children lay upon his back. His voice forsook
him: and being Wicked Festus dies suddenly.
carried away, dyed by and by. This seemed to be a very great act, and of
divine providence.

Priscus.
OF Priscus, much is said before, by reason of occasion offered. To speak of
his conditions particularly: he was a deep dissembler, keeping things hyd in
his mind, and of a great memory. And had all ancient opinions collected and
ready. He was fair and great of body, and might seem ignorant of learning,
because he would syldome come to talk, but kept his doctrine as a treasute,
calling them prodigal, that would talk at every motion. He said, he that was
overcome in disputation, was no more quiet, then he that resysteth against the
truth: by waxing wise with pleasures, and delyght of the body, and becomes
an hater of learning, and a despiser of Sapience. For this cause he refused
company, and was rude and rusticall in behavior. And this manner he did not
only use among his companions of learning, but from a child continued thus, to
his old age.

Chrysantius told the writer of this work, that Aedesius was most familiar
and populous. And when he had done his Lectors and disputations: he would walk
in Pergamo, with the rest of his audytours. And as a good teacher, would
engraft as much by gentle words and dillygence, in his Scholars, that were hard
of capacity, as could be done by man. But whom he perceived haughty for their
strange doctrine, and spreading their feathers, greater and weaker than
Icarus: he would throw them down, not into the Sea, but to the earth, the
place of men.

In the trade of teaching, he met a woman sellyng herbs, whom he with gentle
manner beheld, and spoke to her, of her going about, and what gain she got to
wax wealthy, and also told her how herbs were to be sown. The like he did
with a Weauer, Smyth, and Carpenter: and by this, they that were gentle and
dilligent, did learn, and especially Chrysanthius, and some other that were
like unto him. Only Priscus would not forbear openly, but called him a
bewrayer of Philosophy, and a man cunning Priscus poeuish.
in words, which serves to draw the mind, but be not observed in works.

Being of this sort, after Iulianus death, he refrained from bytternes, and
suffered many rebukes of young men, They were called Corybants. that ran about
like mad men.
that were fond of their knowledge, like Cybels Priests; yet in all things he
kept the gravity of his nature, laughing at man's infyrmity. In the Temples of
Grecia in his last years, for he lacked but ten years of an hundred, when he
dyed: at the which time many dyed for very griese. Being persecuted of the
Barbarians, among the which was Proterius of Proterius of Cephalenia.
the Isle of Cephalenia, who was reported to be a man of much virtue and
goodness.

Likewise Ilarius, whom this writer knew, and of Ilarius of Bithynia.
Bythinia, living till he was old in Athens. And to to them that were void of
other learning, he playde the Philosopher by painting. So that Euphranor Of
Euphranor, an excellent painter. Pli. 35. 11.
seems not to be dead in his hands. And for this cause the writer hereof had
him in great reverence and estimation.

But Ilarius could not escape the public calamity, for being taken without
Athens, having an house Ilarius killed.
nigh Corinthe, he was slain of the Barbarians, with all his family. These
things by the help of God shall be showed in our Histories, in the which we
will declare, not only the lives of particular men, but also the public
actions. Now what every private man did, is told sufficiently in this Treatise.

Iulianus.
IVlianus, an Orator of Capadocia, flourished, in Aedesius time, and had Iuliane
the Orator.
the place at Athens. For thither resorted to him all the youth from every
Land, honoring him for his eloquence and syngular wit. There were diverse
desirous of virtue, that aspyred to his glory. As Apsines of Lacedemonia,
having a name of lyberall science: Epagatus, and a company of Apsines. Epagatus.
other parsons. But he passed them all in excellency. And the other were much
inferior. His Disciples were many, and whether soever they went (as I may
say) and whersoeuer they were dispersed, they were had in admiration. The
chief was, divine Proaeresius, Hephestion, Epiphanius of Syria, and Diophantus
Proaeresius. Hephestion. Epiphanius Diopha^tus. Tuscianus.
of Arabia. Tuscianus, for his worthynes, is not to be forgotten: for he was
familiar with him, all the which be declared in Iulianus the Emperors life.
This writer did see Iulianus house at Athens, which was little and plain. Yet
so expressing Mercury and the Muses, that it dyffered nothing from a Temple.
He left it to Proaeresius.

There was the pictures of his friends, such as he loved. He had a Theater of
Marble, like the common Theater, but less, as proporcionate to his house.
There was at Athens at that time, such a faction between the Scholars and the
Citizens, as in a City, that within their walls, nourished the peryls of
their ancient wars. No Studient durst go abroad to hear the Lessons, but
kept in private auditories, whether Scholars were brought to hear words, not
contending for life, but for praise? Many keeping silence, it is requisite to
take and bring this of Iulianus, for a witness and testimony of all his
learning and conversation.

It chanced the bold Disciples of Apsines, to modest Iulianus in this civil
tumult, with cruel and It seems, he means the whyppings of the
Lacedaemonians.
Lacedemoniall hands using them, that were in danger of their bodies. They
were accused as evil dooers, and the cause was brought before the Vice
Consul. He seeming severe and terrible, commanded the Master to be
apprehended, and all the accused to be tied, as they that were noted of
murder. The Roman seemed not to be unlearned, nor brought up in rude and
ignorant manner. Iulianus appeared thus vexed. And so did Apsines, not by
commandment, but to help the accusers. The matter proceeded, and the
complayntiues entered. In these disordred Province, or charge.
Lacedemonia, one Themistocles of Athens governed, cause of all this evil. For
by his name, he was the more prove, and bold to despite. The Proconsull
looked grimly upon Apsines, saying: who commanded thee to come? He answered,
the care of his Disciples was cause of it. The Presydent stayed his nature with
silence: the accused entered in bands, and their Master with them. Having long
heayre and bodies, evil handled, as the stripes might appear to the Judge.
Whenleaue was given to the accusers to speak, Apsines began. Then spoke the
President. The Romans allows not this. For he that speaks the first
accusation, is in danger of the second. All the preparation being thus dashed
by the present sharpnes of the Judge, Themistocles the accuser, was compelled
to speak. He changed color, and bytte his lyppe full of doubt, and looked
toward friends, and asked what she should do. For they were come to make a
noise and cry, only when their Master should speak. There was great
scilence and trouble. Scilence over all the judgment place, and trouble for
the part of the accusers. Iulianus, with a lamentable voice, desired he might
be heard.

Than the Proconsull said: None of you Teachers prepared, shall take the matter
in hand, nor any of you Disciples, shall make noise to the speaker: and then
shall you know, how pure and sincere the Romans judgment is. Therefore, let
Themistocles make an end of his accusation, and let him answer whom you
think best: after this no more accused, and Themistocles name was obscured.

Iulianus, as the President commanded, to answer the first accusation, said
thus. Thou, O Presydent, by thine exquisite Justice, have caused Apsines, as a
Pythagoream, to hold his peace, though it were late, which he ought to have
learned chiefly before. Because he taught others to follow Pythagoras
doctrine, which is, scilence. If thou geuest me leave to answer, command
Proaeresius, one of my friends to be untied. And judge thou, whether he has
better learned the eloquence of Athens, or scilence of Pythagoras. When the
President had granted, and that very gently: as Tuscianus, who was present,
told this writer, Proaeresius entered among the accused, without bonds. The
master crying to him with loud and high voice, as they that encourage them
that go to fight. So speaking shryll unto him, said. Now is it time to speak.
Than he made a Proeme, which Tuscianus did not tell, but only the sense. That
it tended to move pity, of that they had suffered: and that it was mixed with a
praise of their teacher. And that there was added in the Proeme, a reproof of
one purpose, declaring the swift manner of the Proconsulles power. That it was
not lawful that they that had been judged, should be so used again.

The President held down his head, and was amazed in his mind, at the words
and pithe of the matter, the myid countenance and good iesture. All were ready
to have showted, but fearing the commandment, as a thundering, and using a
mystical scilence: Proaeresius began another Proeme, the substance whereof,
Tuscianus told, was thus. If it be lawful to do all injury in accusing, and
the accuser to be believed, before answer be made, be it so, let this be
Themistocles City.

Then the Proconsull leapt out of his seat, casting of his Purple garment,
which the Romans call a Trabeall Roabe, and as a young man, of so severe,
Nothing more violent then neces^^^ie.
and inexorable a Judge, clapped his hands at Proaeresius. Apsines clapped
also, not willingly, but what is more violent then necessity?

Iulianus the teacher, commanding part to go forth, and the accuser, willing
the master to remain alone: Than taking Themistocles and the Lacedaemonians,
he repeated the whypping of Lacedemonia, and added them of Athens. Thus
continuing in fame, he dyed at Athens, among his acquaintance, ministering great
contencion to his friends, to celebrate his Funeral.

Proaeresius.
OF Proaeresius, is spoken part in Proaeresius of Cesarea, of Capadocia.
the abouesayde, and in our Hystoricall Treatise, is declared abundantly. But
now we will speak more exquisitely of him, knowing him thoroughly, and being
admytted to his talk and samiliarity. His eloquence was great and celestial.
I will not speak parcially, though he were my Master, and his courtesies,
which cannot be expressed, had bound this writer with long and great
friendshyp.

He that made this Treatise, came out of Asia, into The Author speaks of him
self.
Europe, to Athens, at syxteene years of his age, having a curled and thick
heayre, and for the multitude, of many white heayres, like the foming Sea, or
the white silver.

Proaeresius was then (as he said himself) lxxxvii. years of age. In
eloquence he was passing. His aged body was sustained with the youth of his
mind. So as the writer hereof, thought him void of age, and as it were
immortal.

He repaired to him, as called of one that seemed a God, without any business.
He came to Piraeo at the first watch, having got a fervent agewe Pi^aeo, the
Port of Athens.
by the Sea. And many other of his kynne, were come with him.

At this hour when no thing was to be done, the master of the Ship, which
was a man of Athens, went straight to the City, and many that lyked better
that kind of study then the other, stood at the Port, where the going down
is at the pyllour, and other passengers went also. But this writer was not able
to go, therefore he was borne into the City. It was mydnight, when the Sun
makes equal night, being northwarde, and entered the Balance, at which time
the night watches be long. The Shypmaister being of old acquaintance with
Proaeresius, knocked at his gate, and brought all the company with him, as it
happens when contention, falls between two young men, that, that School
would be filled with audience. Some of these, sought strength of body, some
rytches, and some a mean between.

This writer being weak, had only many books of ancient writers in his
youth. The house was full of myrthe, men and women running about, some
laughing, and some prouooking laughter. Proaeresius that time, wylled his cosyn
Anatolius, for whom he sent, to entertain the Strangers. For he was of
Armenia, which is next the Persians: and they received the Guests, whereof some
were their country men. The youth in the Bathes, showed all pastime and mirth:
and when they were washed, they went their way.

This writer, for his great sycknes consumed, and neither could enjoy the
sight of Athons, nor of Proaeresius? Only seeing the things which he ^esyred,
as it were by vision. His countrymen of Lydia took it grievously: and as one
young man will help another, they spoke of him many great things, more than
truth. Conferring together marvelous straungely, there was a sorrow in the
Cittle, as of a great calamity.

There was one Aeschines, not of Athens, but of Aschines.
Chio, that had killed many, in praetising with the sick and the whole. He,
(as appeared afterward) being earnest with them that lamented, said. Let me
come to give the dead man a medicine. They were content that Aeschines should
make an end of him, that was already well nyedead. He opened his mouth with
certain instruments: and than he spoke, which, by the will of God, was many
years after verified. When he had received the medicine, his body was thoroughly
losed, and he saw the air, and knew his friends.

Thus Aeschines cleared his former faults, by this one fact, and was honored
of the Patient, and of them that were his friends. When he had done this, being
honored of all men: he went to Chio, and tarried so long there, till by the
virtue of the medicine, he had gotten health, after the which time, the Patient
kept company with the Physician.

Divine Proaeresius had not yet seen this writer, but lamented his case: and
when he heard, he had gotten health beyond all hope, he called the chief of
his Disciples, and praised to them the efficacy of that art. I am glad (says
he) of this young man's recovery, whom I have not yet seen, being greatly
grieved with his infirmity. If you will do me a pleasure, take him to the
public Bathe, and leaving your wanton toys, use him as mine own child.
Thus this matter went, of which shall be said more in our History.
Notwithstanding, the writer thinks that all the benefyte he got by
Proaeresius, came by the will of God. Yet in the declaration of his life, he
will not swerve one whytte from the truth. A divine saying was it of Plato.

Truth is the guide of all good,
Both to God and man.
The goodlinesse of Proaeresius body (for now I come Plot. 5. of his Laws.
to speak of him) was such, though that he were old, that I doubt, if any
other were of that bewty, being of those years. And it might be maruayled,
that the perfectnes of beuty, did suffice such a body, that had a just
proportion with ye greatest. For his stature was bygger then a man would
believe, yea, conjecture, for he was higher then all other, by a foot, as he
seemed a Giant amongst the tallest men. When he was young, Fortune drove him
from Armenia to Antiochia, for he went not straight to Athens, for he wanted
money, and that way, he was unfortunate, though he come of honest parentage.

In Antioche, he followed Vlpianus, who was chief teacher of eloquence there,
and prospered with the Vlp^anus of Autioche.
best. From thence he went to Athens, after he had tarried a good time, with
great desire to hear Iulianus, where also he proved with the best. Hephestion
went with him, for they two loved dearly, contending as well in poverty, as in
eloquence.

Both of them had but one Cloak, and three or four Mantelles, which being
dyed at home, showed their coursenes for age. Further, being two men, they
seemed but one, as the Poets wryght of Gerion. Gerion. 3. bodies.
So they were two and one.

When Proaeresius went abroad, Hephestion tarried at home, wrapped in his
C^uerlet, exercising himself Ambitious poverty of Proaeresius and Hephestion.
in Rhetorique. The like did Proaeresius, when Hephestion was abroad. So great
was their want. Iulianus lyked well of Proaeresius, and gave ear unto him,
wondering at the excellency of his nature.

When Iulianus was dead, Athens coue^ed to have Death of Iuliane the Orator.
a fytte successor in the art of Rhetorique. Many were desirous of the office,
which to name were a trouble. Therefore by voice were chosen Proaeresius and
Hephestion, Epiphanius, and Diophantus, Sopolis Sopolis. Parnasius.
of the obscute sort, and Parnasius of the vyler sort, to make up the number.
For in (...) the Romans manner, some must be teachers, and some auditors.

These being appointed, one part was called of the lesser company, and more
simple, whose power consysted in the seat and teaching place. To the higher
sort, the City was divided, and not only the City, out all the Nations of
the Romans.

And they contended, not for cunning, but for contries, which should be most
cunning. All the last, as an honor, was appointed to Epiphanius. Diophantus
had Arabia, Hephestion reuerensing Proaeresius, let Athens and dyed. To
Proaeresius, all Pontus, and Hephestion.
the Confynes sent auditors, honoring him, as a doniesticall God. Bithynia,
and Hellespontus did the like.

Lydia now called Asia, reaching to Caria and Lycia, and ending at Pamphilia,
and Taurus, and Egypt, for the excellency of learning, was to him a peculiar
portion, and all that is above Egypt, streatching to Lydia, and the unknown
parts inhabited.

I have told this at large, that men may see evidently, the Nations that first
saw them selves deceived by youth, turned to seek other. The excellency of
Proaeresius made a great faction, which grew to so great contention with the
young sort, that he was forced to leave Athens: they corrupting the Proconsull,
whereby they got the vpperhande. Yet Proaeresius after great penury in his
exyle, returned like unto Pisistratus. Other men lived by their rytches, but
Proaeresius by his eloquence. As Homers Mercury, Iliad. a.
conveyed Priamus to Achilles Tent, through the enemies. He had good fortune
that a new Officer was come, who hearing what was done, did not allow it. So by
the Emperors permission, and alteration of voices, he returned to Athens.

His enemies, again assembling, rose against him, like stynging Serpents: but
being prevented of his friends, he was restored to Athens, as Tuscianus, who
was present at every thing, told me, who had Tuscianus of Lydia.
been Proaeresius, if Proaeresius had not been. When he was come, as Ulysses,
after a long absence, he found some of his friends in good case: among whom,
was Tuscianus, they could not leave beholding of him, nor he embracing of them.
And determined to tarry the coming of the Proconsull, which was at hand. Who
being come, called the Orators, and disgraced all their doings. They had no
will to come before him, but necessity compelling, he propounded questions unto
them: to the which, they answered every man according to his capacity, as
they were called and instructed, and departed rejoicing.

Then were Proaeresius Scholars suddenly called in: who came, not knowing what
was meant. Then said the President with a loud voice, I will have you all,
this day, answer to a question, which, when you have done, then, shall
Proaeresius, or at his pleasure, say what he will. They effectually desiring
this thing, and declaring with great consideration, speeches of Aristides: not
as things vomitted but well digested, the President said again. Now say
Proaeresius. He, from his seat, spoke somewhat, as a Proeme with great grace,
and when he had ended that speech, which he spoke of the sudden, he applied
his matter to the chief point. For the which, the President was ready to make
an end. Than he looked about the audience, and espied of his adversaries a
great number, and of his friends very few: whera^ he was afraid, as he might
well be. Yet Fortune favoring him, and seeing in the furthest part of the
School, the men that were great talkers, and workers of much evil, said,
alowde. O God, yonder be the best Orators.

Command them, O President, to come forth, paraduenture they will tell, they
have done naught. When they heard this, they hid them selves among the
people, coueiting to be close.

The President, sending some of his Sergeaunts, brought them forth, and with
an exhortation, appointed them to speak, in that form, that is called,
Conclusiue. When they had looked a little and spoken together: They propounded a
base matter, rude and hard, and void of all Rhetorical ornament.

He looked grimly upon them, and said to the Proconsull. I beseech thee let me
have the right that was granted me before the action. He said, he should not
be denied right. I require (quoth he) swyft Notaries.

That this day, they may noate Themis tongue, and attend upon my words. He
wylling Themis, the goddess of true petitions.
the best Notaries to come, they stood about him, to noate his words: but
wherefore, it was not known.

Than I (said he) would ask a greater thing: which he was bidden to do. Let
no man, said he, clappe his hands, at the end of Sentences. Which being
granted with great fear to the other: Proaeresius began to speak with
flowing Oration, clapping his own hands, at every sentence end.

The Auditors that were compelled to keep Pythagoras scilence, were grieved
with sighing and groaning.

He increasing in cloquence, and speaking above man's opinion, came to the
second part of his matter, and as a man rapt in a futie: he left that he
thought could not be answered, and turned his speech to the enemies argument.

The Notaries could scarcely follow him, and the Auditors, hardly hold their
peace. Such was the plenty of the words, turning his face to the Notaries.

Mark dillygently, said he, if I do not remember all. Than he rehearsed all
again, when neither The wonderful memory of Proaeresius.
the President kept his own Law, nor the audyence feared the threatninges,
but extolled the Orator as a God, and all that were present, did him honor,
and said he was a God of Mercuries eloquence.

His adversaries freating for anger, yet some of them could do no less then
praise him. The President, with all his Guarde and power, brought him out of
the Theater. And after that time no man durst mute against him. But as they had
all been stricken with a lightning, they acknowledged him for the better.

In processes of time reviving again, as the heads of Hidra, they returned to
their nature, alluring some of the best sort with great feasts, and fair
Damisels. As Princes that be overcome in just and set battle, and by
desperation brought to extremity, they are glad of shot and light Horsemen,
which at the first they did not esteem, but now for necessity, accept them:
So these being feared from ordinary help, laid traynes, that were lewd and
vile. Which were void of envy, unless a man can hate himself.

They had many fellows, and their craft came to good pass. Proaeresius was
in great credyte, and his virtue in floryshing estate. All wise men loved him,
and they that went to him, attained to knowledge.

At this time, the Emperors Court brought forth a man, that loved both
eloquence and glory. Beritos, in Phaenitia, now ^aruto.


He was of y^ City of Beritos, and his name was Anatolius, whom his evil
willers surnamed Azutriona. What Anatolius, surnamed Azutrion.
this name does sygnify, let the mad company of stage players tell. This
Anatolius, obtained both eloquence and glory, and came to perfect knowledge of
the law, which his country Berytos used, being a mother of that study. He
sailed to Rome, and for his pythy wisdom and eloquence, was called to Courts,
and in short time came to great power.

He had all Princely offices given him, with such estimation, as his very
enemies wondered at him, and in time was made great Master of the Court. This
Great master of the Court.
is a Princely office, without Purple. Fortune following his ambition, he was
made Lieftenant of Illyria. And where he was very superstitious, and given to
Greek facions, albeit, study of public state drew him from it: he appointed
to go to the chief places of the Empire, and visyte all, even as he would.

Being moved with a fervent desire to see Grecia, and the Images of the
Orators, with his own eyes: he made great haste into Grecia, and came thither
with much authority. Where he propounded a question to the Orators, wylling
every one to say his mind of it. Grecia maruayling at his wisdom, learning,
and indyfferency. He commanded them to speak of this question, they daily
sought to be guile one another. But when there was no remedy, they determined
the state of the matter, as they call it: upon the which, was such a
contention, as the writer hereof, never heard a more foolysh thing. They were
divided by difference in opinion, every man being bent to please his audience,
and praise his eloquence. And after the coming of Anatolius, more fearful
then the army of Xerxes, and the peril redounding, not to the Greacians, but
to the studients: all other, among whom, was Himerius of Bythinia, Himerius of
Bythinia.
an Orator, took great pains to exercise their wits, in the state of this
matter. This Himerius was not known to the writer, but by his Books.
Proaeresius trusting to his wit and knowledge, was strange among them, and
told no man his opinion.

When Anatolius had done his Ceremonies in Athens, he commanded the Orators
to begin their disputation. Then every man sought to prevent other in the
ostentation of their wit. So ambitious a creature is man. Anatolius laughed
at them, that sought to please their Scholars, and pitied their Parents, that
had put them to such Teachers.

Then he called Proaeresius which was only left. He got familiarity of
Anatolius men, and learned the meaning of all the purpose. The which thing (as
the writer said before) was to be laughted at) being of no moment, nor any
reward of victory propounded, yet Proaeresius obeyed, as soon as he was
called. And spoke so aptly and eloquently to the thing, that Anatolius leapt
out of his seat, and the audience was carried to cries, and there was none but
thought him a God in speech. So as Anatolius esteemed him very much, and as
for the rest, scarcely thought them worthy his table. For he was pleasant, and
fine in talk at Feasts, and there was no meal with out some purpose and
learning. These happened long before, and the writer had the better time to
hear of them.

Anatolius esteemed much Nilesius borne in Smyrna, Milesius of Smyrna.
a City of Ionia, a man of great wit, and given to a solytary life. He
ministered in holy things, and was without a wife: and in verse and meter, of
passing knowledge: so delighting Anatolius, as he judged him one of the Musies.
He called the Rhetorical questions of Epiphanius: Breakings, reproving the
barrennes, and lost business in such tryfles. He illuded all the inventions of
such Orators, saying: if there were above thyrteene, the problemes should be
infinite.

Not long before, he was called of the Emperor into France, who had him in
such admyration, as Constance.
he admitted him to his table among his Nobillitie. And where the men of that
country, could not attain to the inwards doctrine of his mind: they gave
their eyes to the wonder of his body, maruayling at the highness and goodlines
thereof: As an high Picture, unto the which, they could scarcely look. For in
all things he was beyond a man. They that marked his temperaunce, judged him
without affection, Proaeresius, more then a man.
like iron, simple clad without shoes, marueling he could abide the cold of
the country, and drink the frosen water of the Rhene. For in all his life, he
never drank hot drink.

The Emperor sent him to the great City of Rome, for a glory, that they
should see, what men were subject to the Emperor. They could not tell at what
to maruayle most, all things did so pass man's nature.

Than, for many causes loving him, and likewise praising him: they made a
Picture of Brass, of his just stature, and dedicated it to him, with this
inscription.

Rome Queen of the world,
To the King of Eloquence.
The Emperor gave him leave to return to Athens, and to ask what gift he
would. He asked a thing worthy his nature: Islands, not few, nor little,
trybutarie to Athens, in paying of Corn. The Emperor gave them to him, adding
the greatest honor, making him Lieftenaunt General, that no man should envy
that he had so great a public reuenew. The Presydent had authority to
establysh these offices, who was lately come out of France.

And after these dysputations, he went to Anatolius, to have his office
confyrmed, calling to Athens, all his friends that might congratulate with
him, in his dygnitie, who resorted without number.

When the Theater was full, and he required his acquaintance might speak. The
President preventing him, to know what he could do of the sudden, said.
Speak Proaeresius. For it is not convenient that other king, then he that is
present should praise the Emperor.

Than Proaeresius, as an Horse called to the race, spoke of the gift, and
rehearsed Celeo, Triptolemus Celeus, Father to Triptolemus, to whom Ceres
showed the way of ^yl^he.
and the coming of Ceres with the gift of Corn, applying the Emperors
benefit, to these examples.

Than straight he passed to the ancient Manor of munisycence, confirmed all
things by examples, and declared the glory of Fame by eloquence.

He took a wife of the City of Trallis in Asia. Her name was Amphiclea. They
had a Daughter that lived so long as there is time between the conception and
the birth. After the which time, he had a fair Son. That made the Father
glad for the time, but shortly after, filled both Father and Mother, with
heaviness by death.

As at the grief thereof, Proaeresius seemed to loose all his Sap^ence. But
Nilesius, with his musyke and sweet harmony, restored his mind again.

The Romans required him to send his chief Disciple to them. And he sent
Eusebius of Alexandria, who agreeing well with the City, for he could well
Eusebius of Alexandria.
flatter, and please the great men, being thought seditious at Athens, despised
others, and magnifyed him self. Therefore he sent him thither, as not ignorant
of that Cities subtilties. For as touching his eloquence, it is enough to say,
he was an Aegiptian. For that Nation is given to Poetry, insomuch as Mercury,
when he had earnest business to do, would not dwell with them.

Musonius his Disciple, succeeded him in Rhetorique, Musonius.
of whom we have said abundantly, for other causes, in our Histories. He
being appointed to answer, and perceiving with whom he had to do, leapt
into civil causes. He was put from teaching in Iulianus reign, because he was
a Christian, perceiving that Ieraphantus, as the God of Delphos, Ierapha^tus, a
teacher of holy things
did foresee things to come, and tell them to the requirers, that with great
skyll and sleyght, did intercept his knowledge.

The Emperor did affygne Lands to learned To the G^ecians that followed
Gentillitic.
men, that they should be exempt from trybute. Proaeresius, required him to
show by Oracle, whether this lyberality should be of continuance, he denied
it. The other, by other mean, learning what would follow, lived more at quiet.

At this time, the writer being syxteene years of age, entered Athens, and was
admitted his Scholar, and loved, as his son. The fyfthe year he would have
gone into Aegipt, but his friends called him again, and set him to the study
of Eloquence, to the which every man exhorted him. Proaeresius dyed shortly
after, a man of such quality, as all the world was filled with his eloquence,
and inhabited of his Disciples.

Epiphanius.
HE was of Syria, most wyttie in iudginge questions of controversy, Epiphanius
of quick judgment.
but in Rhetorique not vehement. He was one of Proaeresius time, and attained
to great Fame. Man's nature cannot abide one to be praised alone, but for malice
and envy, whereto they be inclined: they set up another, against them that have
Fame and glory. Making principles of contraries, as they do in natural
Philosophy.

He dyed not very old, of bloody disease, and his wife, a very fair woman,
suffered the like. They had no child. This writer knew him not, being long
before his travail.

Diophantus.
DIophantus, was of Arabia, following Diopha^tus. against Proaeresius*
Sciences. The same opinion of men, objected him against Proaeresius, as if a
man would set Callimachus against Callimach. a Poet of Cyrene.
Homer. But Proaeresius laughed at these things, and at the men that sought
estimation, in this behalf. This writer knew him, and heard him many times
openly declame: which to put to the writings aforesaid, and remember, it
seems not good. For the memory is of worthy men, not a writing to be laughed
at. He made the funeral Oration of Proaeresius, who dyed before him, and thus
they say he spoke to Selamine Marathon. where Milciades slew 10000. Persians.
and the Medians.

O Marathon and Salamine, now you shall be in silence. What a trompe have you
lost of your praises? He left two sons, given to pleasure and rytches.
Salamis, where Themistocles overthrew the Navy of Xerxes.


Sopolis.
THis writer did many times hear Sopolis. He was a follower of y^ old Sopolis,
an Antiquarie.
speech: desirous to attain to a sound doctrine. He knocked at the door often
enough, but it was open but syldome. A soft and weak sound did crack from
thence. A little divine breath issewed, which pleased the audience. But did not
bear a way the flowing stream of the fountain at Delphos. He had a son,
who they say, did ascend to the chair of learning.

Himerius.
Blthyria brought forth this man. This writer knew him not. Yet he was ^imerius.
of his time, but was gone to the Emperor Iulianus, to show himself, not to
hinder Iulianus Emperor.
Proaeresius, and was well received of the Emperor. Who being dead, he
continued his travail, and when Proaeresius was dead, he came to Athens. He
was sweet and pleasant in his Orations. He had a persuading way, probable to
the people, and sometime, not unlike to divine Aristldes. After his daughter,
he dyed in his age, of the falling syeknesse.

Parnasius.
IN this time was Parnasius in the chair and teaching. Having scholars
Parnasius.
that might be well numbered, yet of great name.

Libanius.
ANtioche brought forth Libanius, the chief City of that part of Syria, This
part is called Coelesyria. Antioche. Libanius, in Iulianus time, of whose
praise he wrote a book.
that is called Holow. The work of the noble Seleucus Nicator. He was of a
good house, and taken with the best: when he was young and ruler of him self,
his Parents being dead, he came to Athens: neither to Epiphanius, nor
Proaeresius, that were of greatest name, that he should not be obscure in such
a number of scholars, and great glory of masters.

Being caught with them of Diophantus, he cloue Diopha^tus.
to him, but as they that knew him very well, affirm among the scholars, and
familiars, he was little conuersaunt, neither tedious to his master. But of him
self, followed ye form of ancient Rhetorique, which he expressed both in
tongue and mind. As they that often do shoot, sometime do hit the mark.
Diligence continual in instruments, brings an art, not a science. So
Libanius by zeal, and imitation, forcing him self to follow the old Orators
that were accoumpted best, made good steps, and passed thorough the most of
the way. Trusting in his eloquence, and persuading him self to be equal with
them that were in estimation: he would not be hydden in a little City, but
went to Constantinople, a City most famous and wealthy, having need of their
words and works, that could set the same forth. He quickly became notable
there. And after a time returned to his Country. Where he continued all his
life, which was long. Wherefore the memory, worthy his life, is showed in our
Chronicle, of Iulianus acts. Now his private doings are rehearsed.

None of his friends or familiars, went away without a taunt. What every man's
manner was, he well marked, and understood his mind, whether he inclined to
virtue or vice. Such a one he was, in describing and uttering the condition of
men, all the which he did with a nyppe. His familiars supposed to be in him, an
other him self. Therefore his acquaintance said, he was a table and Image, of
sundry facions.

Neither could he be perceived of his Scholars, (were they never so many) to
what part he inclined. But to contrary nature, of contrary manners, he was
lyked, even of them that were contrary to his profession. So every man did
think to behold their conditions, alone in him, not without admiration, so
diverse forms of sundry qualities were found in him at ones. He also despised
marriage, yet he had a woman as his wife, but not of like worthynesse. His
Orations were cold and barraine, without life, so as in this point, it seemed
he was without a teacher. For the common rules wont to be known to children,
he knew not. But in Epistles and such other like familiar talk, he rose
sufficiently to the ancient form. His wrytinges are full of grace and
pleasantness of Comedy, and acumlynes is to be found, scattered
Syrophoenitia, the coast of Phoenitia
thorough his works. All the Syrophaenitians has that manner of speech, which
may be taken of him by learning.

They of Attica, calls it sensyble and sharp: He labored this as the chief
point of learning, all given to draw what he could, out of the old Comedy,
and to express it: and as it were, made of nature from the beginning, to that
pleasantnes and delighting of ears. A man may find in his Orations, exceeding
learning and knowledge, full of sweet speech, so as he would not have passed
the trees of Eupolidis, Eupolis, a writer of the old Co^medy.
Desphosia, and Damasia, if he had known the names of them, by the which men
call them now a days. Yet he found a strange and ancient style that was
hydden, as a gift taken from the old time, and brought it abroad, cleansing
it, and making it fair, framing an whole argument to it, with apt sentences,
as servant and handmayds, to a new grown maistres, and of old made young.

Divine Iulianus maruayled at it: And all men maruayled at his grace in
speech. Many books there be of his, which may be understood of them that
have wit and seek them. He was sufficient for civil causes and busynes, and
beside his Orations, to be bold to perform other things touching sights in
Theaters. The Princes that followed, gave him great offices. For they wylled
him to have the great maistership of the Court, and so saluted him. He refused
it, saying. A Philosopher is above it. And this is no small praise, that being
inferior, in glory, he would be superior in study. Thinking the other to be a
common and ordinary office. He dyed very old, leaving to all men, great
admiration of him.

Acacius.
CAesarea of Palaestina, brought forth Acacius, who was of Libanius time. Full
of Scolasticall contention, and spirit, as ever was man. His speech was like
the old manner with clapping of hands. Rising with Libanius, he got a praise
and held it. A book written of Libanius, of the aptness of nature, was
dedicate to Acacius, in the which, he confesses to be overcome of him, by
reason of his syngular hptnesse. He witnesses to him self, of the placing,
and quick setting of words, as a man ignorant.

And that Homer was not always careful of meter, but of good, sound, and
sweetness. And that Phidias Phidias, maker of the Picture of Pallas, of Iuorie,
xxv^. c^bits hye.
did not always, bring with him a finger, or a foot to set forth the
Goddesses. The ear being always wont to rule, and the cause either unknown,
or hard to be known. As in fair and goodly bodies, all men do not like one
thing. And he that is moved, knows not why he is moved.

Acacius, thus remaining for the best, having great glory and passing Lybanius,
died in his youth. Whom men, for his learning, honored as he had been a very
old man.

Nymphidianus.
NYmphidianus was of Smyrna. Nymphidian us. Maximus. Claudianus, Brethren.
Maximus the Philosopher, was his brother, and Claudianus also, who was a good
Philosopher likewise. Yet was not trained at Athens. He was borne to Eloquence,
and worthy the name of an Orator. Iulianus made him his Secretary, chiefly for
the Greek tongue. Yet Secretary to Iulianus.
he was better in declamations, and disputations: in the beginning and
proceeding, not like himself. He dyed being an old man, and after the death
of his brother Maximus.

Zenon.
AT this time many Physicians flourished: among the which, was Zenon of Cyprus,
ataining to great knowledge. Physicians flourishing.
And he was in y^ time of Julian the Orator. And after him, in Proaeresius
time, ye successor of Zeno, who excelled both in teaching, and practicing of
Physic. His Disciples that were famous, some followed the one part, and some
the other, and some both qualities of him. And were accept for their following,
both in practicing and teaching.

Magnus.
HE was borne at Antiochia, beyond Nisibis, where Alexander overthrew Darius.
Euphratis, which now they call Nisibis. He was Zenos scholar. And might provoke
Aristotle to dispute of bodies elect by nature, and of them selves sustained.
In teaching It seems he signifies that he was corpulent, and so had the name
of Magnus.
he made the Physicians to hold their peace, but in curing, he seemed not so
good.

As they say, they of the old time asked Archidamus, if he were stronger then
Pericles, he answered. When I have given Pericles a fall, he will prove he
Archidamus.
gave me a fall. Even so, Magnus would prove that Pericles.
they that were healed of other Physicians, were still Magnus most skillful in
arguing.
syeke. And when they that were whole and recovered, would give thanks to their
Doctors: he would diswade them with objections and arguments.

Alexandria was appointed his Schoolehouse, to whom men went both by water and
land. Either only to wonder at him, or to take some profit by him. Wherein
they were not deceived. Some, learning to speak, and some, to do, according
to their study.

Oribasius.
PErgamo brought forth Oribasius. Who straight came to glory by that Oribasius,
of Pergamo the more esteemed for his con^trey. Muse of Athens.
mean, as they do that be borne at Athens. If they prove good Orators, the
place makes them the more notable, as a Muse of Athens, and domestical
ornament. He being well borne both ways, was famous from a Child, endued with
all science that avails to virtue. As he grew in age, he was Auditor to
great Zenon, and companion with Magnus. Whom he left behind him in moving of
affections, wherein he was excellent.

He came to the height of Physic, following his country God, or was possible
for a man to do. Being young and notable: Iulianus aspyring to the kingdom,
Oribasius Physician to Iulianus.
took him for his science. He excelled so in other virtues, that he advanced
Iulianus to the state.

The which is more plainly showed in his life. But as the Proverb says. There
is no Lark without a Creaste.

So Oribasius was not without envy. For notwithstanding, his excellency, the
officers of Iulianus spoiled him of his substance, and minded to have done the
like with his life, but they restrained from the mischief. Otherwise,
committing as evil, for they appointed him to be killed of the Barbarians, as
the Athenians do them that be excellent in virtue. Yet such in Athens, suffered
as the law was, and no more. But Emperors added somewhat more to banishment,
That law was called Ostrasismus
being delivered to most cruel Barbarians, making them Lords of their
sentence.

Oribasius, being brought to the place of his enemies, did show great praise of
virtue, not limited by space, nor bounded by terms, but declaring constancy
and steadfastness, according to her nature: working alike, whersoeuer she
becomes. Even as they say, numbers, and such science does.

He got forthwith a great name of the Barbarians, and their Kings. He was
taken with the best. And having regard to the Roman kingdom, he was
honored among them, as a God. Hea^ing some of long diseases, delyuering some
from the gate of death. This said calamity, was occasion of all his felicity.
Wherefore the Emperor doubting to strive with such a man's virtue, in all
places, suffered him to return. In his iourn^y he had, for all his rytches,
himself, showing the rytches of virtue. He had a wise, noble and wealthy, and
four children, which be a live, and himself was living, when this was
written, and so may he long be.

He recovered his former substance, restored by the Emperors public decree,
which he had unjustly lost by the former sentence. And in this case was he. To
be conversant with Oribasius: he must be a gentle Philosopher, that he may
know what to esteem, above al other. Such an armony and grace, was shed and
joined with all men in his samiliar acquaintance.

Ionicus.
IOnicus was of Sardis, whose father was a singular Physician being Zenos
Disciple. He came to the light of knowledge. In so much, as Oribasius had him in
admiration. He was most skylfull in the symples and compositions of Physic,
and best in particular practi^^. He had perfect knowledge in man's Ionicus,
per^^te in the Sunples.
body and a thorough searcher of nature. There was no medicine, nor judgment
that was unknown to him: no not p^^isters, that the most cunning lay to
sores, to ^bate the superfluity, and avoid the encombraunce. The best deuisor
and practiced man, to close the corrupted parts, and not to let other cut
them. All the acts and names, he knew, insomuch as they that had greatest name
in Physic, woondred at his diligence: and plainly confessed, that being
helped by him, they knew indeed, what the ancients had written, and brought
it into use, as names hyd with the wrytings.

Beside this, he had great knowledge in other things of learning and
Sapience. And in divination that appertayned to foresee the cure of men, by
art of Physic: and of the other, that depends of Philosophy, and ends
there, for them that may be helped, by secret ways.

He had also great knowledge in Rhetorique, and other sciences. And was not
ignorant o^ Poetry. He dyed a little before this was written, having two
children worthy of praise and fame. At this time Theon.
one Theon of Galatia, was of great fame. Now let us return to Philosophers,
from whom we have digressed.

Chrysanthius.
CHrysanthius was the cause that Chrysa^thiu^ Scholemaster to this writer.
this Treatise was written, teaching the writer from a Child, and susteyning
him to the end, as a law of benevolence toward him.

Yet for all that, nothing shall be spoken partially of him, for he loved
truth above all things, and first taught it chiefly. We will not augment the
benefyte received, cut rather speak most moderatly of him, for so it was
agreed between us. Chrysanthius was of the Senate, and for Nobility,
accoumpted with Inocentius, a Lawyer gra^dfather to Chrysan.
the best.

One Inocentius was his Grandfather, a man of great rytches and estimation,
being appointed by the Emperors to make Laws. There be books of his, extant,
written both in Greek and Latin. Which testifies his deep and stayed
judgment, and contain knowledge of these things, for such as be desirous of
them.

Chrysanthius being left young of his Father, and given to Philosophy, by his
divine nature, went to Pergamo, to the great Aedesius. And growing in years,
had such a desire and thyrst of Philosophy, as chancing on such a Teacher, as
did give him enough to aslake his thyrst, he lost no lesson, nor gave place to
any in diligence. For he was of a sound and strong body, acquaynted with
labor.

He got full knowledge in Aristotle, and Plato, and gave all his mind to
Philosophy. And having understood all the sormes of the same, he was of
inclination to obtain eloquence, and in good way of exercise and doctrine. He
overcame every enterprise that he took in hand, and had boidnes to make
declaration of his proof: apt to speak, and to be sylent also. And when he
spoke, to get the maistry, he would use high praise and pomp. After this, he
went to the study of knowledge of the Gods, and followed the Sapience that
Pythagoras taught, and other that followed him. Parentinus Architas,
Philosopher. Apolonius, was of Alexandria. borne at Tyana in Cappadocia


Beside old Architas and Tyaneus Apolonius, and them that honored Apolonius,
surely divine men, yet mortal. After this study, Chrysanthius going the
straight way, taking the first occasion, by these principles and guides, he
prospered and attained to such a perfection of the mind, which Plato calls a
purgation, as he got the full of all that science to the uttermost, and was
perfyte in all foresyght.

Men said, he did better see, than speak of things to come, as one that ever
had been present with the Gods. After he had bestowed a good time this way,
and coferred with Maximus very much, he Conditions of Maximus.
left his society. For being contentious and obstinate of nature, striving
against the tokens that God sent, he searched and wrestled for others. But
Chrysanthius by induction, when he had seen the first, stayde with the
sygnifications that were given, and either had the victory, or if he were
wroong, supplied it by polecie.

And when Iulianus the Emperor, sent for them both by one calling, appoynting
soldiers for their honor, bringing a persuasion from Thessalie, ioygned with
a ne^^ssitie: that it seemed he did communicate with God, and manifestly
wrought with him, as a private and daily workman of the lower sort, to judge
the tokens of God: forbydding his going. But Maximus continued fast in the
Ceremonies, and devoutly using the Sacrifyces, with cries: he would ask of God
other tokens, to differ the destiny.

And where he had still contrary tokens, and thereby caused Chrysanthius to try
it again: yet at length the will of the Gods was manifested by signs, and
their determination many times showed by Sacrifice, although the thing that
appeared, was not by him, approved. So as Maximus took that journey, which was
cause of all calamity: Even so Chrysanthius tarried at home.

At the first, the Emperor considered the cause, and coniectured, why
Chrysanthius would not come, because he saw difficulty in the matter.
Notwithstanding, Iulianus wrote again for him: and not only exhorted him, but
also moved his wyle to persuade him to come.

Chrysanthius again, resorted to divine knowledge. And the Gods showed him
continually, all one tokens. The which coming often to pass, and the Emperor
having great opinion of him, gave him the chief Byshoprike of that country.
And he knowing certainly what would follow, was not grievous in his dignity,
nor oppressed the younger, as all in this age, were wont to do, hotly and
fervently, neither was he very extreme to the Christians.

So great lenity was in his behavior, that in all Lydia it was scarcely
known, that there was any alteration of Religion. Whereof followed, when the
change came, that no new thing seemed to be done: Nothing suddenly appeared to
be altered, but al things stayed quietly, and uniformly, and without motion. And
where all other were tossed, as with the Sea, he only was in quietness, some
of the sudden thrown down, other rising again, from their former myseries.

He was in admiration, for that he did not only foresee things to come, but
also used well the things he knew. This was his behavior always. So as it
might be seen, that Socrates was revived again: or that from his youth, he
had immitated and followed him, and was transformed into him.

A plain and simple manner of grace appeared in his speech: yet the
sweetness of his words, did move his audience. He was gentle to all in
conversation. Insomuch that they that went srom him, were thought ambitious.
And as gentle and mylde versies, do easily and readily enter and pass into
every man's ears, and move things void of reason, as they say of Orpheus. So
Chrysanthius speech was harmonious to all men, as it agreed and was fytte for
such a diuersitye of manners. Yet was he styffe and stable in his sentence and
opinion, for the which he saw most men at controuerly. Seldom should any man
hear him boast of his learning, or be thereby the more insolent to others:
what they said, he praised, though it were not well said.

He allowed an opinion, though it were not of the ^est, as though he heard it
not thoroughly, seeming to be borne to please, and not to offend. If there
were any motion, by the presence of some learned men: and he mynd^ug to say
any thing of the coutrouersie, all was full or scilence, as though there had
been noman.

So neither int^^rogations, divisions, nor repetions, were required of him, but
refrayned from disputation and contradiction, least they should seem to fall
into manifest fault.

Many that did but meanly know him, and could not conceive the depthe of his
mind, blamed his simple speech, and only praised his myldnesse of mind.
But when they heard him dyspute, and wrapping himself, with reasons into
pr^cepres, they thought him to be another manner man, than they supposed.

So unlike did he seem unto him self, in matters of controversy. His heayres
stood right up as in a fear, and his eyes testified, that his mind was rapt,
about his doctrine. Living to great years, he spent his days, without the
cares of man's causes: but only for provision of family, mayntenance of the
Plowe, and gain that was just.

He better did bear penury, than others plenty. His diet was such, as might be
easily gotten. He never eat Porke, and syldome any other flesh. Always
worshipping God, he applied the reading of old Authors, diligently. He
differed neither in age, nor in youth. For being four score years old: he
wrote so many Books with his own hand, as few young men can read over:
whereby his fyngers ends, for the continual use, waxed crooked. When he rose
from study, he recreated his mind by walking softly abroad, taking this
writer with him.

He would walk a good way, but fair and easily. So as it might be thought, he
had pain in his feet, so much was he carried, with declaration of the truth.
Bathes he seldom used, yet always seemed as he had been washed. As touching
the company of great men, he refused not for arrogancy or pride, but as it
may be judged for simplicity, as a man ignorant of power, yet he talked with
them openly, and plainly.

He taught the writer hereof, being young, who came to him to Athens. And
continued his love toward him, as his Child, increasing it with daily
benevolence. And so much increased in learning this writer, as in the morning,
he taught others, and read Rhetorique to them that would hear it. And after
noone resorted to his chief master to learn more divine and Philosophical
matter, which was not painful, because he bestowed it upon his dear beloved:
and to him, so readily taking it, the work was a pastime.

Than the Christian state preuayling, and ruling Iustus ruler of Asia.
over all: One Iustus came to govern Asia, from Rome, which was a long
journey. He being old and of gentle behavior, not having lest the ancient
rites of his country, but followed that blessed and happy manner of life, ever
in prayer, and depending upon the aunsweres of God, being the more bold, that
he prospered so well thereby.

He came dyrectly from Constantinople to Asia, and appointed Hilarious an
officer, who was of his own Hilarious.
opinion: And on the sudden set up Altares at Sardis, (where was none,) and
repaired the Temples that were decayed, and making public Sacrifyce: By his
letters, sent to every place, called all such as had opinion, and fame of
learning, who came to him out of hand, maruayling at him, thynking now the
time to be come, that every man might utter his knowledge.

Some of these put their trust in flattering, like children, hoping that way,
to get honor, glory, or gain. There was a public Feast proclaimed, at the
which all we^^ present, and among others, the writer hereof.

Iustus marking well, and beholding the Sacrifice which lay out of order, asked
of them that were present, what the form of that manner of falling of the
Host, meant. Here the flatterers were styrred with a great maruayle, that he
could divine by Figure, and affyrmed that he only knew it.

The grauer sort, stryking their beardes with their fyngers ends, staying
their countenaunces, and shaking their heads, slowly and leysurely, beheld the
thing as it lay, and said some one thing, and some another.

Iustus scarcely refrayning from laughter, turned to Chrysanthius, speaking a
loud, what say you old man? Chrysanthius being nothing abashed, said: he
disallowed all. And if you (said he) will have me speak, what way there is of
divination: say you first what kinds you know, and of what form, of what
question, and what prefixed manner, it proceeds. And if you tell this, I will
show, what the appearance sygnifyeth to come, before you declare this, it were a
rude part of me to answer to your interrogation, and to show of things to
come, seeing the Gods will sygnifie sufficiently, what shall be, and ioygne
that, that is, with that which must be hereafter.

By this reason, there should be two interrogations, and no man is asked at
ones, of two or more, for in things defynite, controversies has not one
consyderation.

Than Iustus cried, that he learned that he never knew before, and ceased not
from that time to learn that he knew not, by conferrin^ with him priuatelye,
to know from the foun^ayne, that of which he was ignorant.

At this time, many that had names of learning, came to talk with
Chrysanthius, moved by the fame of his excellent knowledge. But when they
perceived that they were far inferior to that Majesty that was in him, they
went their ways.

The like happened to Hellespontius of Galatia, a Hellespontius.
very syngular man, and except Chrysanthius, the chief of all. He was so
desirous of learning, that he went to places unknown, to seek better learned
than him self. And being furnished with goodlye travail, and great learning,
he came to Sardis, the old City of Lydia, to speak with Chrysanthius.

Chrysanthius had a son, of the name of his Master, Aedesius at Pergamo, of
whom we have spoken before, who from a child, enclyned to virtue, as Plato,
in Phaedro, resembles two parts of the mind, to Horses, and the third, to the
Carte^s.
one that with wings was created to fly to it. Not having but one of the
Horses that Plato speaks of, neither a puffed mind, but quick and swyft to
knowledge, whollye bent to the honor of God, and so much above the affections
of the body, as he seemed almost to be created of the mindeonely.

His body in moving, was so deliver, as is to be scarcelye credyted, as one
(according to the Poets) that was carried in the air. He had such familiarity
with divine matter, and that so easily, and so readily, that it was superfluous
to set a Garlande on his head, but looking only against the Sun, he vttred
true Oracles, and conformable to that kind that comes from a pure
divination. Yet he knew no verse, nor was sufficiently learned in Grammar. So
God wrought all things in him. Nevertheless, at the determined end of his
life, he dyed: at the twenty year of his age.

Than his father declared himself to be a Philosopher. For either the
rauishment of his senses made him void of affections, or the patience of his
mind, made him bear the loss of his son. And the mother, having regard to
her husband, passed the nature of a woman, refrayning from all lamentation,
though the passion were most grievous. After these matters, Chrysanthius
returned to his studies. And many great and public causes chauncing, that
drove men's minds to fear, he only remained without trouble, that it might
seem, he was not of the earth.

At this time Hellespontius came to him, but seldom entered disputation. But
when they were at it, Hellespontius was so rapte, as he lest all to abide with
Chrysanthius, and learned like a young man, and repented he had lost so much
time, and was so old, before he had tasted of so healthful doctrine. So
wholly did he give his mind to him.

Chrysanthius would be let blood, as he was wont: when this writer was
present, as he commanded. When the Physicians agreed that he should stryke a
vain, he attended to see it done accordingly. And affyrmed that it was rashly
and unadvisedly done, to take so much blood, and commanded him to be stopped.
For this writer was not ignorant of Physic. Hellespontius hearing of it,
came in great anger, and chyding, as in a great offense, that so much blood
should be taken from so old a man. But when he saw him safe, and heard him
speak, he turned to this writer, saying: The City accused you of a great
fault, but now they will be still, when they see the old man safe, and void
of danger.

This man coming after to Chrysanthius in a public cause, fell sick by the
way of a flyxe, and at Apamea in Bythinia, dyed. Commanding his fellow
Procopius, only to honor Chrysanthius. Which thing Procopius told, when he
was come to Sardis.

Chrysanthius in the summer, the year following, used the same Physic. And
where this writer wylled the Physicians that they should tarry for him, as the
manner was, because he was President. Yet they prevented him, and let him blood,
and whylest he bled, he put his hand to his chyn, and a sudden weakness
followed, with a shrynking of the synewes. Oribasius was called forthwith for
his conning. And he with noriture and hot things, restored strength again,
and made him in good case. But age prevailed, which the next year dispatched
him, natural heat being extinct, by the much use of fomentations. And so
being sick, he dyed after the common course of man.

Epigonus and Beronitianus.
EPigonus of Lacedemonia, and Beronitianus of Sardis, succeeded him in
teaching. Men worthy the name of Philosophy. Beronitianus was more full of
sweet grace, and fytte to live with the multitude.

And so, I pray God, he may.
To the gentle Reader, Hadrianus Iunius.
I Ohannes Sambucus, of Hungary, a diligent obseruer, and likewise searcher of
antiquity, neither sparing expense nor labor in that behalf, and one that is
wont to impart and communicate, his delyght and care with other men: More then
two years since, did send me a copy of Eunapius of Sardis, very gently, and
was the first that moved me to translate him into Latin: which labor I did
not refuse, because I hoped the book, that was so well written by the Clark,
should have caused the less labor to the interpretour. The which being
written out by the benefit of the Lybrarie of Cardinal Farnesius, as he
pretended (who, as they say, has a study replenished with old Books) was so
mangled and hacked, and so full of infinite and monstrous faults: that I well
perceived, I had need of Paeon. an e^cellent Physician. Chiron, a Centaure.
Paons hand, to heal Chirons wounds, whereby I was almost utterly discouraged
from the labor of tra^slatio^. And my many other business beside, might
easily have put me from my purpose, except I had pulled up a good heart to
continue, and determined to wrythe a clubbe of diffyculty from mine own hand.
Wherefore I determined to guess like a Diuinour, to draw my conjecture into
parts, and to supply: yet, with great preciseness. But sometime I had rather
pass it over lightly, then to thrust in other men's noates: that is to say,
mine own. But If I might get the Florentine Copy, which by the only life of
porphyrius, printed there, I judge more corrected and full, I would trust my
second travail should be better. Certainly, as much as lay in me, I have
brought to pass, that by this labor, I have committed into the hands of the
studious, an eloquent writer, never heretofore seen abroad. Both speaking in
his own ^^ngue and Latin also, as faithfully as I could translate him. Being
delivered of the promise I made to Sambucus, though somewhat later, than we
both desired.

Farewell.
A Table of all the notable names, and principal matters, contained in this
work.
A ABlabius. Fol. 9 Ablabius ball of fortune. 10 Acacius of Caesarea, dyed a
young man. 35 Aedesius sees a vision. 10 Aedesius. 56 Aedesius, a soothsayer.
10 Aedesius gentle. 6. 8. 22 Aedesius dilygent. 5. 78 Aedesius, son to
Chrysanthi^^^s dies at. xx. years of age. 42 Aegiptians given to Poetry. 32
Aeschines a practiser. 27 Affections, the Horses of the mind. 40 Africa. 19
Alarichus. 19 Alexander the great. 1 Alexandria praised. 15 Alypius 6. of little
stature. 7 Alypius death, and Iamblicus. 7 Amelius scholefellow with
Porphyrius. 4 Ammonius of Egypt, scholemaister to Plutarche. 1. 2 Amphiclea,
Proaeresius wife. 32 Anatolius. 5 Anatolius Azutrion borne at Berytos. 30
Kynsman to Proaeresius. 26 Made greatmaister. 30 Given to Paganism. 30 His
integrity^. 30 A taunter. Fol. 30. 31 Andromacus. Fol. 5 Anteros 6 Antiochia,
Nisibis. 36 Antiochia besieged. 11 Antiochia builded of Seleueus. 34 Antoninus,
Sosipatras son. 15 Antoninus praise. 15. 16 Antoninus providence. 16 Apamea
of Bithynia. 42 Appolonius Tyaneus, taken for a God. 2. 38 Apsines professor
of Arts. 24. 25 Aquilinus, scholefellowe to Porphyrius. 4 Archidamus. 36
Archytas of Tarent. 38 Aristides. 29. 33 Aristophanes. 8 Athenienses evil, to
good. 8 Athens, factious. 24
B Baiae. 6 Bathe, to the which Strangers were brought, at Athens. 26
Beronicianus. 43 Berytos, a City of learning. 30 Byactes. 1 Byzance. 9
C Canobus, mouth of Nilus. 15. 16 Causanthas a spyrits 4 Callymachus 33
Cayster a flood 12 Carneades 2 Celeus 3^ Cercopes 8 Ceres. beneficial. 32
Chalcis of Syria 5 Charybdis 4 Christians destroy Temples. 16 Chrysathius,
Acdesius scholar. 5 Chrysanthius, Eunapius master 5. 38 Chrysanthius 8. 17. 38
Chrysanthius of good house 38 Of strong body 40 Scholar of Acdesius 38 Twice
called of Julian 19. ^0 A Soothsayer 19. 20 Made Bishop in Lydia 20. 39 Not
cruel to Christians 39 Follower of Socrates 39 No boaster of learning 40
Abstayning from flesh 40 Fleeing great men's company. 40 Unmoved in his sons
death. 42 Stryketh a vain in age. 42 Dies 43 Claudianus 17 Brother to
Nymphidianus. 17. 36 Claudius Nero 2 Clearchus 21 Scholefellow of Porphyrius 4
Constantinople populous 6 Constantinople flourishing 34 Constantinople served
Athens of grain ^ Constantinus destroys Temples, 8. 9. 10. 17 Constantius
10. 17 Constans ^^ Cyniches ^ Cybels Priests ^4
D Danger by Chariots ^^ ^^ Demetrius ^ Demonax ^ Dexippu^ 5 Dion of Bithynia
1 Dionysius 3 Diophantus 24. 28. 33 Makes funeral Oration of Proaeresius ^^
Dipsas works continual thirst 13 Divination two ways 38 Divination of
Sofipatra. 13. 14. 15
E Epagatus 24 Epigonus 43 Epiphanius 24. 28. ^3 Professor of Rhetorike 33
Soft in speech 33 Dies of a blooddy flyre 33 Eros. 6. Euemerius 19 Eumolpus
law 8 Eunapius, Chrysanthius scoler. 8 Endued with best learning 8 His history
of Iulianus 10. 17. 19. 20 Priest of Eleusine Goddess 18 Comes to Athens 2.
26 Eunapius old in youth 26 Recouereth a desperate disease, 27 As a son to
Proaeresius 29. 31 Going to Egypt is revoked 33 Scholar to Chrysanthius 38, 40
Used as his Child. 38, 40. Learned in Physic 41 Eunapius C^syn 20 ^unapius
truth in writing 9 ^ustathrus 5. 11. 12 Euphranor, a Paynter 23 ^uphrasius 5
^uphrates 1 ^upolis 35 ^usebius 17. 18 ^usebius, contentions 31 ^umenides
furies 22 Exostracisme 37 Executioners to kill Ablabius, 10 ^xonius 2
F Festus dies suddenly 22 Festus kylleth Moximus 22 Festus falls ^odenly 22
G Gadara a Bathe in Syria 6 Galba 2 Gerion ^8 Great master 30
H Hecates Temple 18 Helespontius 42 Trauayleth the world 42 Tarryeth with
Chrysanthius. 42 Dies 42 Hephestion 24. 27. 28 Hefiodus mornings 15 Hilarious
of Bith yo^^ slain 23 Hilarious Pressoent of Asia 41 Hierophantas, shewer of
holy things. 32 Himerius of Athens. 31. 33 Dies of the falling sickness 34
History of Eunapius 26 Homer 13. 16. 20. 36 Holow part of Syria 5. 24
I Iamblicus 5 Iamblicus co^^^ring 6. 16 Iamblicus divination 6. 7 Iilyrin 10.
30 Impotoncie of love 2 Inocentius, grandsire to Chrysanthius 38 His book of
Law 38 Ionicus of Sardis 37 Learned in divination 3^ His two so^^es. 3^
Islands given. 32 Iouinianus. 20 Iulianus Orator. 24. 25 Iulianus to Ephesus.
18 Iulianus to France. 19 Iulianus liberality. 17 Esteems Libanius. 35
Helped by Oribasius. 19. 37 Passes the Rhene. 19 Comes to Pergamo. 17 His
Docilitie. 17 Iulianus house, a Study. 24 Iulianus Viage to Persia 20 Iulianus
the Orators death. 28 Iustus President. 41 Restores Temples. 41
L Lacedaemonia disordered. 24 Libanius of good house. 34 Follows old
Writers. 34 To Constantinople. 34 Lives long. 34 Lives single. 34 Grace in
writing. 35 Dies old. 35 Dedicateth a book to Acacius. 35 Lycopolys. 4.
Lybia. 19 Longinus. 3 Lucianus. 2
M Man curious. 31 Man self willed. 33 Magycke operation. 5 Magic knowledge.
4. 6. 7. 16 18. 19 Magnus of Antioche. 36 Confounds Physicians. 36 Teaches
at Alexandria. 36 Malchus. 3 Marcella. 4 Marathon. 33 Maximus. 14. 19 Iulianus
master. 17 At Constantinople. 20 Haughty. 20. 39 Committed and tormented. 20.
21 His wife procures her death. 21 His wit. 39 Delivered from prison. 21
Melita. 20 Mendesius. ^ Menippus 2 Milesius. 31 Surnamed the Muse. 31
Comfort Proaeresius. 31 Mithriaca, Sacrifice. 19 Molossus 17 Musonius 2
Musonius, forbidden to teach, because he is a Christian. 3^ Muse of Athens. 36
Mydwife. 9
N Notaries. 29 Nymphidianus 17. 36 Iulianus, Secretary, 36 Necessity. ^5
O Oracle. Fol. 4. 10 Oribasius. 19. 36. 43 Iulianus Physician. 37 Julian
advanced by him. 37. 39 Spoiled of his g^ode^. 37 Delivered to Barbarians 37
Taken for a God among them. 37 Called from exyle 37 Maryeth a wife. 37 Has
four children. 37 Recouereth his goods. 37 Origenes 4 Orpheus 40 Otho 2
P Parnasius Orator. 28, 34 Paulus of Athens 5 Pericles 36 Phidias 35
Philometor in danger 15 Philometor loves Sofipatra. 14 Philosophers, when
chief, 2. 3 Philostratus 2 Philostratus of Lemn^s. 1. 2 Plato 2. 5. 7. 38
Plotinus obscurity 4 Plutarche, one in Traianes time, another in Iulianus 1. 2
Porphyrius 3 Porphyrius, why he maryeth. 4 Porphyrius into Sicelle. 4
Porphyrius, Plotinus friend. 4 Porphyrius healed by Plotine. 4 Porphyrius
casts out a spyrit. 4 Porphyrius abstynenc^. 4 Porphyrius plain speech. 4
Porphyrius name Malchus. 3 Prophyrius death 5 Priscus 17. 20. 23 Priscus a
dissembler 23 Priscus peenish 23 Priscus modest 20 Priscus, 90. years old. 23
Proaeresius pleads in bands. 25 Proaeresius 24. 25 Proaeresius poor 27
Proaeresius rewarded 28 32 Lieftenaunt 32 Marieth 32 His Daughters death 32 His
death 33 Called from exyle 28 Fortunate 30 God of Eloquenc^ 26 Higher then all
men 27 Called into France 3^ Years old. 87. 26 Borne in Armenia. 26 More then
a man 27. 31 His picture at Rome. 31 Eloquence incomperable. 26. 28 Memory
wonderful. 29 His poverty. 27. 28 Procopius, a Tyran. 21 Procopius fellow of
Helespontius 43 Prodigal of cunning 43 Priests of the Goddosses 18 Punishment
of the Boats 21 The Proverbs. Adamantinus strong. 38. Reaching to the
Stars. 11 12. 26 A Lark not without a Creast. 37 Draw from the fountain. 7
The Oracle of Delphos. 17. 32. 33 An horse to the plain. 32 As of an Oracle.
17 Ball of Fortune 10 Heads of Hidra. 30 Spread Icarus feathers. 23
Lacedemonian hands 24. 25 To taste Lotos 11. The Image of Mercury. 29 Cheine
of Mercury 4 Sacrifice to the graces of Mercury. ^ Breathing Mercury and
Musies 24 A School of Musies. 7 Sacred Taciturni^ie 8 Increase by ^^bites 19.
Pithag^ris^ie to be sylent. 25. 29 Picture of ^apience 8 Image immovable. ^6.
S Salamin^ 33 Salutation to Emperors 10 Salutius 12 Sapores king of Persia 11
Scaphismus ^1 Serapis Temple 15. 16 Seuetus 2 Similitude elegant 2. 7. 30
Socrates death 9 Socrates Image of Saplence 8 Sotion 1 Sopater 5. 8 Sopater
killed 9 Sopolis 28. 33 Sosipatra married 12. 13. 14 Sosipatra of singular
learning. 12 Sosipatras divination 13. 14. 15 Sosipatras death 15
Syrophaenicians 34 Syrenes songs 11
T Themis 29 Themistocles Orator 25 Theodotius 22 Theodorus 5 Theon 3^ Tmolus
21 Titus 2 Theophilus 16 Trabeall garment 25 Trallys 3^ Truth 27 3^ Tyro^ 3
Tryptolemus 3^ Tus^ianu^ 24 25 29
V. Ulysses 4 Valens, burned in an house. 22 Valentinian and Valence, 20. 21
Verity guide of all good. 27 Vespasianus 2 Vision of illusion 16 Vit^llius 2
Virtue 37 Vlpianus Orator. 27
X Xenophonts prays^ 1 Xenocrates 5 Zenon of Cyprus. 36

FINIS
Faults escaped.
Leaf Side Line Fault. Correction. 2 1 3 Demonactes, Demo^a^ Ibid. 2 11 face,
color foot, collar 3 2 12 Strian Syrian. 10 1 ^ Constantius Constantinus.
Ibid. Ibid, 14 Constanti^us Constantius. Ibid. Ibid. 15 Ellyria Illyria. 11 2
17 purpose Purple. Ibid. Ibid. 32 which why. 12 ^ 7 Cosipatra Sosipatra. Ibid.
Ibid. 27 in certain uncertain. 13 1 in the note. Sosepatra Sosipatra. Ibid. 2
22 not, much not much 14 1. and in one, ^y place else Philometer Philometor 17
1 5 Homers, Minerus, Homers Minerua, Ibid. Ibid. 26 Uncles, Eunuchs, 18 1 11
begun, being, Ibid. 2 17. and 18. Priests Priest. 19 1 in the note. Mithriaae^
Mithriaca. 20 2 26 Thus This 25 1 11 she he Ibid. Ibid. 29 Pythagoream,
Pythagorean. 31 1 31 Nilcsius* Milesius. 32 1 24 Manor manner, Ibid. Ibid. 2
Nilesius, Milesius. Ibid. Ibid. 21 Ieraepha^ Ierophant^*


