OF The duty of a faithful and Wise Magistrate, in preserving and delivering
of the common wealth from infection, in the time of the Plague or Pestilence:
Two Books. Written in Latin by John Ewich, ordinary Physician of the worthy
common wealth of Breame, and newly turned into English by John Stockwood
Schoole-maister of Tunbridge. A Work very necessary for our time and
country, where the Plague rages so sore in many places presently, or which
hereafter shall be visited, which God forbid, if it be his will.

Psalm. 41. Eccle. 7. Well is it with that man, who wisely handeleth the sick:
for at what time he shall suffer any adversity or trouble, the Lord in like
manner will help him again.

Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree by Thomas Dawson: 1583.

To the right Honorable S. John Blanke, Knight, L. Mayor of the most renowned
City of London: and to the Right Worshipful M. William Fleetwood Sergeant of
the Law, and Recorder of the said City: and also to the right Worshipful,
the Sheriffs and Aldermen, with the whole state of the same city: John
Stockwood Schoolemaister of Tu^bridge, wishes a most plentiful increase of
the spirit of wisdom, and al necessary graces, for the government of so
great a people, as may be most to the glory of God, the profit of his Church,
and welfare of the common wealth.
AS mankind naturally ever since the fall of our first parents Adam and
Heuah (right honorable and Woorshipfull) has not ceased in it self, and
forsaken of God his spirit, to grow from bad to worse, and from evil to start
naught, or (as the Psalmist speaks very properly) to walk in the counsel
of the wicked, to stand in the way of sinners, and (which is a thing most
lamentable and fearful) to sit in the seat of the scornful, that is, to clime
those staiers, and scale that ladder, whose steps being sin, and staves
iniquity, cannot choose but fail them coming once to the top, and to cast
them down to that horrible downfall of perpetual ruin and everlasting
condemnation: so GOD a most just judge, and yet with all a most gentle and
loving Father to such as are his, has used and tried from time to time all
manner of means and ways, to bring the same out of thraldom to llbertye, out
of prison to enlargement, out of misery to joy, out of pain to pleasure, out
of ignorance to truth, out of darkness to light, out of wretchedness to
happiness, and out of hell to Heaven. He has proved and assayed all kind
of remedies, wearying as it were himself for our amendment, and has nothing
at all in a manner prevailed: he has myldely entreated us in the dealing of a
Father, he has seuerelye handeled us in the person of a judge. The heavens
have burnte above us in strange manner with fires, new Stars, Comets and
unwonted lights: the earth beneath us has trembled and quaked at the
judgments of GOD, as notable any longer to bear the burden of our sins,
yet man has nothing at all been moved. He has plentifully sent forth his
word; and great have been the number of his Preachers: but his people have
stopped their ears like the deaf Adder, and will not hear the voice of the
Charmer, charm he never so wisely. He has pyped unto us, Mat. 11.17.
and we have not daunced: he has mourned unto us, and we have not lamented.
He has blessed us in the City, Deuteronomy. 28.
and blessed us in the field: he has blessed the fruit of our body, and the
fruit of our ground, the fruit of our cattle, the increase of our kine, and
the flocks of our sheep. He has blessed our basket, and our dough: he has
blessed us coming in, and blessed us going out. He has caused our enemies
that have risen against us, to fall before us, they have come out against us
one way, and have fled before us seven ways, in so much that all the
nations of the earth see this, and wonder at the same: yet cannot all this
make our Realm of England thankful. What then remains, but that, if we go
on still wallowing in our sins, adding contempt unto unthankfulness, as
drunke^nes unto thirst, the Lord will turn al these his former blessings, unto
new and unwonted curses: cursing us in the town, and cursing us in the field,
cursing our basket, and cursing our store, cursing the fruit of our body, and
the fruit of our land, the increase of our kine, and the flocks of our
sheep, cursing our coming in, and cursing our going out, sending upon us
trouble and shame, in all that we put our hand unto, making the heaven over our
head, brass; and the earth that is under our feet, yro^; smiting us with a
consumption, with the fever, and with a burning ague, and with fervent heat,
making the pestilence to cleave unto us until he has consumed us from the
land, which we possess and dwell in. For we are not so witty and cunning in
committing daily and hourly new sins, but the Lord is as expert and skillful
in ordeining new plagues to correct and chastise the same withal. We see how
amongst other his scourges, sent no doubt for the amendment of his chosen,
and for the warning of the reprobate, that these are but fleabitings unto the
torments that are reserved for the^ in the life to come, how the plague and
pestilence now furiously rages almost in every corner of this la^d, a sickness
that every man so greatly trembles at, and no man fears to deserve the same:
a disease so usual, especially in your most honorable city of London, that
albeit it were somewhat feared at the first, yet use has now at length made it
unto many so familiar, that there is little more regard had of it then of any
other common and light malady. A great number, and among the same, some also of
no small account (at leastwise in their own judgment) contrary to reason,
philosophy, physic, divinity, yea experience it self, absurdlie and fondly
both by word and example, mainteyning ye same not to be infectious, or that it
may be taken one of an other, which makes the^ so undiscreetly, and
unadvisedly, nay so unchristianly and rashly, where there is no need, without
any fear of themselves, or regard of others, to resort and keep company with
such as are infected, under a pretense of christian charity, but indeed of a
blind zeal without knowledge: yea and many times to win the commendation and
glory of not fearing, or rather contemning death, this way procuring untimely
death (I speak not of the vncha^ble determination of God, but as may be
gessed by the ordinary course of nature) both unto them selves and also many
others, to the displeasure of God, and the loss of the common wealth: not that
I think it unlawful for one Christian in this kind of sickness to visit an
other (whereunto Godliness, religion, and Christian duetic does bind) but
that I would have al needelesse resort restrained, being, although not the
only, yet in my judgment, the chiefest cause of the spreading and scattering
abroad of the same. But hereof (I mean whether the Plague be infectious or
no, and whether, and how far it may of a Christian be shunned and avoided)
there is a very notable and profitable Treatise, written by that famous and
Godly Divine Theodore Beza, in Latin, and not many years since by me
turned into English for the benefit of my country men, whither for shortness
sake I send the Reader that is not already satisfied. As for you (right
Honorable and Worshipful, whom in the Lord with all humility I reverence,
and on whose shoulders lies the heavy charge of governing this noble city) I
am fully resolved, that you are otherwise persuaded, thinking the Plague not
only to be infectious, but that it is also your parts and duties so far
as in you lies, and by the wisdom and policy of man, not contrary unto
the word of God, may be attained unto, to labor to stop, prevent and hinder
the contagion of the same. To the furtherance and forwarding of which your
Godly purpose, I have taken pains to English this very excellent and
singular Treatise, the Father of it being a Dutch man, the child a Roman, not
by country, but by education: the which being committed unto my tuition, I
have taught in fourteen days space to speak this mother tongue of ours in
such rude and homely manner as you see; hoping that the plainness and
simplenes of his speech may be pardoned and borne with in regard of his short
time that he had to learn, not that he would win praise for his quick
capacity, but seeing the occasion of God his so general visitation, he thought,
that if he might be heard speak before your H. and W. he might happily say
some thing that might turn to the common benefit, having meant ere this time
to have presented himself unto you under his masters simple dedication, saving
that I know not how it falls out of a preposterous and overthwart course,
that good things can hardly pass the press, when as unprofitable and
hurtefull Pamphlets have very quick and to too speedye passage. Whatsoever good
and wholesome counsel he shall give, he trusts shall at your hands not only
be friendly accepted, but diligently followed, and put in practice, as occasion
and opportunity shall be offered, craving pardon for his wants, and
imperfections, nothing doubting but they shall be supplied, either by your own
grave wisdoms, or else by the learned advise of Godly and skillful
Physicians. It is enough for him to have broken the yse, and to have showed the
way for others, ministering matter of further deliberation, what manner course
ought to be taken for the taming and maistering of this so fierce and cruel a
Dragon, (for so I read this sickness of the plague by some very singular
Physicians to be termed) before he be suffered to approach too far within
your borders. We see what preparation is used of every man to withstand his
own private enemy: what care every good husband has for the fortifiyng of his
house against the lawles atte^pts and brekings in of thieves: what public
diligence is showed, and strong munition had always in a readiness to keep out
the power of the foreign soldier: how much more then stands it you upon,
and all other godly and faithful magistrates, to employ al your endeavors, to
communicate and impart all your counselles, to bend all your devises, to stop
in time the dangerous assaults of this bloody Lion, yt ra^geth so fiercely in
most places of this realm at this time? If delay in all perils be dangerous,
it cannot choose but in this disease, which like a swift devouring fire
consumes all things before it as it goes, but be very perilous and
hurtful. Meet with therefore the beginning, least remedy come too late: when
the disease by tract of time is growe^ to such strength, that it can very
hardly, and not without much trouble be cured. A little bracke in a Wall made
to keep out water, taken at the first, may quickly be stopped, which being
suffered but for a small time to have his course, makes such a breach as often
turns to the drowning of an whole Country. The fire that is espied when it
first takes hold in the thatch or timber of some house in a Town, may easily
at the beginning with a little help be quenched, which catching strength by
spreading, causes sometimes the pitiful desolation and utter burning to
ground of all the houses and buildinges in the same. After like manner it
fares with this unruly stream of the Plague, and unmerciful flame of the
Pestilence, if you give it leave by spreading and scattering abroad, once to
gather force and power, it many times makes ridda^ce of whole towns, and
clean sweepeth away huge and mighty Cities, whereas being wiselye looked unto
at the first, after such order as in this short Treatise is prescribed, it
often passes away without any great hurt or harm dooynge. You have
heretofore felt of the inconuenie^ce that has grown by delays in this kind
of calamity. Let therefore your former harms make you beware against time to
come, in reco^pe^sing the former slacknes, with new and speedy diligence. And
above al things have especial regard to make sharp laws for the punishment
of such as needlessly resort to those that are infected, and for such as having
been taken with the sickness presume to come abroad, and to thrust the^ selves
into the company of others, before they be thoroughly cured. For these two
ways this disease may wonderfully be increased, whereof in this small
discourse you shall read very strange and wonderful examples. I know there be
that reason, that the days of man are numbered: that the time is set and the
hour limited, in which we shall all die, and hereof infer, that albeit we
never so much, nor so often haunt the company of the infected, yet it skilleth
not, we shall not die before our time, etc. But this Diuelles argument (so I
call it, Mat. 4.6.
because the Devil uses the very like reason in the tentation of our Savior
Christ) shall find no countenance before your H. and W. as I trust. For it is
a very badde kind of reason from the etetnall and secret decree of God known
only unto himself, to go about to take away all ordinary mean to be used
by man. True it is, that no man shall die before the time which God has
appointed, which time because it is unto us most uncertain, we are to use the
lawful means which God has ordained for us to sustain our life withal.
Otherwise, if all ordinary means be to be refused, let us eat no meat, for
we shall not dye before God has appointed: let us wilfully destroy our
selves: for we shall not dye before GOD has appointed: yea let the robbers
and murderers by the high way side that lay violent hands to take away the
life of man, escape unpunished, because they have not killed any man before his
time by God appointed. Which reasons look how vain, foolish, wicked, and
ungodly they are: even so vain, foolish, wicked, and ungodly is this; I
shall not dye before the hour appointed by God, therefore I will without all
regard either of my self or others, when there is no cause or need, go unto
such as are infected, to the hazarding not only of mine own life, but also
the life of many others. Christ when as the Devil (the Father of such kind of
arguments) alleged the charge of God given to his Angels over him to keep him
from hurt, to persuade him to cast him self down headlong from the pinnacle of
the temple, whereas he might use the ordinary means of going down by the
stayers, told him that so to do, was indeed to tempt God. The Heathen
mariners, in whose ship Jonas was, at the strange rising of the tempest,
Jonah. 1.5.
threw all their goods into the sea, for the sauegard of the ship, and
saving of their own lives, which they needed not to have done, if they had bin
of the same opinion with these odd fellows, but thus to have determined the
matter: we shall not die before our time, we will therefore use no means at all
to save our selves, but let God work. I am ashamed to stand so long herein, but
that I know that this fond reason carries away great multitudes, not only
into the inconveniences aforesaid, but also to the utter contempt and despising
of the most commendable art of physic, as a thing unprofitable and
needelesse, the which GOD notwithstanding has given for the singular help,
profit and comfort of mankind, which question is by occasion ha^deled at
large in this selfsame Treatise, the which I have presumed to offer unto the
gentle acceptance of your H. and W. as the meetest Patrones for such a
work, who, as you have the charge of government of this most woorthye
City, so I persuade my self, that you will very carefully seek in all
respects the welfare of the same, and so far forth allow of the good
advice of this Author, as you by your wisdoms shall judge to be most meet
and expedient. The principal and chief course is, to begin at true and
hearty repentance, (which is the first thing that the maker hereof Persuades
in such a case) bewailing every man his former wicked life, with prayer and
fasting, renting your hearts, and not your garments, and commending most
humblye your afflicted estate unto the merciful consideration of our heavenly
Father: and then to use all other lawefull remedies that may be thought
necessary for the avoiding of infection in so dangerous a disease.

To which end I commend and commit this little book to your through insight and
near consideration, to be followed where it is profitable, to be supplied,
where it wants, to be corrected, where it is faulty, and to be refused, in
what point soever it shall unto your wisdoms seem not profitable, or
convenient for your state and government. The Lord bless your H. and W. with
the true fear of his name, and a careful desire as well of the health of the
souls, as the welfare of the bodies of the people, committed to your rule and
direction. From Tunbridge the 19. of May. 1583.

Your H. and W. most humble in Christ, John Stockwood, Scholemaster of
Tunbridge.

A short admonition unto the gentle and courteous Christian Reader.
THis small treatise (right gentle and courteous Reader) coming unto my hands
at such time as God began afresh to visit the City, and many other places
of the land with the fearful and dangerous sickness of the Plague: after the
diligent perusing and viewing of the same, thinking it as well in respect of
the matter, as in regard of the present time and occasion, a profitable
discourse for such my godly country men as understood not the Latin tongue:
according as my leisure best served from my schole charge, I have occupied my
self in turning the same into our English and mother language, which being
communicated with diverse of my godly, worshipful, and learned friends, both
Divines, Gentlemen, and Physicians, they have thought it a work very well
worthy the publishing and setting abroad, to the benefit and profit of all
such places, as it should seem good unto God to punish with this kind of
visitation. I have therefore consented to let it pass the press, and come
under thy godly view, and diligent examination, giving thee before to
understand, that in some places and names of fishes which thou shalt meet
withal in this discourse, I have retained still the Latin name without any
Englishing of the same at al. This thing I have chosen to do purposedly, that
thou might resort unto some learned Physician, herein to use his skillful
advice, rather then by my gessing at all adventures at the Englishing of the
same (which I could neither learn out of any Author, nor come to understand
by conference with others, albeit very godly and learned Physicians) to bring
thee into an error, having more regard unto thy right instruction herein,
then unto mine own estimation, judging it better in this behalf to be
counted ignorant, then by bold aduenturing, like blind bayard, to be worthily
deemed fool hardy.

Thy loving brother in Christ, John Stockwood.

The Preface of the Author unto the Reader, of the causes of the pestilence.
Alex. Trallian. li. pri. cap. 1
IT is a received opinion among Physicians, that the first part of all healing
and curing, must be called back unto the knowledge of the causes, and
judgments. Whereas therefore the learned do often dispute of the cause of this
so horrible a sickness, the which we call the Pestilence, and the public
curing whereof we are to set down: it seemed unto me to be worthy the travail,
in few words to declare this matter, yt so much the more easily and diligently
every man might do his duty, in taming or assawging this dragon, as Galen
rightly terms him. For not without good cause it seems unto some a thing
worthy to be marueiled at, that so many oftentimes do die in one house, into
which this infection once gets: Every plague comes not immediately from God.
and that such as betimes fly thence many times remain unhurt. Which thing
they which suppose to come to pass by unavoidable destiny, or affliction
immediately sent from god, speak in my judgment, indistinctly and unorderly.
For such a plague is wont to happen not by common tokens, yea and very seldom,
and that myraculously. And I nothing doubt that God does wink at many things,
and does not at all times defend us, which thing notwithstanding he is able
for to do: or to speak more properly, that he does oftentimes use the Devil,
yea, men also, and which more is, our selves, to try our selves withal: so
far of is it that I would by any means deny it. Moreover this likewise is
a rare thing, and such as many old men have not seen in all their life, that a
plague should grow of the infection of the common air. For in this case it
must needs be that many and manifest signs go before. Wherefore we see the
Astrologers many times to be foully deceived for want of due consideration of
causes. For how can they always without error observe and mark so hidden
natures of so many things, and so diverse conjunctions and disiunctions of all
the stars? Therefore forasmuch as it is not lawful, neither altogether to
shut out God, nor rashly to make him the Author of our error and oversight,
according unto the judgment of the most learned and grave men, both
Philosophers and Physicians, and also Divines: this may well be affirmed, that
every pestilence in deed, like as other diseases even in the judgment of
Hypocrates) and all adversities are of God, but yet notwithstanding have not
all one nature: for there is one kind of plague which may be said to come only
from God: 3. sorts of plagues. 1. From god.
and another natural: the third, received by infection. The plague from God,
when as it rises either immediately from God, or by the ordinance of God (as
Alexand. Bened terms it) and by no oversight of nature, by no placing of the
stars, or through the threatening of no Eclipse, nor through the defaulte and
rash headdines of men, that is, when as it is sent by the mere pleasure and
wrath of God, being angry with men for their sins. And this is a most heavy
case, and growing suddenly, rages very hotly against those (for we do not
affirm the chastizing of the Lord to be like a bickering in the dark) who
are not marked: the which we cannot avoid either by flying or medicines, or
ought to seek to avoid, but the way is only by supplication, prayer, and
purgings. It is also oftentimes to be perceived by plain and fearful tokens
from God, or by the voice of God himself, or his Prophet.

2. The natural plague.
The natural pestilence is that, which comes of causes by means, and such as
consist in nature. This by some is thought to be of three sorts, either by
means of the air, or of the water, or of the earth* of others twofold (which
comes in a manner all unto one point) namely common and private: of the which
the one is not properly called a common disease, D. Hierom. ca. 9. in Mat. Luke
4.
albeit many times it be the cause of a common disease, that is of a common
plague. Now concerning that plague which happens by reason of the air, or
of the water, or of the earth, they say that it has not God either the next,
or the proper cause, although it have him as her Lord, to whom it is forced to
obey, and at whose beck it is ruled. Yet this plague many times does so
furiously rage, that it wastes away most famous cities, most mighty provinces
and countries (from whence it seems to have the name Epidemia, that is such a
sickness as haunteth a whole country or people) destroys whole kingdoms,
utterly takes away the former plight and countenance of a place, blind for
the most part (I speak after the manner of men) uncertain, unconstant, rouing
all aboutes, vntreateable, raging without any law, taking away whomsoever it
meets: without any regard either of nobility or common sort, infecting all
things sometimes far and wide from the East unto the West, yea ra^ging unto
beasts, unto trees, unto the fruits of trees, and of ye earth (from whence
comes that starring which the Greeks call Astrobolismos, Hiero* Card. de
rer. vary. 15. cap. 18.
or star blasting) and finally unto fishes* the elements being infected by ye
noysom meeting (as it is thought) of Saturn and Mars in the house of the
virgin, or of the Twins, through the Eclipse of the Moon, or of the Sun,
and such other like added circumstances. This miserable sickness, comes many
times upon me^ so suddenly, that many within the space of 10. or 20* hours
without any ague, amongst their doings at home or abroad, or their public
business, without any certain sign either of urine or pulse, in the Church, in
the high way, in public offices, yea sometimes in feasts (O lamentable
condition of man's nature!) are taken away in a short time upon the sudden,
Cor. Cel. lib. 1. cap. 10.
being merry, iocond, and fearing nothing. Wherefore in this kind of pestilence
they think this singular remedy (fly quickly, far off, come slowly again) to
be a most safe preservative.

3 The plague by infection. Francis. de pedem. cap. 6 de Febr. putre.
As for that plague, which has his original and beginning from infection, the
same is gotten either by companying or lying together, or by some disposition
from the party that is infected with it, and comes through the mere
negligence of men: albeit at sometimes it rage as hotly as the 2. former, when
it lights upon fit bodies, that is, such as abound with il humors, or are
prone unto rotte^nes, Pet. Bayr. de med. morb. distinc. 21. trac. 2. cap. 3
as fire amongst stuble and daily takes strength through the carelesnes of
such, as are unwary, and despise good counsel, and lives by moving it self,
and waxes strong by spreading abrod: so that of a private hurt there grows a
public, of a particular an universal in the end, like as of a small spark, a
great fire, and according to that saying of the Poet, One naughty man often
times does make a City whole be punished.

This kind of common sickness was not known either unto the Greeks or
Arabians, as Cardanus witnesses, with whom I easily agree. For when as they
lived more temperately, De variet. rer. 8. ca. 46.
and in time sought the help of the Physician, and received the same, and
kept company warilye with such as were sick, they did the more easily let
the spreading abroad of this sickness.

Which things standing so, it may easily be understood, after what sort the
scripture reports the plague to be sent upon men by God, and by what means
he delivers such as obey his commandments from the same. For I willingly
grant, that no hair falls from our head without his will, that there is no
evil in the City, which the Lord has not done* But again my judgment is,
that these things come not always immediately from God, in such sort as he may
be said to be the next cause of them: nay they are to be said more rightly
and more properly to grow from their own, Chapter Pezel. 3 part. arg. Philip. de
necess. and fat. arg. 7. W. Musc. Loc. com. de afflict.
and from such nature of next causes, rather then in respect of the providence
of God. Because that every thing is to have his name from his inward or next
grounds, that is from his own nature, and not from outward causes. For what
if a dronken man should fall into the fire, or into the water: or through
having his stomach ouerquatted with meat and drink, seeking to procure vomit,
should break a vein of the breaste, and so come into a phthisicke, will you
rather lay this unto GOD, then unto the intemperancy of this drunken sotte? If
a man living in idleness, and daily surfeiting, glutting him self
unseasonably and vnorderlie with too much and moiste meat, wallowing in
riotousnesse, given wholly to whordome, dauncinges, bathes, sleep, using one
while the cold, an other while the hot air, gathering great store of rawnes
and fleam especially in the winter, and in a cold country, in a rainie wether,
by nature moist, gross, in age very old or young: if such a one (Isaie) fall
into a quotidian ague, will you not rather impute it unto the nature and
negligence of the man, then unto the providence of God? But if besides the
simple rottenness, these humors gathered together, and through the
continuance of time by little and little waxing worse, Ioh. Farn. de feb. 4.
cap. 17
and partaking with some poison, shall have hurtfulnesse from else where: and
that happilye there be added hereunto the infections of the air by infected
fennes, lakes, deunes, caves, the carkases or dounge of men and beasts, or of
some other more strong savors, and that the proceed of the inordinate
excesses of times and seasons, and do pearse into the body of man already apt
to receive them, or with meat, or with the air, or with any other means
else: If, I say, these things thus fall out, and bring forth the pestilent and
evil agues of their nature, who will not rather lay the fault upon the nature
both of the air and rottennes, and also upon the rashness and heedelesnesse of
men, then upon the peculiar and mere punishment of God? So that the Gods in
Homer do justly in this sort complain:

Alas how mortal men on Gods do every foot complain: affirming that their
miseries from us proceed, when as their own deserts and wickedness beyond
their fate do cause their punishments!

For some are wrapped in the like error in a manner, in the which some of the
interpreters of Hippocrates are entangled. 1. Epid. 1. Gal. in prog. Hip.
common. 1
For when as he willed the Physicians to mark whether there were any thing
from God in the disease, they (says he) drew this hereunto, as if men were
stricken with sickness, through the anger of the Gods. Which Galen in his
Commentaries according to the meaning of the same Hippocrates, does utterly
deny. For albeit both of them judged not distinctly and plainly enough of this
matter, as being void of the true knowledge of God: yet what things soever
have causes unknown to some body, or far contrary unto the opinion of the
common people, are not by and by notwithstanding to be said, to be simply
divine or from God, although peradventure a man may term them wonderful.

What is the cause then, will some man ask, why so commonly and constantly men
do judge this sickness of the plague above al others, to be a punishment sent
from God? It is because, that for the most part they find it to be a grievous
and cruel evil? For the old Writers as well Greeks as Latins use to call
that holy or divine, which is unusual, vehement and wonderful. Be it so, yet
this is evident by the testimonies of learned and godly men, that, as has bin
said in the beginning, it is not always a punishment immediately sent from
God, as they either of ignorance, or too much scrupulositie and spicednes of
conscience have persuaded themselves. S. Hierom says, Hieron. in Mat. 9.
that many infirmities of the body (which indeed is to be granted unto him)
do come because of sins: ergo by the self same saying he seems to show,
that many do happen for other causes, that is by nature, or through the
unadvisedness and negligence of men, which thing Luther confesses willinglye
of the plague of Witeberge in the year 27. And Basilius the great, both in
deed and name, affyrmeth that all sicknesses are not of nature, or of careless
diet, or other originalles, which Physic may help, but oftentimes to be God
his whippes for sins, sent of God for our conversion, according to that
saying: Whom the Lord loves, he chastizeth: yea he chastizeth every son,
whom he receives.

Doubtless, where he says not all, and oftentimes, he by the self same
confesses, that some scourges are of nature also, and many times not to come
immediately from God. I could prove the same by many and most manifest
testimonies of most excellent and chief men, but I think there is no man,
unless he be all to gether void of eyes and mind, or wedded to his own
opinion, have his wits on wol gathering (as they say) which will deny the same.
Wherefore since that which we say, is agreeable unto truth, away with their
unskillful standing in their own opinion, who being persuaded, that all plague
comes immediately from God, would have no endeavor, no travel used by men to
the driuinge away of the same, but that only with the Heretics called
Euchites or Prayarres, There are too many, even among professors of this fond
opinion.
we ought to fly unto prayer and supplications: prattling that all the labors
and charges of men are in vain and unprofitable: the which opinion there be
some that have of al other diseases. For we have to think far otherwise, who
when as we do godly confess that all things are subject unto God, and governed
by his appointment: yet do hold that many things come to pass through our own
defaulte and course of nature, the which after God, both may and ought to be
remedied, avoided, yea and also changed by the help and travail of man.

To the right Honorable the L. Consuls, and to the right Worshipful the
Senators of the Common wealth of Bream, Stadeen, and Boxtehud, his Lords and
Patrons most highly to be reverenced, salutation and tranquillity.
IT is a thing to be lamented, (right Honorable and Worshipful) that the nature
of man, The miseries of the life of man.
through the fall of our first Parent, is run into such misery, yea, and so
far blinded, that is, must continually bear not only many discommodities,
tentations of Satan, persecutions of men, wars, troubles, famines, al kind
of diseases, and finally death it self, but also that it neither understands
the causes of these euilles, nor yet seeks or receives fit remedies for
the same.

For there are many of so peeuishe nature, that if they know any, that can both
show the^ their greef, and also give them medicin against the same, and be
moreover willing so to do, they think that they are rather to laugh at them,
and to bear grudg and hatred against them, then friendly to hear them, or to
give them any reward for their labor. Which despite, if any in the world,
truly Divines and Physicians are wont especially to feel: as who then at
length begin to be hated of some, when as they have done them most good, and do
prove indeed by experience true, that which Xenopho^ affirms, namely
shamlesnes to be the companion of unthankfulness. Which thing although it be
so, and that I my self so^times have had proof hereof, yet have I not judged,
that I ought therefore to slack diligently to do the duty of a Christian
Physician, both in studying out of such things, as are profitable, and in
putting the^ in practice which I have found out, by all means that lies in
me, with hand and foot. Wherefore, when as certain years past, following the
counsel of Mesua, wherein he bids in althings to set God before, I have
published, and put forth 2. treatises of matters in divinity, which are the
true Physic of the soul: in the one whereof, which is written against the
absurd and fond heresies of our time, I have gone about to root out false
opinions, being as it were corrupt humors: in the other, which is entitled,
of the knowledge of the will, and grace of God, and of the fruits and signs of
this true knowledge, my meaning was with sound doctrine of Christian religion,
as it were with good and holsom nourishment, to feed and strengthen the
unskillful: I many times thought, and hereafter will think, if God spare me
life, according to my power, to perform the same, in mine own proper
profession, that is, in the Physic of the body.

But whereas I have spoken of Divinity, The study of divinity appertains
unto al.
I would not have it so taken, as if I meant rashly to thrust my sickle into an
other man his harvest, and to play the busy body. For letting pass great and
weighty controversies, I only dealt with those things, which are approved of
al, or inueighed against such things, which are improued of the better sort,
and that with such reasons, which I have learned and marked, both in the
schools and also in the Church Wherefore I think it no unlawful thing, if the
scholar render some part of his Lesson: since it is manifest by the testimony
of al men, that from the first beginning of the world, even unto our time, it
is not only right and lawful, that men endued with the use of reason, might
judge of religion, but also that it is profitable and necessary, that they be
able perfectly to judge, that is to say: to discern and know the false from
the true, the hurtful from the wholesome, the counterfeited by men, from that
which is delivered by God. For like as al men consiste of two parts, that is,
of a soul, and of a body, so also there ought to be in all men a twofolde
action: one, wherewith it becomes us to magnify God, and to praise him: the
other, whereby we are bound to imploye our study and travail upon the Common
wealth. And as there is notwithstanding great kindred amongst them selves,
between these two parts, albeit they be distinct and several by nature: so
these actions cannot without great wickedness be parted asunder, the one from
the other.

Wherefore they do very wickedly, which do so follow their wordly business,
either public or private, that they have either none at all, or else very
small regard of divine matters: and not like men, which for the study of
divinity do for slow their matters at home and abroad. Unto whith judgment
your wisdom also gives most honorable witness, whilst in your Cities you
study not only this, that your citizens may live together commodiously and
quietly, but also being instructed in the doctrine of salvation most rightly,
may walk godly and holyly. For where but one of these things only is cared
for, it cannot be, that the Common wealth and the Church can any long time be
happily governed. Which thing, besides the examples of certain other
countries, the most afflicted kingdom of France, and the miserable Provinces of
the low Countries in Flaunders (alas for pity) do at this day declare. For
what other cause is there of their misery, such almost as has not been heard
of, than the contempt of pure religion, the not caring for the truth of God,
and the wicked persecution of those which were followers of true godliness? For
whilst the magistrate does rather seek to maintain his own authority then
the pure service of God, constreineth his subjects to obey his will, rather then
the will of God: And finallye gives ear to the counsels of most wicked Doeg
and Machiauel, rather then unto the counsels of Gamaliel and Abdias: there
must needs follow such effects, as there have gone causes before. And because yt
I know you with all your heart to detest this hurtful opinion and mere
tirannical kind of government: and rather endeavor hereunto, that it may go
very well with your subjects of your dominion, as well in mind, as body, I
cannot choose but highly commend this godly meaning, and most holy care of
yours: and not only co^me^d it, but also according to my duty with my labor
and trauail such as it is, to help forward the same. For as much therefore as at
this time yt same sore sickness of the plague, De there. ad pison.
with Gale^ does rightly term a cruel Dragon, does begin to breed every where
through out al our country of Germany in a manner, and is very hot in some
places not far from us, and as it goes, like unto a Canker, eats up all
the things that are next unto it: many learned Physicians have written
diligently of the curing of those, which are taken with this disease, and also
of the preservation of every particular person, and have left their counsails
in whole books, a practice greatly doubtless to be commended: but because I
have perceived this their endeavor not to be sufficient, but that ye infectio^
is daily nevertheless increased, and grows with his stirring, and gathers
strength by going, especialy because there is no public course and order taken
for the avoiding of this evil, I have considered, that there is need of so^e
greater help, namly, which must be used by the authority of the magistrate, in
whose travel the chief hope of staying this misery consists and lies.
Concerning with, when as in times past I had gathered something, which I had noted
in most famous Cities and countries, partly by use and experience, and partly
had judged to be agreeable unto reason, I thought it might be a work worth the
travail, if I should beat it again upon the anuil, and set it forth: that if
happily so^e certain could be persuaded, yt for the turning away of this evil
some thing might be done by the travail of man, they might have some course
to follow: and that if they should think some thing to be wanting in my
counsel and treatise, they might in deed and travail themselves supply the
same. For this cause is not such, which may content it self only with fine
speech and fit laying forth of the matter, but such as being once with wisdom
advised upon, must betimes be accomplished, and (as they say) be brought into
action.

And whereas right honorable my meaning has been to dedicate this my pains
jointly to your L L. there were two causes especially moving me thereunto: of
ye which the first did seem to bind me as it were by a certain duty: as in
whose dominion I have now spent almost these 18. years, and have had a public
stipende of the common wealth of Breme in especial, and minding in a manner
there to end my life, that of whom I have received most benefits, to ye same I
might render again as much duty as in me lies. The second was considered of me
in the mystery of your number consisting of three, whilst that in this
Bishopric you seemed unto me as it were in one body to represent three
principal members, the brain, the heart, and the liver, and in great consent
of minds, in agreeable government of your subjects, and finally in peaceable
following of true religion, to resemble a most beautiful harmony of a
trinity: wherein I judged my self to owe this duty not to one of 3.
(especially since this care appertains indifferently unto all magistrates) but
unto three rather in one. Wherefore it shall be your part (right honorable
and most reverend Lords and Patrones) to take in good worth this testimony of
my ready good will and service, and to take as commended unto you, this care
of the common saftie, which I have here in some measure portraited and drawn
out. Which things if at any time they shall be ouerruled by the ordinance of
God, which cannot be called back, it shall be sufficient to have approved
your endeavor and good will unto men. Christ Jesus the true turner away of all
evil, and the Physician as well of the body as of the soul, begotten of
unbegotten, God in man, true life in death, (that I may end with the words of
Egysippus) preserve you with your subjects unhurt of this deadly infection,
and always in good health. Dated at Breame in the year 1581.

Your H H. most bounden, John Ewich, D. of Physic.

Of the duty of a faithful and wise Magistrate, in preserving and delivering
the common wealth from infection, in the time of the plague or Pestilence. The
first Book.
That the care and charge of the common wealth belongs unto the Magistrate.
Cap. 1.
ESAIAS the divine Prophet, and Homer the chief of Poets, Esaias. cap. 49.60.
Homer. Iliad. 1. Plato 4. de Repub.
the one enlightened with the heavenly law, and the other with the law of
nature, have adorned and set out Princes and Magistrates with an excellent
title, whilst the one in his tongue calls them Omenim, that is to say,
Nurses, to wit of the Church: and the other terms them Poimenos Laon, that
is, Pastors, or Shepheardes of the people: to wit for this cause, that they
ought with wholesome laws, and good discipline, to govern, and defend their
subjects, and also after a sort provide for them such things as are necessary
for their food and living. For albeit they do not as Parents to their
children, put in every one his hand, what to eat and drink: albeit they
nourishe not us being idle, yet when as by wise policy they bring this to
pass, that nothing be wanting, what every man labors either by traffic, or
travel, or goods to get, and that what by honest means is gotten, the same he
may in safety possess, and with gladness enjoy, they have not without a
cause given unto them this honorable title and commendation. And as it is not
sufficient for a diligent nurse and faithful Pastor to have provided for his
nurse child, A comparison.
and flock, such things as are requisite and needful unto the necessary uses of
life, but also they be careful to turn away ye things which might endammage
their health, and to provide wholesome remedy for them being in danger: So also
the wise and faithful Magistrate ought not only to have care and diligence for
those things which concern the trade of lawful traffic, and diligent
practice of handy crafts, the preserving of peace, and keeping of quiet among
the Citizens, but also he ought to prohibit or let those things which may
either take away the same, or greatly weaken, or infect the whole society and
fellowshippe with daily contagion or infection, and assail and destroy with
miserable ruin, the life of every particular member: Galen ad Pison. cap. 2.
judging the looking unto the common safety to be the chiefest part of his
rule and office. For if they be Gods (and as the Psalmist himself both king
and ruler terms them) the sons of the most highest, Psalm. 81.
certes it is their parts to know, that they in this point are with all
diligence to imitate and follow GOD, of whom we daily crave both things
needful, and also pray to be kept from things not needful or hurtful:
that they furnishe the City, not only with profitable, necessary, and
wholesome things, but preserve and deliver it from things also unprofitable
and hurtful. Which things when as the heathen saw, albeit ignorant of the
true God, that this was a thing highlye needful, and in a manner heavenly,
they called their Kings and Rulers of the people, Gods, not proportionablie,
as the Jews and Christians, but in very deed, and began to honor mortal
men with honor divine or belonging unto God. For when as there never yet was
any nation so barbarous, which had not some feeling of ye godhead: Romans 1.
nay when as the Apostle in plain words affirms, yt for this same cause ye
very Gentiles are without excuse, because ye they had written in their minds,
which might be known concerning God: who would think them so foulie to be
deceived, in that they judged those to be, to be honored for Gods (which
Pliny said to be a divine thing) who^ they saw to employ al their endeavor to
help others? Lib. 2. not. hist. cap. 7.
For albeit they did not rightly give unto many, that thing which was due unto
one: yet by the power of nature they profited thus far, that they almost
atteyned unto the knowledge of the nature and office of God, although they did
not rightly worship him. Moreover ye Apostle in an other place compares the
Church unto the body of a man: for as the members of a man have every one
their power and office, yet are all governed by the only virtue of the brain,
desire and embrace things profitable; and shun things hurtful: so also the
magistrates, who in this external or outward society or fellowship, are the
head of the common people, ought to set before the other Citizens profitable
things, and keep away things hurtful, that they may be said truly to
fulfill the office of Pastors and Nurses.

But if any man will say, that it is the proper office of God, Objection.
to preserve and govern mankind, the which in his singular counsel he has
made: I answer, Answer.
that this indeed is true, but yet as God by the ministry or service of man
does teach us, deliver us from sin, make us partaker of his grace and save
us, albeeit in very deed these same are not the works of men: even so he does
govern and preserve the life of man by the service of those men, who^ he
chooses unto this office, and suffers to be partakers of this praise.
Hereuppon Romulus, Cic. de leg.
which builded the City of Rome, and is thought to be that Quirinus, was by
a certain right reckoned in the number of the Gods, Romulus. Aug. de
ciuitate Dei, 2. cap. 15. Hercules.
because that he showed himself a loving and bounteous governor unto the
people. Hercules borne of Jupiter and Alcmena, got not only this name, (for
thus the Oracle answered, Immortal fame by helping me^, thou certainly shall
win) which was adua^ced with immortal honor, but also was registered in the
bedroll of the gods, because that with unweariable toil, and most singular
labor, he killed such mo^sters, as endammaged men, and brought them great
danger. Apollo and his son Aesculapius because of their physic, Apollo.
Aesculapius.
wherewith they did much good unto men, obtained the name of gods. I blush at
the telling of it, our Elders through a like error builded temples unto many,
and gave honor unto them, such as belongs unto God, of who^ it is scarce
certain, whether they ever were in ye world, or at least wise any light
opinion, yt they have performed unto others such like duty. Wherefore, albeit
we judge them to have committed no small fault: yet in that they acknowledged
them to be worthy singular renown which did good unto many, I think their
infirmity or weakness rather to be to be excused, then to be followed. For this
doubtless out of their too much lightness in belief is manifest, that it
especially concerns those which have the rule of others, Galen. ad Pison. 2.
to procure and maintain the safety of their subjects by all the means they
can, all things yt might empayre the same being betimes and wisely taken out
of the way. Wherefore who will make any doubt in this state of things whereof we
here entreat, namely, of the infection of the plague, that the godly and wise
magistrate ought to deal not slowly, but lustely, In Epistola ad Crate.
(for here is no room for sloth, and that which Hippocrates affirms, delay
in all diseases to be dangerous, the same in this death bringing sickness
especially falls out) not sparingly, but plenteously, and not only to
provide for things healthful, but also that concerning things hurtful, he
ought to be careful in time, and wisely to turn away the same? For whereas the
plague is a most hurtful and also most infectious disease, yea (as Galen
speaks) as it were a certain dragon, Vide Octauianum medic. in praefat.
operis sui.
which breaths out poison against man, and utterly denies all truse-taking,
and very seldom comes unto conditions of peace, he greatly offends
against the rule of charity, whosoever according to his ability does not
seek and bring some aid, as it were a preservative, to master this Dragon,
and the Magistrate most of all, who in this common calamity or miserye both
can and ought in comparison of others to do most. Neither in this case ought
the authority of certain worthy and most learned men to move us, who seem
too undiscreetly for to deny, that this care appertains unto the
Magistrate, whose office (say they) it is not to rid men from diseases, but
only to maintain the safety and peace of our life and goods. For it may
even out of their own words be proved sufficiently, that albeit the
magistrate ought not to cure the diseases of every several man, or preserve
them from such as do not openly raunge, nor have common causes, (for this is
the proper duty of the Physicians) yet when as they hold it to be belonging
to their charge, by their service and authority to perform, that their
subjects may live commodiously: who sees not, that this commodiousnes does
also appertain unto the health of the body? Which thing he that believes
not, the same has never seen, how miserablye all the duties of men are
cumbred, the order of the Churches, the exercises of Godliness, the
instruction of youth, the traffike of Citizens, whereupon must needs ensue a
most grievous destruction of particular persons, when the plague troubles a
City or country. Wherefore, I appeal unto thy self, whosoever thou be that
art of this opinion, that thou think not it to be the duty of the
Magistrate, to preserve the common wealth from diseases (and especially common
diseases) do not such sicknesses seem unto thee to be, to be numbered amongst
other incommodities? And can men live together commodiously, when as these
diseases do rage? Doubtless this can thou not affirm, if ever thou have had
experience before what the Plague is, or what it may work, where it once has
prevailed? Why then, say I, do thou think it a thing not apperteining unto
the duty of the magistrate, to deliver me^ from such diseases, Le. Lemnius 2.
de occul. not. miracul. cap. 4.
that is with public care to defend? I pray thee have thou not seen that which
is usual in all well ordered common wealths, how diligently in cities the
Magistrate provides and storeth up such things as serve for the use of
war? How carefully he prepares weapons? How busily he reteineth garrisons
set in a readiness? Especially when he is in fear of some hurt to ensue? and
to what end? but that men should live commodiously. Wherefore are horses
kept; ships built; walls repaired, tre^ches dug, towers set up, and
banks cast: but that the citizens should live more commodiously in safety
against the invasions or assaults of the enemies? Dogs are maynteined for the
like cause, nets are pitched, hunters are hired, and troops of country
people draw together, if at any time wolves or such like beasts do trouble
a country. I remember in the kingdom of France, that certain Leopards, which
the king uses to keep, did break out of ward, and in every place slew the
country men. The whole country was mustered, and neither cost nor labor
spared, until they had rid the land from that fear. How much more justly then
in this calamity and misery also ought there some prouide^t course to be
taken, whereby this so mighty an enemy, and cruel beast may be kept away from
our throats, which in a very short time is wont to raunge very far, and as
it were a Canker, eat up every thing yt is next it? To the end that the clean
in the old Testament should not keep company with the unclean Lepers, Lepers.
by the authority of the Magistrate, there was made a separation, neither were
they received among the other people, before that they were by the Priests
appointed to this office, judged cleansed after they were viewed naked. In like
manner at this day after a certain resemblaunce of them (for the disease is
not all one in them both, nor all one cause of separation) those with us which
are infected with the Leprie, called Elephantiasis, are by a public censure,
and view, The Leprous called Elephantiaci.

The common wealth of the Venetians.


removed from the company of other men. The same custom, and with the same
wisdom in judging and ordering the sick of the plague, keeps the most
famous, and almost in the whole world the most mighty common wealth of the
Venetians, according unto the pattern of which wisdom I have rudely drawn
this treatise of mine such as it is. The same does Antwerpe a City almost in
populous trade of merchandise, Antwerpe.
and renown of name, like unto this. In the most noble City of Padway, Padway.
I my self have seen, when as then I there studied Physic, the Magistrate,
calling together the Physicians, and hearing the cause opened by them, which
then grew only of infection, to have let pass no travail, no charges, to
preserve and deliver his Citizens from the same, the which he happily
accomplished in short time, albeit the disease were scattered through the
whole City. I can avouch the same of Philip the Landgraue of Hassia, Philip
the Landgraue,
when as the Plague began to grow in the parts near unto him, who so
carefully, and so fatherly dealt by the advice of his Physicians, which was
published through al his dominions, yt he may worthily be a pattern, for
other godly and wise Princes and magistrates to follow, of the which in the
next Chapter shall be spoken more at large

Lastly, ye like did ye magistrate of our worthy, and of me much to be honored,
common wealth, when as in the year 1565. he had intelligence that this wild
beast through the unwary dealing of some, had invaded or assaulted a few
houses of his city: They called me into the Senate or Counsel house, and
asked my direction and advice, how they might preserve without hurt the people
by GOD committed unto them, of a godly care, and unless I greatly be
deceived, a care indeed most beseeming a Christian Magistrate. Which things
being so, if princes and Magistrates be desirous to maintain their name (which
I said in the beginning, to have been given them not only by the Prophets,
but also by wise men among the Heathen) and will be indeed, as they are called
in name, Nurses and Pastors, they must think that it stands them upon,
faithfully and wisely to handle the matter, that in such a time of the plague,
they let pass no care, which may by any means make for the turning away of
so deadly and infectious a disease, and for the preserving and delivering of
their subjects from the same.

That the Magistrate before all things proclayme a public repentance. Cap. 2.
But some man may peradventure say, you so deal, Objection.
as if ye whole matter lay in ye foresight and strength of man, and make no
mention of the help of God, on who^ hangs all hope of victory, especially in
so doubtful a battle: when as notwithstanding by the judgment of Mesua
himself, it is manifest, that in all things which we do, we ought to set God
before, that we may make proof of all things with more safety and boldness. I
answer, Answer.
when as I speak of the duty of a faithful Magistrate, and being my self
a Christian, deal with Christians, that my meaning is, to have these two
things, that is to say, the grace of God, and travail of man, so lincked
together, that the one be not void of the help of the other. For Hippocrates
has said both very well, Lib. 1. de Insom.
and very godly: It is indeed seemly, and very good to pray unto the
Gods, but yet man himself ought to do some thing, He held of many gods
like an Heathen.
and withal to call upon the Gods? Why so? Because man without God can do
nothing, and God without man will not do all things. God indeed is bou^teous,
and man very poor and needy, when as he has nothing which he has not
received at his hand, but god loves to be asked, and yt me^ by this mean
should acknowledge their need: whereby we should be driven to obey him in whom
all our happiness does lie. If (say Moses and Aaron) thou shall diligently
hear the voice of the Lord thy God, and do that which is right in his eyes,
and shall obey his commandementes, and keep all his statutes, I will send no
grief upon thee, which I have sent upon the Egyptians, because I am the
Lord that heals thee: but if ye shall not hear me, Leuit. 26.
says God, and shall not do all these commandments, and if ye shall refuse
my statuts, and fulfill not al my precepts, but shall rather make void my
covenant, I also will do this unto you: I will visit you with fear, swelling,
and a burninge fever, which shall consume your eyes, and make your life to
pyne away. Likewise in many other places there is especial mention made of the
plague, which god either threatens unto the disobedient, or from the which he
promises to deliver the godly: so that there is no doubt, that albeit we
understand that every plague is not the peculyar and proper punishment of GOD,
Number. 14. Deuteronomy. 28. Ezech. 5. 14 2. King. 2. The first and chief remedy.
nor yet always immediatelye sent of God, (which is a thing chieflye to be
observed and marked) but sometimes comes either by the course of nature (as
has been said before) or through the fault and negligence of men: yet
whatsoever original and beginning it has, always and before all things,
we must fly unto the help of GOD, unto whose myghtie hand we most
assuredly believe all, both sickness and health, life and death to be subject.

Wherefore, when as it is manifest, that this cause also, which we now have
in hand, does especially concern the Magistrate, according to his power to
preserve his people from the danger at hand, and from the infection of
sickness, or to deliver them from the same when it is come: First of all
let them have this care, that they them selves turninge earnestly and
unfeignedly unto God, proclaim unto their subjects universally, and
proclaimed, execute a public repentance, which is wont to be showed by prayers
made both privately, and also in the solemn assembly, and by alms and
absteyning, not only from meat and drink, but from all riot, daunsing, and
banqueting: after the example of the people of Niniuie, The Ninevites.
unto whom when as the Lord by his Prophet threatened punishment for their
sins, the king enjoined a fast of 3. days, not only unto the men, but also
to the bruit beasts, besides other works of repentance, that by this means
they might reconcyle God being angry, unto them. When as David had
transgressed the commandment of the Lord, there was sent upon the people so
fierce a pestilence, that in the space of three days there died 70. thousand
persons. 2. Chro. 20.
With the which plague David being moved, confessed unto the Lord his sin,
and by prayer obtained at his hand, that forthwith all that affliction
ceased. The like is read of king Ezechias, when death was threatened unto him,
Ezechias.
yet through earnest turning unto God, and bitter weeping, his life was
prolonged by the space of fifteen years. It is also read that in the days of
Elias, Elias.
when as the heavens had bin shut up three years and more, and that it reigned
not a drop, whereupon followed a miserable dearth of victuals that at the prayer
of Elias, this scarcity was recompensed with sudden plenty. Hitherto may
worthily be referred the commendable fact of the most honorable prince, D.
Philip the Landgraue, The Proclamation of Philip the Landgraue.
whose publik writing concerning this matter, turned by me into latin, I have
thought good to set down, as the perfect pattern of a faithful and wise
Magistrate, for all men to follow: and thus it is in English: We would have
it known to all and singular our subjects, how we are given to understand,
that the infectious sickness of the plague does sore rage round about in
places, near unto our dominions, insomuch that it is to be feared, that it
will come also into our Territory and Country, and assault our subjects. For
as much therefore as without all doubt, such a Plague is a punishment for
sin, we do all men to understand, that first of all the turn earnestly
unto God, and desire of him pardon for their fault: Secondly, that they use
them selves moderately in eating and drinking, and put their trust in God, who
is the only and true Physician for our grief. We have also of our loving
mind to do good unto our subjects, called together our Physicians, and
commanded them to take advice, and by common consent to consulte and prescribe
remedies, as well for the poor as the rich, wherewith next after the calling
upon of God, every one may preserve and defend himself against this deadly
and infectious disease, or if he be taken with it, how he should order
himself, and be healed, as by order is plainly in this our writing set
down: according unto the direction whereof, let every one after his power
govern himself: but that above all things, that he know how he ought to
trust in God, who is our only aid in troubles, and steadfastly to cleave unto
him, etc. These are the words of the most virtuous and gentle Prince: the
rest which appertains unto the order and kinds of the medicines, I will not
here express. Last of all, of a like testimony of Godliness, and love
toward his Citizens, our Magistrate also in the year 65. when as our City
was visited with the Plague, gave commandment unto all the Ministers of his
Church, that they should often call the people to repentance, to the duties
of charity one toward another: to be short, that they should diligently and
daily exhore them to the looking unto the health of them and theirs, according
to the rule prescribed and published by me at his commandment. For they did
acknowledge that which the Apostle said, to be most certain and true: God is
faithful, and will not the death of a sinner but that he should turn and live.
The which thing he plainly proved, when as he gave his only begotten son
unto death, and that unto the death of the cross for our sakes. Also S. John
teaches us, that we should not sin: and that if we sin, we have an
aduocat with the father, who makes intercession for the whole world. In these
most praise worthy examples shine forth, and are showed not only a true care
of the magistrate toward his subjects, but also especial godliness toward God,
and fruits of the truth of the Gospel. Through the following and steps of the
which, every one for his part also ought to be stirred up and stre^gthned to
pray unto god, and undoubtedly believe, yt it appertains also unto him, which
Christ said unto ye sick of ye palsy: Son be of good cheer, thy sins are
forgiven thee: Also to the Leper, I will that thou be healed, be thou clean.

Of ordeining preseruers of health. Cap. 3.
Being now fortified with these preparatiues, and as it were spiritual
weapons: namely with a good conscience toward God, and sure trust of ye
forgiveness of our sins (which are the first and chief causes of all
miseries) showed us, and grace promised, the faithful and wise Magistrate
ought to follow the usual and commendable custom of common wealths in the
time of war. And what is that? When there commethe news, that some mighty
Tyrant, whom we suspecte for to bear us ill will, is in arms, has
gathered a power, and lies lingering about our borders, and that it is not
well known upon whom first he will make assault, they use to appoint their
Generalles and Captains, which are bound unto them, and with these when as
the whole Senate, or Counsel are without power and victuals, they take advice
how they may peradventure go against their enemy, that betimes they may
drive him from their Coasts. The like we do when as counsel is to be
taken at the same time for public munition, for walls, for banckes, for
gunnes, and all kind of armor, that search and notice may be taken by
calling together the Ediles, Carpenters, and artificers, what they have
already, what is wanting, what time and charge is needful for the furnishing
of such things as lack, that laying their strength together, and diducting
or taking out the charges from the whole sum, we may know how long we are
able to wage battle. So surely, and with no less carfulness, Eccle. 18
Ruffin. in praefat. histo. Eccle.
in the rifenesse of such infectious diseases breeding, ought the Magistrate
for to do, that calling together the physicians, provision with all diligence
be had, how, after the calling upon OOD, and the commending of us and our
affairs faithfully unto him, so far as by the travail and power of man, may
be, we may meet with the disease as it is in coming, and look not for
this: Too late the medicine is prepared, when tract of time the grief has
rypde: nor, when the Steed is stolen, that then we shut the stable door:
Which is not only a point of great foolishness and madness, but also against
the duty of a faithful and wise Magistrate, which we have taken in hand to
set forth. Unto which matter, albeit there be required more wisdom and
experience of things then I acknowledge to be in my self: yet because this
argument has been thoroughly handeled of none before this time (so far as I
know) and published in writing, if I bring to pass nothing else, yet I shall
procure thus much at least wise, that I shall stir up either such as are
better learned, to supply with more skill, that which in me is wanting, or
that they unto whom this charge shall be committed for to execute, may
perform that in deed, which shall be lacking in my words. For me it shall
be sufficient to have made proof, if not of any singular labor, yet at the
least of a notable good will to benefit men. For this cause is not such as
contenteth it self with fine speech, but which being wisely and well advised
upon, ought speedily to be put in practice: and that which Plato has said
of all virtue, that it is begun of understanding, whereby is inquired what is
to be done, and ended in fortitude, whereby it is finished in act, the same
doubtless in this matter is especially needful.

Where then at length or from whence shall we take our beginning? namely,
Preseruers of health.
from the very same persons by whose appointment in a manner all things which
hereafter are to be ordained, must be done and ordered: and these also as in
name, so likewise in deed shall be preseruers of health: not many in number
(for nature has ordained a few to bear rule, and many to obey) but only
three, chosen out of the whole company, partly of the Senate, or as it were
the Benche, and partly of the other Citizens, as they shall be thought most
meet for that purpose, sound in manners, fearing God, endued with experience
of things, and reasonable knowledge in learning (if it may be) beloved of the
Citizens, careful for the public health, faithful, grave, yielding nothing
to their private gain, glory, love, hatred, envy, or any affection. If any
thing fall out, with they are not able to deal wtal, ye same they shall bring to
the whole Senate or Benche, and from thence as from a common head spring, shall
ask what is needful to be done. And they are to consider, and most
certainly to persuade themselves, that the way to remove for ye most part so
great an evil, does next after the help of God, consist and lie in their
travail and diligence. For as it belongs unto the Physicians to provide that
the bodies of particular persons fall not into the Plague through the
constitution of the air: so shall it be the duty of these preseruers, to let,
or take away the public and outward infection.

Now if it, which I say, shall seem new unto any man, let him understand
that I here go about a new in deed, but yet very necessary point of
policy. For it follows not, that if a thing be new, it is therefore also
hurtful: for all things which now are old, were sometime new: and such new
things as notwithstanding with advice and reason are now taken in hand, and
ordained, may with good succes receive age, and become old. And whereas in all
parts of ye common wealth, there are certain with wisdom made rulers, which
take charge of the same as ye Ediles for buildings, ye Tribunes for war, the
Masters of schools for places of learning, the viewers of Drugges for
medicines. Moreover, when as in all things order is better then disorder
alwais, and that God him self is the Author and defendor of order, I hope
that wise men will easily grant, that common wealths may admit and receive
this newness. For albeit at the first it will seem somewhat hard unto such as
are not acquainted with it, yet by use it will wax gentle, and become more
acceptable or better lyked. For as Balthazar Castilionensis has said very
well, De Aulico. lib. 1.
an Italyan writer: Use can do more then reason, in bringing in of new
things, and putting away of old. Now what I would have looked unto by this
new Magistrate, and what order by them is to be appointed, as well in persons,
as in all other things: Moreover, how the hole and also the sick, (so far as
pertains unto the publik charg, for here regard is not had of every
particular person) ought best to be provided for, I will diligently, plainly,
and distinctly, as being thereunto by the whole Senate or bench required (for
so does the regard of mine office always require) hereafter endeavor openly to
show, and set down every thing severally in his Chapter.

Of Physicians, Chirurgians, and Apothecaries. Cap. 5.
THese therefore appointed Preseruers (as I termed them) by the common consent
of the Senate or bench, and by ye assent of the Citizens (if need be) the
first thing of all, that they shall think they ought to see unto, shall be, that
they provide the common wealth of Physicians, Chirurgians, and such as they
commonly call Apothecaries, such as for years, fame, experience, honesty of
manners, virtue, and the fear of God, they shall judge to be best lyked and
fit. Which conditioned men, if happilye the common wealth have not, or ca^
not have, (for it is an hard thing to find such, and so perfect, especially
in so dangerous times) yeat at least, that they be careful, to have them in
the next degree, and that they may be commended, and excel for faithfulness,
temperancie, painfulnesse, and reasonable experience. And these being hired for
a convenient stipend, and bound by oath unto the common wealth, that they take
no occasion to start away, for fear of the sickness greatly increasing (such
is man his weakness) they must severally every one of them be put in mind
of their office: namelye, that manfullye shakinge off the fear of death, they
lustilye imploye them selves to approve their faithfulness and service both
unto God and man: considering that God is the beholder and judge of the things
which they do, howsoever they may be hid from the common people unskillful in
the art. If they do any thing through error or deceit, that it shall not be
unpunished: but if they shall behave them selves in their office diligently and
faithfully, that then they shall receive a far greater reward after this
life, then can of men in this world be paid unto them. Well shall it go (says
the Psalmist) with that man, Psalm. 40. Eccle. 7.
which faithfully deals with the sick: for at what time he him self shall
suffer any trouble, the Lord in like manner will help him.

The Physician priuatelye must be put The Physician.
in mind by the preseruers, Hipp. de decenti ornatu. Item in lib. de praec. med.
that he often consider, how great an hope of al men he takes upon him,
whereby all the Citizens will have him in admiration, and reverence him as it
were some God, sent down from heaven. Also how great good will he shall win
among the men of all degrees, who with good success shall use his help, and
be healed: and how notable a name he shall get amongst others, which shall not
be forgotten, no not after death. For albeit the unthankfulness of some be
very great, especially toward Physicians* yet many will be so bounteous,
that with their lyberalitie, they will bounteously recompense, that which
others of covetousness foreslow to do. That it is the part of honest men to
have more regard of their duty then of gain, and rather to seek and have
an eye unto the health of the Citizens, (whereunto a Christian physician ought
to refer and apply all his labors) then either unto promotion or riches. And
therefore that he show him self gentle and courteous unto al persons, that he
afoord the poor not only his service, but also his monnye according to his
ability: and that of the rich he receive the reward, which they give him
with such modesty and cheerfulness, that he may seem to love the gift for
the men's sake, and not the men for the gift sake: that ambition and the wicked
desire of having, beecommeth bragginge and vaineglorious Thessalians and
Paracelsians, not such as are desirous of their own health, or the health of
their Citizens: But rather let them study night and day, that whatsoever is
profitable, whereby with his art, he may from so dangerous an enemy preserve
and cure those that are committed to his trust and charge, let him use the
same betimes, and wisely in the fear of God, that he may so near as may be,
come unto that point, speedily, safely, pleasantly (wherein does consist the
whole office of a wise and godly Physician.)

Let the Chirurgions be admonished, Chirurgians.
that they show themselves ready and wary in all things. Also, that they
imparte their counsels with the Physicians, and do all things by their
appointment. For, albeit that now adays through the fault as well of times as
men, it be a several profession, which in times past was one: and that this
part which is called Chirurgerie, be translated unto them: yet they know,
that there are many hard points in it, which unless they learn of skillful
Physicians, and deal by their counsel, they shall not be well able to keep
their standing, and shall many times to their own shame bring slander to so
worthy an art, and through their negligence and unskillfulness be evil spoken
of and diffamed amongst others. Let them therefore be persuaded, that it is
neither shameful nor unseemly, which Solon said of him self, Hipp. de
praecep.
I wax old, always learning somewhat. And that which Hippocrates says: In
the danger of a present matter, ignorance casting as it were a cloud of
darkness, others also must be sent for, that by common consent, the cause of
the sick body may be enquired on, and known, and that they may be fellow
workers in helping him. For (as the same says) in continuance of the grief,
the sickness increasinge, for want of counsel, many things at the
present are forgotten. But let our Chirurgians have ready stuff fit for the
making of ointments, plasters, and medicines, moistening (for with these
instruments in this sickness for the most part their art is finished.) And let
them not lack lances to open the vain, nor knives to cut, nor yrons to
sear, if the sore or impostume (as many times it happens) shall break out.

Finally, The Apothecaries.
let the Apothecary be instructed, to have in a readiness all kind of needful
remedies, as well simple as compound, expulsive, preservative, etc. and let him
faithfullye minister them by the appoyntmente of the Physicians according to
the need of every one, and sell them for a reasonable price. Let him consider
that in a manner ye whole direction and success of the counsel and action of
the Physician and Chirurgian does depend on him. For what shall profit them
to deal artificiallye and paynefully, if he vnfaythfullye and careleslye
minister those things, whereby the art and whole charge with praise is to be
executed? Let him not think, that he has now gotten an occasion to rob and
spoil, when as he sees the Citizens in extreme necessity, compelled to
come by flocks unto his shop: but rather that he is as it were a cook (by
which name, my meaning is not to impeach his commendation, when as neither
Galen him self any thing at all reprocheth ye unworthiness of Physicians, in
comparing his art unto repayring of old rotten houses) which ought to assuage
and satisfy the lusts and hunger of many: or as the steward in the hall of a
great prince, which gives meat and drink at the commandment of his master
unto the whole familye, according unto the diversity of office, age, and
dignity: Wherefore the monnie which he receives, let him account not again,
but a consideration of his charge and labor. For they that hunte after gain,
are not wont to follow just dealing, but covetousness, nor the health of their
Citizens care they for, but regard their own vnfillable greediness. Pety
Physicians and Experimensers roging up and down the country.
Such as are those petty Physicians, that roge about the country, and to the
killing of many a man: these Experimenser Jews, Paracelcists, Alchimistes,
jolly brave fellows, that is bragginge and vain boastinges, Thessalian
witches and Sorcerers, men (a certain few excepted) lewd and wicked, which
do not only confound and corrupt the end of a most notable and divine art
(for so is the aunciente and old Physic called by S. Paul) but also do
miserablye defile and mar the rules thereof, and that which is more
shameful then these, with manifest iuggleries diffame it: whom godly and
learned Physicians do worthyly lament and dislike, that through the too much
favor of Princes and Magistrates they are suffered. For when as Physic is an
art fet from the most inner secrets and closets of nature, and seeks her
causes and principles in natural philosophy, which is known to few Princes:
Moreover, when as these Rudesibies and ignorant doltes, or at least wise
cosining runnagates amiss instructed, An usual thing in many places, which I
have seen often in Germany.
commended oftentimes by the letters testimonial of many, are woonte no less
shamelesly, then boldly to vaunte themselves and their wares: The Magistrates
that are by nature somewhat too mild, are soon deceived, especially driven by
some notable necessity: so that they give both hearing and entertainment to
such lewd losels, which thing notwithstanding, if they would deal wisely,
they ought not to do, nor should so rashly commend such dishonest persons with
their honest testimonies. For it is a wonder to see, how with these sealed
titles and writings, the common people, yea and they them selves are besotted,
puffed up in pride, and shamefullye deceive many others. Would to God
therefore, which thing al good Physicians wish for, there might be some open
examination and punishment, to punish this their deadlye boasting, or at least
wise to bring it down, that they should not dare so easily to give out them
selves falslye for physicians, and forthwith to practice so high an art: I
would it might be by law forbidden, yt any man should give to any to drink,
medicines, especially such as serve for purging, unless he be allowed by
public authority: Good God, of how many deceites, of how many errors, of
how many dangers, that I say not privy murders, should mankind be
delivered? I would to God, I say, we might once see that day, in which this
foul and filthy stable might be cleansed: To the great benefit of the common
wealth they are punished, which set to sale naughti wares: they are punished
which sell bad fish, or flesh: moreover, not so much as a coblar in any kind of
handy craft is admitted publikly to practice his art, unless having served a
certain time as appre^tize, he can approve himself unto his M. and are they to
be let go scot free, who at their pleasure, in so^e secret stable or dodging
alehouse, where ye host is a baud, and the M. an harlot, the man a lecher, deal
with those things wherein consists the public and private health, or else being
decayed, is restored, and do al things deceitfully, betray and set to spoil ye
health of men rashly and ignorantly, and (to speak in a word) with heinous
treachery in s;teed of life do minister death? What plague can happen unto a
common wealth more plaguey then this one plague? But I cease with more words to
inueigh against this rake hell Rabble: because there is good hope, that our
preseruers, which we make, in so heavy an estate of things, where otherwise many
things use to be don rashly* will not deal loosely, nor by any means handle ye
matter so, but yt they will course away lustily these harmfull Rascals, and
greedy cormorants, and that those their phisitio^s, who^ with due advise the
have once received, who^ they have had commended by honest testimonies, whom
they have gotten by ye grace of god, as men endued with virtue, faithfulness,
te^pera^cie, and godliness, with knowledge in learning, ye same they will
courteously entertein, use and maintain with al kind of favor. Last of al, it
shall not be lawful for these to go to any other diseased persons, then those,
which are sick of the plague: which also is to be determined (yt al occasion of
infectio^ may every where be avoided) concerning other officers publikly hired
for this purpose. For when as it may so fall out, yt they may carry with them in
their garments the infected air, Marcil. Ficin de Epid. cap. 2*
who yet by reason of the strong state of their nature, or medicines
preservative, which they have taken or for yt they have now a good season bin
used unto such an air, it do not infecte them selves, yet being brought unto
such as have not bin accustomed unto the same, or as are already weak with
sickness, and in danger of every injury, may easily hurt them, what folly (I
pray you) were it, to draw from him poison, of whom you look for remedy? and
what poiso^? Namly such as received only by breath, or, ye which is more
wonderful by the only transpiration or breathing through of the arteries and
veins, does sometimes bring present danger unto an whole family, and
sometimes unto a whole City and Country. For it can scarce be told, how
greatly the corruption of the air about us, and how fast the poisoned
quality does cleave unto garments, and chiefly woollen, and how the breath in
fetching the wind does infect, and as it were with a secret flame set on fire
the veins and arteries, being the instruments of life. And let these things
thus far have been spoken of the Physicians of the body. Let us hereafter go
forward unto the ministers of the Church, who have the charge of souls.

Of the Ministers of the Church. Cap. 5.
THose now being chosen and allowed, which have the charge of the body,
hereafter provision must be made for spiritual ministers, who may instruct the
sick in faith toward God, and comfort them up with hope of salvation, and
take care of their souls, whom the preseruers shall so choose in every
Parish, that they take not to so weighty a matter, whosoever comes first to
hand, but such as they shall have known to be singularlye given unto godliness,
holiness, sobriety, and chastity. For they that hitherto have had no care of
true godlynes, cannot profitably exhort any man thereunto. And the intemperate
will beestowe most of the time upon their cups, and will be unprofitable unto
them selves, much more unto others: especially seeing this opinion is settled in
the hearts of many, yt they think drunkenness and plenty of wine to be a
notable remedy against this sickness. As for the incontinent, there will be
great peril, when as in these times many occasions of sinning are offered, and
that without punishment, least they commit some such heinous wickedness, for the
which God being rather provoked, increase ye punishment, the^ knoing it, keep
the same away. And further, they must not be covetous: For in this state of
things, no otherwise the^ in war, or burnings of houses, Five hanged at Padway.
many things lie open unto ye spoil: for which kind of fact I saw five hanged
at Padway, in the year 1556, after whose execution the sickness in short time
ceased, as if the wrath of God through the punishment of so lewd a part had bin
assuaged. They must besides be upright men, courageous, endued with mean
learning, but not with mean charity: let the^ be wary, not rash, and let them
consider that they have every day death before their eyes. Wherefore let them
put their hope and trust in God alone, and look for at his hands, rather an
heavenly then an earthly reward of their labors.

But if peradventure there can no such be found among the ordinarye
Ministers, out of the rest of ye people there must be chose^ such, which come
unto the next degrees of ye foresaid virtues. For in this miserable time ye
things of most perfection come not alwais to be had. Therefore, as they say, As
we can, when as we would, we may not.

When such at length are chosen, whom the Preseruers shall have judged meet and
sufficient for every parish, it may not by any means be suffered, that they
go to any other then such as being taken with the plague, require their help.
For I have said before, and say still, that not only the outward and common
infectious air, but also contagious breaths and infectious breathinges, or
blowinges, which are gathered, and afterward imparted to ye hole: and others
that are sick by the keepers, by such as sit by the^, by the ministers of the
church going hither and thither, and standing by the infected, yea many times
also by them that are dead, ought specially to be avoided. Which thing, when as
by daily experience we are taught, and have proved also unto us to be true, by all means we have to take heed, least that we leave the cause of this so great
a disease in others, whom with all diligence we have, for fear of infection put
a part. Hereunto you may add, which we have oftentimes no less experience of,
yt many sick persons also (I speak not of such as are infected with the plague)
albeit they be not infected with the company of such ministers, yet they will
nevertheless refuse their presence for fear of the infection. Whereupon also
this inconvenience will arise, yt they had rather receive never so simple
comfort at the hands, either of some of their own household, who for the most
part are unmeet for this purpose, or else dye alone, then to undergo a dubble
mischief, or receive the usual Sacraments of ye Church. Which thing, whether
otherwise it be godly, or not godly done, albeit it be not greatly material
here to discuss, yet upon ye occasion offered, I will set down certain reasons
on both sides, whereby the students in divinity may be stirred up to examine ye
reason of this known practice of our elders, and how far it may be allowed,
and is needful for the sick persons, they them selves may judge: least any man
might think yt I would foreiudg or prescribe the skilful and learned Divines.

They therefore which hold, that ye private receiuinge of the Lords Supper may
or ought to be left undone of the sick, give counsel, Of private receiving of
the Lords supper.
that whatsoever such rites ought to be done, be done in time, and in the
public assembly, Reasons of the^ that deny it.
which they say proceeds partly from ye ignorance of the common people,
partly of distrust, and not to be without suspicion of a kind of superstition.
remembrance of the death and benefits of Christ, that it cannot conveniently
and comely be done of such as are half dead, and stricken with the fear of
death. Thirdly she cast roses and pearls unto swine, and give that which is
holy unto dogs. Fifthly, Hyppocrates himself, who has said of unwholesome
or unclean bodies, that the more they are nourished, the more they are hurt.
Which Plato and Galen in like manner affirm of unclean souls, unto which if
you offer wholesome and nourishable speeches: that is, admonish them of virtues
or vices, they wax not only not the better, but also the worse. Wherefore
wise Physicians, when as they doubt of a disease, or of strength of the sick
body, and therefore what will be ye issue, they are wont to follow ye more safe
and easy medicines, and not such as may bring into danger. Lastly, they say
yt not so much as the form, which gives unto every thing his being, is
observed and kept in that private ministration unto the sick. For Christ unto
his Apostles, that is, unto the Church present, and gathered in one, and not to
one particular person, divided the Supper, and said not take, but take ye: nor
eat, but eat ye: Finally, not drink, but drink ye: wherefore S. Paul in
rehearsing the ordinance of Christ, badde not every man to eat his own
Supper, but one to tarry for another, that it might truly be called a
Communion, and that by the breaking and partaking of one loaf, might be
showed a lively growing together in charity to be made, and also an
incorporation into Christ, and our neighbors and the receivers present. And
these things are so liked of the one side, that they would never have this
sacrament ministered to any, but in the public assembly. For whereas it seems
unto some, that as the word may be preached every where, and set forth to
men alone either sick or whole: so also this Sacrament of our Communion, may
privately be rightly ministered unto one, they think that the comparison is
not alike. For that every kind of ministry has his manner and form as it
were, without the which they cannot be the thing that they are called, albeit
all things tend unto the same end. What that properly it is no part of the
ministry, unto sick men, or unto others privately without the public
assembly to have the word read, preached, and with the same, others to be
admonished, instructed, and comforted. For that this may be done of any, and
so is wont to be, yea even of women, unto whom notwithstanding the public
ministry is not permitted, wherefore they think that here is a dislikelihood,
and that their cause as yet stands: namely, that the receiving of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper ought not to be private, but public, and common
unto many.

The reasons of them that maintain private receiving.
On the contrary side, others contend that this use and custom of private
receiving of the Supper of the Lord ought to be retained, if not at all times,
yet at least wise, when the whole congregation receives it in the Church. For
albeit Christ (say they) peradventure did it not, as who held the Supper only
once with his Apostles, hereof yet it follows not, either that it is not
lawful, or that the Apostles and the Church which followed them, did it not.
For such as were absent might be let upon lawful causes, as by sickness,
or age* or other occasions, so that they could not resort unto the public
assembly. Hereupon the old fathers of the true primative Church, used to
imparte it as well to such kind of persons being in health, as to those yt
were sick, to the one as the cognizance, and badge of peace and agreement of
faith, and to the other as a pasport to them that were going away. For when as
the Church is as it were one united and whole body, and that Supper appointed
for the whole Church, there is no cause (they say) why she may lawfully deny
it unto some certain members being absent, upon some ceraine lets. And whereas
it is said that the Church is uncertain of the faith and mind of such
persons, albeit this peradventure may have place in those whom it is manifest
to have led a loose and lewd life before, and in such as are unknown unto the
Church: yet this principle ought to be retained, which hitherto has been used:
The Church does not judge of things yt are hidden, and whosoever do confess
with us with one consent Christ, and in plain words acknowledge that they
repent of their sins, being by Baptism ingrafted into the common body of the
outward congregation, that of these we ought to hope well, and to make them
partakers of the outward benefits of the Church. For (say they) there is not so
great danger, as seems unto others for to be, and that here there is no more
poison given in steed of medicine unto them that crave it, the^ there is to
those that are in body body present, and gathered together in the
congregation. And that we must not so much regard unto whom it is given (so
that they be not open enemies of religion, or by force of the disease driven
out of their wits) then what is given. For that the chief end of this
Sacrament is, that Christ should assure us, yea, and make us partakers of his
promise, and benefits purchased with his own blood (which on yt high altar of
our redemption he shed to set men at liberty) yt he should arm us with faith
and hope, knit Christians together with the bond of mutual love, and inflame
the^ as it were with a certain fire of love. Moreover, when as ye sacraments
are a part of the word, and as it were certain visible words, the which also
according unto ye mind of others, bring no other thing, the^ the word it self
preached and heard, albeit they do it by another mean, they say there is no
cause why sufficient, wherefore we should more withhold them then this from
any man, who thus far, as concerns outward conversation, have been our
brethren: for who can judge the heart, but God alone? If they have heretofore
lived somewhat more at large, may it not be that either a short admonition of
the minister, or a little breathing of the holy Ghost, may raise up in them some
small spark, the which by all means to cherish, so as it be not against
godliness, shall not be unprofitable? How I pray you ca^ it chose but be
against ye wisdom of a Christian, to deprive them from thanks giving and
remembrance of the Lords death, who in their heart feel themselves to be moved
to celebrate and keep the same with the church, that is, with their body,
albeit in situation of place absent therfro^, would declare themselves to be a
member thereof, and to be short, are desirous to testify before others, yt they
are displeased with their former life? Last of al, these lean so far to this
opinion, yt they think the supper of ye Lord to be no where more rightly
ministered, the^ among the sick. For here is in deed retained the true form
thereof, in the which it was first instituted: namely, at the point of death,
or upon some other urgent and great peril, some sharp admonition going before.
And to be brief, a lively faith, hope of salvation, earnest prayers, and an
ardent mind following: yt is, altogether earnestly. Which consideration has so
far liked some, that they have thought yt there could be not better reformation
of the mass, yt is of ye abused supper of the Lord, the^ to have it made by
this rule.

These things I minded to say here by the way, the which albeit they do but
smally appertain hereunto, and have been spoken as it were besides the cause,
and that I my self leave the matter in suspense to be determined by my
masters the Divines and Governors of the Church: yet hereof would I have
our diseased people to be admonished, that touching this matter they quiet
themselves, and be not troubled in mind, if happily either through the
cruelty of sickness, or for other causes, they cannot at that time be
partakers of this Sacrament, as concerning the outward ceremony. For if the
Heathen Poet have judged it sufcient, so far as able thou shall be, the
immortal Gods to serve: why should not rather we Christians, who by the son
of God are delivered from all bondage, persuade our selves the same, and
believe that God, who searches the hearts and reins, and requires not so
much the fact, as the mind, will as well be present with us by his spirit, as
if in the very deed we had fulfilled all the Ceremony? For this is that
spiritual eating or Communion, which our Elders also believed to be done in
mind, and faith, and to make us no less partakers of the body of Christ
bringing salvation* then they are which use the outward ceremony: if so be we
can say with a constant and steadfast faith: Lord, I am not worthy that thou
should enter under the roof of my house, but only say the word, and my
soul shall be hole. The Lord himself in John says, I stood before the door
and knocked, if a man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in unto
him, and will suppe with him, and he with me, etc. And S. Augustine bids us
believe, De ciuit. de^. lib. 21. ca. 25.
and says, that in believing we have eaten. Also in another place he says, He
that is in the unity of Christ his body, that is, in the joining of the
members of Christians, the Sacrament of the which body, the faithful
receivers are wont to take at the altar, By Altar, he means the ^^ble of the
Communion.
he indeed is to be said to eat the body of Christ, and to drink his blood.
Let Christians therefore persuade themselves of this, if they cannot by lawful
means be partakers of the earthly part of the Sacraments, that the heavenly
may abundantly suffice, the which at any time by faith to receive is no hard
matter. The same also I dare pronounce of the comforting and strengthening,
which by the ministers of the Church is wont to be made unto the sick, that it
is sufficient, when as it cannot be had otherwise, if they be used by private
persons. Which thing that it is not diligently done, the cause is in the
shameful slothfulness of the common sort of Christians, who always learn,
and never come unto the knowledge of the truth. For many so carelessly hear
the public sermons, A cammon fault.
that they bring not so much profit from thence, as that in the extreme
necessity of sickness or death, they can be able in any point according to
the will of God to instruct, or with godly consolations to strengthen either
themselves, or their household, who truly ought to know this, that as it is
not lawful for scholars in the school to be idle hearers: so also that it
becomes them not to come unto the Church as it were to behold some play of
runners about the Country, but as it were unto that place, whereas both
Christ himself the son of GOD sits as ruler, and the angels mark the
hearers, within a little while after as it were to take an account of every
one, of the fruits of their diligence, and seuerelye to punish the negligent.
I pray you, if we saw these things with our eyes, would we not promise to
deal earnestly and diligently, and in no case negligently and carelessly? A
Tale.
In the lives of the fathers we read, that a certain religious manne, when
as he diligently marked the Monks according to their manner singing, that he
saw the evil spirits to creep into some of their throats, and to provoke
them to coughing, and to slide into the noses of others, and make them to
neese, to enter into others ears and pull them, to shut up the eyes of
others, and to cause them to sleep. Which things although they be fabulous
or but a tale, yet they plainly signify, that our rechlesse negligence, and
slothfulness comes from the Devil the Father of laziness and sloth, and
that it is wicked carelessness. But hereof more then peradventure I ought.
Wherefore, now I return unto the matter in hand.

Of order to be appointed among the Citizens, and of leaving of public
meetinges and assemblies. Cap. 6.
THere must also an order be set down among the Citizens, to avoid public
asse^blies, games, feasts, drinkings, marriages, dau^cings, fayers, schools,
churches, and public bathes, For besides that in many of these there is great
offense committed not only against the body, but also against the soul,
there is also no small danger of getting and scattering the infection.
Wherefore, wise men give counsel, that at such times we should very seldom come
into great companies of men. For there is no man so unskillful but he knows,
that where as al things are done without consideration as it were in a mingle
mangle, yt there the infection is spread farthest, and infecteth many. As when
the tauernes and typling houses, whither they go to drink, are open unto al
daily, ye market also, ye shambles, public places also in which linne^ is
washed, and diverse sorts of people are wont to be mixed together, are haunted.
In this case therefore laws must be made by the preseruers, whereby such
meetinges may be forbidden, or else severed into diverse places and times.

And first concerning Churchmeetinges, Of order to be kept in the church.
this counsel is to be given, that they come not by heaps, or by thronges,
neither in, nor go out, and that they flock not by great numbers into one
Church, where they shall be driven to fit straightly and near together,
especial in one City: whereas there are more places fit for this purpose, in
the which the divine service, that is, the expounding of the word of God,
and administration of the Sacraments may be done. For albeit these things may
peradventure seem unto some to be but small, and of little importance, yet
nothing is to be omitted, which by any means may make for the turning away of
the infection. And that which Cicero said, that when as we ought to do for
the benefit of men, and do service to the fellowship of mankind, nothing is to
be kept close, whatsoever commodity or store we have, the same especially ought
to have place at this time.

If marriages be to be made (albeit whom Of marriages.
can these contractes like in such an estate of things, in which if at any
time else, the counsel of the Apostle ought to prevail, that for the present
necessity it were better to remain single) let them be kept with a very
small number of persons, and without all pomp. As for drunkenness and
gormandize, Tob. 2. Amos 8. 1. Match. 1. Prou. 14.
dauncinges, and other not necessary or rather dangerous and hurtefull
ceremonies and fashions, which for the most part are wont to be used: let
them be sent packing far away, least (as it is in the Proverb) this sweet
meat have sower sauce, and least they bewail the next day the oversight
committed the day before. But chieflye drunkenness is such a vice, which
does not only greatly offend God, where it is left unpunished, but also
draws with it other most horrible sins, as blasphemy, periuries, bawdries,
wrongs, murders, incests, adulteries, fornications (al which for the most
part are wont to issue out of ye ugly serpent, and do provoke the wrath of God
against ye whole nation, Marcil. Fic. de Epidem. cap. 24.
) I will not say, yt those which daily use this customable glutting and
quaffing, are more subject to this sickness, and harder to be cured. Histories
report of Socrates, for yt he lived te^peratly, yt he always was of sound
health, although he lived in many great plagues, which reigned at Athe^s. For
(as Aristotle and Galen say) there is such a constitution in sound bodies, yt
they seldom be infected with ye plague, or if they be, yet they die not. On ye
other side, it is manifest by ye examples of many newly taken with the plague,
Leonar. Fuchs. de medic. mor. li. 4. Alex. Aphr. 1. Prob, 83.
yt when as they have plentifully filled themselves with wine, they have comen
into great danger, and miserable present death. For in this case, if at any
time else, the counsel of Gale^ is most profitable, where he says, that the
body must be pure and sound winded. Wherefore, it is not only ye duty of ye
magistrate, to make a law and set a sharp punishment against such glutto^s, but
they themselves also, if they will seem Christians, and not rather altogether
Paga^s, must take heed, yt they run not into ye sharp saying of S. Paul,
Detestation of drunkenness.
in which is pronounced, yt dru^kards shall be shut out from ye kingdom of God,
and let the^ remember always ye commandment of Christ, where he says: Take
heed that your bodies be not ouerloden with surfeiting and dru^kennes. Which
comma^deme^t they which so carelessly dare set themselves against, and stir up
others unto ye like riot, I cannot judge how they should not be plain
Antichrists. For what is more Antichristian, the^ directly to cast off ye
co^ma^deme^t of christ: and to command ye which Christ forbids? But I will
not here more largely rake up this puddle, when as such offenses ought not so
much to be kept under with arguments as by laws.

Of dauncinges.
As for these daunsings and friskings, which are wont to be used so
unseasonably, to wit, straight after meat and the table taken away (for thus
have many persuaded themselves, if no man will dance that is sober, except it be
a mad man, that they deal very wisely, if they do it when they be drunk,
that is stuffed and crammed till they are like to burst again, with wine and
meat) these are to none more hurtful the^ unto ye dauncers themselves, namely,
gathering together abundance of raw humors, which oftentimes do quickly
enge^der great rottenness, and obstructions, or stoppings of the veins,
whereof are wont to grow hurtful and pestilent fevers. And hereof says
Leonarth Fuchsius a most excellent Physician of our country of Germany, that
he by experience has tried, that many whilst they were in dancing, were
infected with this plague and died.

Further I said also that public bathes were for many causes to be avoided,
Of public bathes.
which in such a time is as it were a present and deadly poison: for that many
and diverse sorts of me^ one with an other use to be gathered together in that
same vaporous or reeky air: of the which some not long before were infected
with this disease, and now by sweating would empty out the remnants of the
same: others being anointed with sundry medicines and preservatives, of the
which every one brings his several filth, and infectious breaths, wherewith
they fill that same air shut in, the which air received by those which are
there present, and have their bodies now rarefied or made thin through the
heat, is very easily drawn in by the mouth and nostrels, and also by the
pores or small holes of the skin being opened, and many times being carried
unto the heart or brain, or liver by the arteryes and veins, may very
speedily corrupt with infection.

Now concerning houses of learning and schools, in which children come
together, Of schools.
what shall I say else, then that it seems very convenient, and in manner
necessary, if we will avoid the spreading of the infection, that those which
cannot be brought unto a place more commodious, be for a time shut up, and
that the youth be rather taught at home, albeit with never so small profit, and
give themselves to private readinges, then with so great danger by heaps to
come together. For the age of children and laddes, as being given to feeding,
intemperate, tender, thin, unwary, is wont to be more subject unto this
sickness, then it that is elder and of more years. Wherefore, Rhases the chief
of the Arabia^ Physicians, and after him Franciscus Valleriola Physician of
Arles, give counsel that Infantes and children be with speed removed from
infectious places into an other country, where they need fear no danger of
infection.

Of yearly faires.
The like may be judged of common and yeerelie faires, also of funerals or
burials, whereof in their place shall be entreated more at large.

Unto this Chapter, let the Preseruers add this, and earnestly advise upon it
with all the Magistrates, namely, whether it were better for certain poor
people, which get their living by begging from door to door, and by reason
of their needy life feeding on every thing, are more in danger of this
disease then others, go unto, and run about all streets, and chiefly such
houses where dead corses are, and seek unto all men (for cruel necessity
drives them out of their own poor Cottages) let them I say consider, whether
it were better to send them some whither else, or to maintain them by the
common charge at their own houses so long, until ye sickness slack, that by this
means occasion may be taken from them of running up and down, of receiving,
and scattering the infection. For it can scarce be said, how great and
present danger does hereby grow unto the whole city. For which cause I have
seen in the most famous city of Padway, after this same manner meat daily
by the common charge allowed, not only unto the poorer sort, but also unto
them of reasonable wealth, which either had been with the sick, or were them
selves infected, that so much the more easily they might be kept within
their own walls at home. Of mainteining the poor.
And it were a thing highly to be wished, that not only in these times, in
which especially necessity does require the same, but continually and
always care were had of all common wealths, that the poor might be
otherwise mainteyned, then by this shameful, and unto Christians reprochefull,
running up and down, by which they inure themselves unto nothing but idle
life, and all kind of naughtiness. Which thing that it is not done, I see no
other let but our own gross negligence. For in our part of Christendom,
there is scarce any village so mean, but that it were able in some reasonable
sort to mainteyne their poor, if so be the Magistrates did mind the matter,
and that wisdom and order were used. The which after what manner it might and
ought to be, albeeit I have this good while been in devising, yet after I
saw, The regiment of the poor translated by M. Trip a Preacher.
that the most godly, and in all kind of learning the most skilful divine
Andreas Hyperius diligently and sufficiently to have set down the same, there
is no need of my declaration.

This also in this place I have thought good to call into counsel, because
that oftentimes there are many fearful, many weak by nature, and unfit
to do service in the common necessity, whom it were better to live some where
else, that it might be both more commodious for them, and the common wealth also
less charged, whether it may be ordained, to set these at liberty, to get
them selves for a time unto some other place. For although that some either for
religion sake, or for shame dare not to leave their City oppressed with common
misery, and will not seem willing to fly the hand of God: yet if by the
advice of the Magistrate it shall be thought good, and that it be done for the
end which I have said, I doubt not but that with a good conscience it is
lawful. For this way it shall come to pass, that the less multitude of
people there is, so much the less infection there shall be: and the less
infection there is, so much less dying and more speedye deliverance is to be
hoped for. For like as when the rotte is gotten into an heap of Apples, the
more lie gathered together, the more it increases, and the longer the rotting
endures: so also here it comes to pass, that if once the Plague be crepte
into a City that is populous, we see the sickness daily to be increased and
cherished a great while, which thing is not wont in such sort to happen in a
place less peopled, if the other things which we have said already and
mean to say hereafter, be observed.

Of order which is to be kept in the buying and selling of things necessary.
Cap. 7.
ANd thus much of order to be kept among the Citizens: hereafter we must see
concerning the selling and buying of things necessary: that as before care was
had of medicines for the body, and of sacrifices and Sacraments for the soul:
so also provision be made for the Citizens of nourishments, vitayles, meat and
drink. For if Diogenianus have said truly, that by the things wherewith we
live, by the same also we get sickness, it is a thing doubtless greatly material,
that not only things hurtful be not brought into the city, but also ye
things good and profitable should be brought, but with such a Prouiso, that the
things yt are to be brought in, Th. Taber. de pest. lib. 8.
be set abroad, and sold with least danger. Here therefore laws are to be
made, what kinds of meats may be lawful to be sold, and what not: also for
what price: and lastly, in what places, and a certain penaltye by the
Preseruers to be set upon the offenders.

First therefore must straightly be forbidden, that none of the country or
indwellers set to sale, or sell sweet cheries, prunes (except vngary and
damask) new grapes, and figs peaches, pears, mellow and sweet apples,
melons, pippins, and least of all cucumers, the which (as Galen witnesses)
have great store of juice apt to putrifiyng: Marcil, Ficinus permits
Gourdes, and Rhazes, who dwelled in Egypt, where there is much drought, in a
season very hot grants herbs, and Summer fruits, such as are cold
and moist: which is scarce lawful for us in this country to follow. Secondly,
Meats not to be eaten.
diligent heed must be taken, that no man sell ope^lie corrupt or il dressed
fish and flesh, amongst which also must be numbered, although it can hardly be
forbidden, to young la^b and veale, which in certain great cities is wont very
ill to be done: also fish yt are not scaly, soft, taken in rotten pooles, as
eeles, la^prous, la^preies, Fish not to be eaten.
and the fishes called albuli and bustomi. For it ca^ scarce be told, what apt
matter al, these do minister unto rotte^nes. In ye steed therefore of al these,
are not only to be admitted, but also to be desired, and by ye preseruers
procured such as are holsom, and inge^der good blood, and may be some let unto
ye sickness growing: as are among the su^mer fruits, damask and vngary prunes
dried: Fruits to be eaten.
raysons, and corinthes, sower peaches, and pears which are wont to be laid up
against winter, quinces, bitter almo^ds, capers, walnuts, sower cheries, and
especial Pomgrannats, ora^ges, limons, and citrons. Among the herbs are,
Lettise, Succorie, Milkethistle, Purslayne, Herbs to be eaten.
Orach, Spinach, Sperache, Carduus benedictus, Baume, Sorrel, Burrage, Burnet,
Rue, Betomy, Rosemarie, Sage, Isop, Cheruil, Parsley, Fenell, and such like.
The which when as all men have not, neither can have, it shall not be
unprofitable, to buy them daily of the Gardiners, that bring them to market.
Fishes to be eaten.
Fishes which at that time may be eaten (albeeit every country may measure
this according unto the nature of ye place, for all lands bring not forth all
things) shall be chiefly such as be amongst stony places or grauelly, as
Gougeons, Loches, Pearches, Pickerels, Breames, Trowts, Soles, Sticklebagges,
Bleakes, Barbels, Carpes. To teach that these should be sodde in Vinegar, or
small wine, albeit it be no small remedy to preserve health, yet does it not
pertain to our present purpose. For here is set out the duty of the
Magistrate, and not the diet of particular persons. Flesh to be eaten.
Wholesome flesh are, Chickens, Capons, Hens, Partridges, Pheisantes, Wood
doves, Turtles, Pigeons, the Attagen, Thrushes, Starles, Sparrowes,
Chaffinches, and all small birds that live in wooddes, bushes and vines: also
kids, fat Calves, and of reasonable age, Roes, Hares, Hearts, Cunnies, Oxen,
Weathers. Neither are spices altogether to be ouerpassed, the use whereof the
richer sort (for the poor make hunger and labor a sauce) may use as
preservatives in saucing their meats. Spice to be eaten.
And they are these, Cynnamom, Saffron, Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves, whole Pepper,
for ye strength thereof being of a thin light substance, is easily dissolved by
feathing, and does heat overmuch. And thus much concerning meats.

There must no less care be used concerning drink, that none at al be
suffered, Beer*
which may in any respect be a nourishment unto rottenesse: and again such
must be provided as is wholesome, by the counsel of the Physicians, according
unto ye custom of the place. I would not speak any thing unto the prejudice or
fore judging of others: yet can I not allow of all kind of drinks a like.
Manardus a very learned and famous Physician of our time disliketh all Beer in
this sickness: but because he was an Italian, and accustomed only unto wine
(for Italy scarce knows our Beer) his judgment in this point is not
greatly to be accounted of. For I dare certainly affirm, that our double and
single Bream Beer, and also the Beer of other cities adjoining, is not
unwholesome, especially, if it be clear, well sodden, reasonably hopped, and not
to high coulored, for so it may dry the bodies, and strengthen the powers,
clear the spirits, and after a sort like unto wine, make glad (as the
Psalmist speaks) the heart of man. He that is desirous to know the virtues
of every kind of beer, let him read the treatises of some written of this
matter, and examine them according to the rule now set down, which is applied
unto the state of time, in respect whereof we have directed this our whole
advice. I have spoken first of Beer, because this has the first and chief
use with us: yet in the mean season I deny not, Wine.
but that wine deserves especial commendation, and is far better then
Beer* or any other kind of drinks, if it be pure, and not to strong. The
chief praise is given to white wine, pure, ripe, well smelling, old, austere,
rather the^ sweet: neither is claret wine disliked of a thin substance, of
reasonable age, and not striking the head. Let the same judgment be concerning
made wines of Wormwood, Cardus Benedictus, Betonie, Sage, Rosemary: but of
whom, when, and in what quantity these are to be used, pertains not unto
this place. Thus far therefore of drinks and meats: other things
concerning food, as not necessary, I purposely pass over, least I might seem
scrupulously to deal with every small matter.

For the price of these things, Of the price of things.
which was the second thing set down, this only I am to counsel, that there
be used by ye preseruers reasonableness, not only as Aristotle requires in
the exchange and price of things, and equal unto the wares, but also such as
has regard unto the poverty and ability of the chapmen, according unto the
estate of the persons, and the same in such sort yt whilst ye one is had care
of, the other be not burdened And because ye judgment in this case is hard,
this equity is to be left unto the discretion of the sellers, with this caveat
and Christian remembrance, yt they have not so much their minds greedily set
upon gain (which in this state of things is in no case seemly) as upon that
saying of ye Apostle: Love seeks not the things, which are her own. Again,
They that will be rich, fall into tentations: again, let no man beguile his
brother in bargaining. For what shall it avail thee so greedily to scrape
together yt thing, from which thou ought to fear, least thou be taken
every moment? Thou fool (says Christ unto ye rich man in ye gospel, which
here I may say unto thee, O whosoever thou art with in this common mystery
hu^test after thy private lucre) this night shall thy soul be taken from thee,
and then whose shall they be, which thou have gathered together? Wherefore thus
rather we ought to determine with our selves, that we in this world possess
nothing as our own, but only are stewardes of another man his goods. If we
have gotten any thing to our master with our labor honestly, the labor will
end, but the reward remain: but if contrariwise, we shall have burdened our
neighbor with dishonest and unlawful taking, the iniquity will remain, and the
gain have an end. Besides this, my request is also in this case, that princes
and such as have customs and tolles, would yield somewhat of their right, unto
these cities and people, which being visited with this sickness, are both
ouerladen with their own charges, and also cannot use their wonted traffic.

Lastly, also as touching the place, wherein all things pertaining unto meat
and drink, Of places meet for sale.
are to be sold, some thing must be added. For it seems not convenient, that
all things should be brought into one market. For so it must needs be, that a
mighty multitude of people should come together, and that the savors of
diverse things, many times also filthy and strongly smelling must be mixed
together, which thing doubtless will give no small occasion of rottenness,
which, if we will avoid, the infection must with all diligence be shunned, as
has been often said already. There must therefore be ordained many places, in
sundry parts of the city, where those things must be set, which pertain unto
food, and are needful for every one. Let there also be a several market for
flesh and fiish, for herbs and fruits, that all discommodities, which may
arise by the mingling together of a multitude of people, and bringing of things
saleable, may with all diligence be avoided.

Of purging the air, cleansing the streets, putting away of kine, hogs
geese, etc. Chap. 8.
SVch things as concern meats and drinks, have been set down in ye chapter
next before, wherein, when as we thought good to prescribe among other things,
several places for the sale of ye same, that the spreading of the infection
might be hindered, and yet nevertheless the rottennes, whereof oftentimes the
same takes not only his beginning, but also increase, can hardly be kept from
those places, it follows by good reason, yt we briefly treat of purging the
air, of clea^sing the streets, of keeping away kine, hogs, and geese, the
which do greatly defile the same. For I see that all the learned, yea and the
common sort also do hold this: namely, that the causes are to be taken away,
if we will take away ye effects, which grow of the causes: also, that the pure
air does make much to the strengthening of the spirits, and unto health, so
that it has given occasion of a proverb: Such air, such mind: also it is
known, that nothing does so much dissolve the powers as stench. And because
the streets can not be kept clean, First.
nor consequently stench, rottenness, and vnpurenesse of the air to be
let, so long as such living creatures are suffered, which engender store of
such filth, these must be put into some place without the City, which seems
fit for this turn: namely, which is near the river, if it may be, that their
filthy excrements may be purged into it, or else that from thence the stinking
reekes as little infect the City as may be. For the doung and excrements of
those beasts, which I have spoken of, do more then will be believed, infect
and weaken the spirits and principal members, as the brain the heart, etc.

There is alike fault unto this, and too abominable (the which I marvel to
be suffered in worshipful Cities, and I shame to speak it) that the
streets, and allies, yea and the Church yards also, are every where in some
places so defiled with ye doung of shameless Roges and Beggars, that which
way so ever you turn your self (with reverence be it spoken) you will think
you see not a public and commendable way in the City, but a vile and beastlye
Iakes. The like in manner you may say of lie water, wherewith linen clothes and
vessel are washed, the which maids are wont commonly to cast before the doors
of the neighbors, when as they cannot abide it at their own houses.

Wherefore the Preseruers must do their endeavor, that when as they have
freeed the City from these beasts they also command these filthes to be
carried all away, and by law decree, that none hereafter do either maintain
or admit any such filthiness. The which yt it may the better be observed, there
must be made in place fit for that purpose, sties and stables in such manner as
has been said: also public houses of office, and sinckes under ground, into
the which may be carried all such kind of foul stuff, which places when
they begin once to be full, let them be covered with lyme, to drink it up
withal: for the other practice, which is used in carrying it out, is not
without danger at that time.

Ditches about Cities.
Afterward also the Ditches, if there be any within, or without the City (for
the walls of Cities many times are wont to be compassed about with ditches,
which often serve the common people in steed of priuies, whilst they carry
out into the same, as into some foul hole, all their filth) Also pondes and
standing waters, if from out of them there be suspicion of any evil reekes
(as when Flax and Hemp, or Tanners skines are steeped in them, or when as
houses of offices by vautes under the ground do empty their sincks into
them) they are either to be filled up with earth, or by trenches to be let
out, and carried away: or finallye, if it may be, they are some certain
times to be scowred, by lettinge in some swifte brook into them. For such
many times (as Paulus Aegineta does witness) are causes procuring contagious
and infectious air. Li. 1. Cap. 49
The same do all Physicians, and many great Divines think of Churchyardes, of
the which somewhat more shall be said in the second book. Of Africa we read,
that it was sometimes infected with a great plague, by reason of a corrupt
breath fuminge up from sea lopsters cast up on the shore, and there dying.
Alex. Ben. li. 1. de pe. ca. 1.
The same witnesses Alexander Benedictus, to have happened sometimes after
great earthquakes. For (says he) a filthy vapor lyinge a long time restinge
and moulding under the earth, as it were in everlasting darkness, may
infecte the moist and pure air, and bring new and evil fevers: Such as
histories record were sometimes at Venice, by means whereof all women almost
that were great with Child, were delivered of their Children dead before their
time, and anon after dyed of the plague, the same year. For whereas some
laid the cause hereof upon a Dragon, which lay lurking in those Caves, it
was but a tale. It is needless to bring hither more examples, albeit it might
be done in great plenty. For experience and reason, two chief causes of
making things to be beeleeued, do agree to this opinion. Wherefore the
Preseruers must take great heed, least, when as they have used other kinds of
industry and pain taking, and leave beehynde these present breeders of
corruption, they lose both their cost, and also their labor.

But here peradventure some manne will obiecte unto me that common sayeinge:
Purging of the air.
that one poison is driven out with an other, lykes as one nail with an other:
Also the usage of some Nations, who at such times are wont not to keep or
cleanse the places infected from evil and filthy savors, but to fill and
stuff them. Whereof Alexander Benedictus recites a story of his time,
woorthye to be remembered, A (...) story
concerning the countreye Sarmatia, the which also he thinks may be
confirmed by natural reason.

A certain noble Merchaunte, (says he) of Creta Li. de pe. ca. 6
, when as he traded Merchandise in the Country of Tauros, and that a most
cruel Pestilence was grown by reason of the corruption of the air, by means
whereof there was no end of dying, reported, that he saw a Physician in that
notoryous death of men, a dweller of that place (for the Sarmatians do
inhabit there) who commanded Dogs to be killed, and every where to be
cast in the ways and streets, which Dogs being swollen up and rotten,
filled the air with a filthy savor, and that by this remedy the City was
straight restored to health. Also that the Sarmatians are woonte often to use
this medicine.

For the Dogs putrefying changed the nature of the air, which was only
hurtefull unto the men. For so does vnlykenesse and discord of things
work, and one poison is maystered of an other. Zoar.
Which thing also one Zoar among the latter Arabian Physicians does affirm.

This story tells Alexander, the which least any laysie bones might
allege in defense of his sloathfulnesse, whilst he is desirous to avoid
such means and labor of cleansing, as wise men do counsel: or least any
manne should rashlye follow that, which he understands not how it is done,
the cause of so unheard of, and unwonted remedy is to be sought out. I
grant therefore it to be true, that one poison sometimes is driven out with
an other: but when that shall be done, there must needs be a manifest or
secret contrariety of qualities beetweene those things which drive out one
another. For otherwise the one will not only fly from the other, but will
rather come unto it, and will be joined and knitte in felloweship more
stronglye and neerelye: For concord (says Hyppocrates) cleaves unto and
dwells with concord. But things disagreeing use rebel, fight, and disagree
among them selves. It is also commonly said, that like things are not only
preserved with like, but also increased and strengthened: as fire uses to be
increased with oil, Naphta is a kind of chauky clay, that burning with fire,
the more water is put to it, the greater is the flame.
Naphta, brimstone, aumber wood: heat with heat: the Ague with rottenness of
humors: the Dropsy with drinkinge of water, Choler with the eating of Capons,
and the poison of the plague (as Marcill Ficinus says) with wool. And this
contrariety of qualities which I spoke of, when as it proceeds from an
inborne quality, which in diverse kinds of things is diverse and oftentimes
has manyfolde causes, even according unto the nature of the place,
constitution of the air, temperature and disposition of the subject or thing
it is in, and finallye according unto the proportion of the poison and agent
cause, it does woonderfully vary, and may rather be understood by the
falling out of the thing, then by any steadfast reason. What shall we say then
unto the question put forth? Is this cure done by any manifest quality? For
the nature of Dogs is dry, and the rottenness, wherewith for the most
part the plague is joined, is said to be a corruption in a moist body. Or
shall we say, that the stench of Dogs putrefying is by a certain secret
quality repugnaunt unto the nature of the plague? Truly, I dare not say so, in
as much as this cannot be proved (so far as I know) by the authority of
any, but only by the custom of that country, and the experience of that
soil agreeable: namelye, that there a certain singular plague, a singular
nature of Dogs, a singular temperature of men, a singular air, and such
other things as are in this case required, do all agree in a certain
singular quality, which in other parts of the woorlde, in other natures of
beasts and men are not in all points so like. Which cannot be doubtefull
unto them, Clementius Clemen. de not pest.
which are endued but with reasonable experience of things. For the poison and
infection of the Plague is not after one sort, in all times and places.

Men also and other kinds of lyuinge creatures do greatly differ within them
selves.

There is such a Plague, as in which chiefly Fyshes dye, sometimes
fourefooted beasts, sometimes Birds, sometimes Mankind, and amongst
mankind sometimes Women more then Men, and the younger more then the elder.

Hieronimus Cardanus a man most skillful in many things, Li. 4. de var. rer.
cap. 4. Scrib. Larg. in pref. de compo. medi.
makes mention of a certain plague at Basil, with the which only the
Heluetians, and not the Spaniardes, or Italians, or Frenchmen, which were in
the same City, were visited, which truly were to be woondred at woorthyly,
unless we knew the variety of things to be endless, and the greater part
(as Aristotle, the chief of Philosophers confesses) to remayn always
unknown unto us. Therefore to conclude this doubt, De anscul. Phis.
I think that we ought rather to follow the authority of most famous men,
as well old as new, which have handled this cause, when the received custom
of barbarous people of one strange place, by what experience soever, in which
place also peradventure the last do not agree with the first in one
continual course.

Wherefore, sithence we know, The power of fire.
that a great part of such deadlye mischief does depend on the corrupt,
rotten, and infected air, and that fire above all things does resist
corruption, let us rather use fire, followinge Hippocrates, then these
outrageous stenches, which may greatly hurt even those that are sound: Let
our streets shine with fire, let our air burn with fire, the goodness of
whose substance how great and subtyle it is, read Albucasis the Arabian
Chirurgian in the first part of his Chirurgerie, Chapter 1. For the fire is
most pure, Discor. 6. cap. 36. Plin. not. hist. 36. cap. vlt.
and purifieth all things, whereupon Eusebius in his church history does
witness, that the Chaldees in old time did woorshippe it, as a mighty GOD.
Water does cleanse but the outward part, and cannot wash the inner, Li. 11.
ca. 26
because it cannot pearse unto them: but fire, when as by his force he goes
through all things, leaves nothing untouched, and when as it is by nature
most pure, as has been said, it does also most speedilye cleanse all
things. Wherefore, when as at the last judgment Christ shall most fullye
purge all the whole world, the scripture says, that he will come furnished,
not with water, as in the time of Noah, but with fire, and finishe so mighty a
work. For by fire we see all cloudiness to be scattered stronglye, all
superfluous moystures to be consumed, Auicen. de med. cord. tract. 2. ca. 20
ye air to be purged, man his heart to be kindled with gladness: to wit,
the troublesome and gross vapors being scattered, and strength added unto
the wearyed members: so that it is not said commonly in vain, that as fire
is a singular ornamente of the house, so also it is commodity of men to be
wyshed for: in so much that the Poet does not in vain ask this question: What
more profit brings then fire? And I, if I should be demanded, what is the
chiefest thing in preseruinge a Town from the infection of the Plague, as he
to him that demanded, what was the chief point in an Orator: the first,
second, and third time answered, action: so I by good right might answer,
that the first, second, and third help, is fire: because that all the best
being taught by reason and experience have so set down. For fire is unto air
as a triacle, which dries up his rottenness.

Moreover drying up is the chiefest thing, wherein Galen says, the intention
of healing of this sickness does consiste: when as moystenesse, wherein
happens rottenness and corruption, is too much. Aristotle also says, that
all the Elements do putrify, except fire. Wherefore, when as the air has
gathered corruption, 1. de diff. feb. Metheor. 4 ca. de putred.
(I mean such corruption as comes of vapors, or breathes myxed together,
and drawn out of the earth or the water) which air, like as the stomach in
man receives al kind of meat and drink, so does it receive the fumes and
reekes of all things, nothing can be more profitable then fire, which does
not only assume as the air, but rather consume all corrupt and rotten
vapors. For as that fire, or heat, or rather heating virtue, such as is in
Zedoaria, Baume, Cinamom, Angelica, and many other such like, cleanses the
natural spirit of man, and keeps away pryuate infection: so our
artificial fire, of the which we here entreat, shows forth his use in the
outward air, and keeps and drives away the common infection, with
singular admiration and profit.

Wherefore leaving that natural fire unto Physicians, who are employed about
ye curing of private and singular persons, our Preseruers shall have care
hereof, that in time causing to be carried the wood of Juniper, Oak, Vines,
Beach, Cypres, Pine tree, Pitch tree, or also of Willowes, they command great
fires to be daily made every where in the Cities, Great Fyers.
but especially where there is danger presentlye, or else shortelye like to
be: And they in a manner, after like sort, although dislike faith, that in
times paste the old heathen at certain set times ordained perfumes,
Waxtorches, and great fires, solemnly to cleanse and purg the Towns and Fyelds
near adjoining, both from corruption of the air (as I verily suppose) and
also from Deuilles, who notwithstanding, for that they are used unto the fire,
it is likly that they are not feared nor hurt with the same.

Let them I pray you for GOD sake follow that most excellent Hippocrates,
which with his wisdom (as witnesses Thucidides) delivered Grecia sometimes
from the pestilence of Aethiopia, and therefore was rewarded with a golden
crown. Also Thales, the Philosopher of Milesia, Aet. Amid. 2 ser 1. cap. 94
tetra. Paul. Aeg. 2. ca. 35
who only by making great fires delivered his country Acron from this plague.
Let them follow, I say, rather the example of these, who for their wisdom
have gotten everlasting praise throughout the wholeworld, then the barbarous
and foolish custom of those barbarous people.

Of the driving away, or keeping at home of Dogs, Cats, and other tamed
household beasts, which are wont to run up and down. Cap. 9.
Having in the Chapter before goinge set down a way to cleanse and purge,
which I said to consiste in remoouing unclean beasts, in carrying away the
dounge and filth of the streets, in filling up, or amending of ditches and
pooles: and finallye, in cleansinge of the air by fires, in this place we
must see what may according to profit and reason be judged and said of
Dogs, Cattes, Goats, and other tame beasts runninge up and down.

Here therefore straight way after the beeginninge: I would have a law made
by the Preseruers, for either the driuinge away, or killing, or diligent
shuttinge up and keeping at home of such things. Which truly certain common
Wealths do wiselye observe, so that at certain times of the year,
especially about the heat of the Star called Syrius, when as the Son
enters into the sign called ye Lion, Dios. 6. ca. 35
which time they commonly call the Dog days, they command the Dogs to be
killed, the cause whereof I judge to be this: When as the Dog, Part. 1. de
feb. cap. 17.
(as Galen witnesses, albeit Gordonius otherwise no ill Author thinks him
to be melancholyke) is a living creature very hot, and by nature choleric,
and has the holes of his heart very straight and narrow, at that time when
as the heat of the air is most burninge and parchinge, the humors of his
heart being inflamed, and blood above measure rysinge up, he easilye runs
mad: whereof afterward ensues great and present danger, both to men and
also unto other beasts.

Now, if the like may be said here, not only of Dogs, but also of
Cattes, The comparing of a mad dog, and a dog infected with the plague
together
and other such like, as well tame, as tamed beasts: Namelye, that they may as
well as men take this infectious poison of the Plague, as it were a certain
madness, and unless they be kept at home, carye it unto others, they them
selves many times remaining without hurt: ought not the same course also to
take place in this state of common infection? Nay, so much the rather ought it
here to be of force, and to be followed, by how much more the danger ought
to be feared, not only of being touched and bytten of them, as when they be
mad, but also of the common air by them infected, and of powringe and
bringing the infection unto others, whilst they continually run up and down
hither and thither.

Moreover, that which is worse then madness is here to be added: for Dogs
infected with the Plague, as when they are sick of other diseases or harms,
they for the most part come home to their own houses, and fawn upon, and
get them near unto them of the house, as hopinge for help at their hands,
or taking as it were sanctuarye among them, so that after the example of Judah
the traitor, they sometime wrappe their Master in this danger, and beetraye
him: whereas mad Dogs contrariwise for the most part flying as well the
known, as unknown, Dio. 6. ca. 35
get them selves into wooddye places, and do show them selves so open
enemies, that a man may beeware of them, and shun them, and do seldom
assault and fly upon any other then such as meet them, or set themselves
against them. Again, The dog infected with the plague, far worse then the mad
dog.
such Dogs as are taken with the infection of the plague, oftentimes through
the vehemence of the disease hyde them selves into some secret corner, and
there dye priuilye, and beeinge dead, before the matter be known, lie
sometimes a long season rotting, and defile the air with infectious vapors
or breaths, and so not only alive, but also dead, do very much hurt,
which in mad Dogs falls not out in any such sort.

Lastly, if you compare together both the kinds of diseases, Scrib. Larg. de
compos. med. Alex. Be^. 26 cap. 16. Mathiol. li. epist. 6.
albeit both of them do rage with deadlye danger, yet madness is less
hurtefull, because, that for the most part it gives longer time of truce,
and does not so speedilye overthrow all the powers of the infected body, and
therefore brings not so swift destruction as ye plague. For the plague is so
subtle of fine, pearsinge, vehemente, and finallye so hurtefull and enemilike
an infection unto the vital spyrite, that it can pass through what passages
of the body soever, and in a few hours take the castle of life, and bring
death. Which thing, since it is so, if we think mad Dogs to be by all
means to be avoided, it is much more agreeable unto reason, that Dogs
infected with the plague should be auoyed.

How dogs, cats etc. may infect others, and not be hurt them selves*
But one thing peradventure will seem incredyble unto you, that we have said
that Dogs, Cattes, etc. do remain sometimes unhurt them selves of the
plague, and nevertheless to bring it unto others, and to infecte them. The
reason whereof to yield is no hard thing. For this happens by the
disposition of the subject or body that takes it, in which disposition
according unto Aristotle, Galen, Auicen, and other singular Philosophers, the
bringing to pass of the thing does chiefly consist. For when as the subject
is apt, then the efficient cause, albeeit never so weak, can quickly bring
forth the effect: like as a small spark of fire does quickly fire straw, or
brimstone.

As again, when as the efficient cause is strong, then also is it able to
subdue the matter, albeit not apt, and to work upon it at his pleasure. For
albeit Brimstome does sooner take fire then wood, and dry wood or cleft into
sheuers, Alex. Aphrod. 1. Proble. 85.
sooner then green or whole wood: yet a burning fire or furnace sets on
flame and confirms as well great as small, as well green as dry wood. For
ye vehement power of ye efficient cause, as I have said, does most speedily
dispose and work upon the matter put under it. Hereupo^ Marsill Ficinus a
singular Physician, De Epid. cap. 2.
and a philosopher, reports of a certain plague of this time: namely, in the
year 1479. in a quarter of Italy called Corregium, that Cattes and Dogs did
sundry times bring the Plague from one house into another, they themselves
being neeuer a whit hurt with the infection. The same is affirmed of a
certain other, which was infected with the Plague by his horse, of the which
notwithstanding the horse felt no hurt. All which things are said to this
end, that it may be understood, that the matter ought not to be handeled
carelessly, or negligently, that our Preseruers should not think and persuade
themselves, but that this hurtful kind of infection is to be kept away and
extinguished or quenched with all their power, all their endeavor, and finally
with all care and foresight.

Of not receiving of trauailers and strangers into the City, nor of bringing
in of things without a testimonial of the health of that place from whence
they come. Cap. 13.
BUT truly the Preseruers shall in vain altogether with this travail and
diligence look unto their common wealth, if they use not like wisdom in the
receiving in or shutting out of either men or things that come from other
places, when as this sickness is now ryfe every where, and is at this time in
a great part of German. For what shall it avail to have removed the Fylth of
our own places, if we will receive again the corruption from others? For as
this is a commendable travail of the Physicians, that when as by purging
medicines they have first cleansed the bodies of the sick, they afterward
wisely take heed, that they gather not again like superfluities: also that no
remnauntes of the disease remain, the which might cause it to come again:
even so also this Magistrate of ours (whom in this case we have said must be
a general Physician) must do his diligence in the universal and common body
of the common wealth, and orderly provide for all, that not so much as the least
piece of infection be received or left behind, whereupon new wrackes and
dangers are to be feared. For (as the Poet says) The flame that is not looked
unto, Alex. Ben. lib. 1. de pest. cap. 2.
does straight again recover. And who is ignorant that the Plague (as has
often been noted already) is a disease very infectious, and not only in men
and beasts, but also in diverse things, as in cloth, old iron, wood,
vessels, bedstedles, packes, linen, wars, household stuff, money, and most
of all in woollen Garments (unless you take marvelous great heed) may lie a
long time enclosed, and upon occasion offered with great destruction far abroad
to spread his infection? For as a mad dog carries about his poison
oftentimes many days, Gal. 6. de locis affec. cap. 5.
yea in the judgment of some, many months sometimes, and also years, before
he feel any hurt, so it is apparent by almost infinite histories, Gordon. de
Febr. part. 1. cap. 17.
which partly I my self, and partly others have observed, being Physicians of
credit, that it happens also in this disease. For I remember certain years
ago, when as Colonie was visited with a sore plague, Alex. Ben. li. 26. cap. 16.
that a certain maiden of a worshipful house, with her mother and another of
her sisters fled out of the city, Leuin. Lem. de occul. not. mira. cap. 5.
and sought health by going aside into another air: the which maiden albeit
she went out hole, and came into an healthie place, yet within three days
after she was infected and dyed: whereof there was no other cause, but that ye
plaguie infection did stick still either in the garments of them that fled, or
in the open ways of the skin, or veins not so near the heart, and did not
trouble her, before that it touched the very heart. For it is a light and small
vapor or reeke, A description of the plague.
which is not at such deadly feed with the other members as with the heart.
For which cause Marsill Ficinus is not affraide to affirm, that it may lie hid
in a man sometimes two months without hurting them, which if it be true, as
it is very likely, some do to far of, and too darkly cast off this cause
upon the influence of Saturn, staying the influence of Mars. And Bern.
Cronenburgius, otherwise a most expert Physician, might have more plainly and
effectually answered certain pratlers, and of ignorance blaming such as fly
away from places infected with the Plague, then by finding I know not what
fault withhumours, and vnorderlie diet: by which means in deed, some Ague or
small sickness, but very seldom the Plague uses to grow. For I do know
concerning this maiden, Clementius Clement. cap de pest.
that for the godliness of her mind, and singular knowledge and fear of God,
hereunto being adjoined the ripeness of her age, and the especial care of
her mother being present principally in such an estate of time, that she
offended a little or nothing at all in her diet, nor was cumbred with no ill
humor. But if this notwithstanding seem hard to be credited of a maiden,
whose sex is fleeting, I am able to affirm the same of both the daughter, and
also the wife of a most skillful Physician, both the which after the same sort,
in another place, whither they went aside for saftie sake, were taken with the
plague and dyed, whom it is likely, neither by the means of unwary diet, nor
by the nature of the unwholesome place to have taken there the infection, but to
have carried it thither with them. But if yet now these things cannot make you
fully to believe, so that you can allow that which I say, I will bring more
strong reasons. I remember that Padway a noble City of Italy on this side the
Alps (which now they call Lombardie) subject unto the dominion of the
Venecians, Ann. 1556. A Plague at Padway.
was almost wholly infected by one scholar (whose house was not far from
mine) which came from Venice infected with the Plague. A plague at Hamburg.
Anno. 1566.
How fierce cruel, and strange a Plague ranged at Hamborow a few years ago*
and had his beginning by ye infection of one man, A Plague at Breme. 1566.
which came from Dansk thither, me^ of credit, and Citizens of the same city
have reported. At length to come unto our own home, our common wealth also,
through the fault of one infected person, which was brought from Hamborowe
unto us sick at the same time, within a very few days was infected, so that no
street almost was free from that sickness: albeit again so few died
therein, that none of all the Sea Cities (when as every where they were
visited with the plague) lost so few men: through the singular mercy of God no
doubt, and the wisdom and travail of the Magistrate and Physicians: which two
God himself would have joined together, and does not at all adventure bestow
upon us his help without the service of me^. This therefore may suffice of the
infection scattered and gotten by men. In the which we have understood this
to be most profitable and necessary for the common saftie of all, if the
common people be not so rashly (as vsualie is wont to be done) mixed
together, nor leave be granted for every man at his pleasure without order
or consideration, to go whither he will.

Concerning the things them selves, which being brought out of infected
places, have withal brought the infection, so many examples come to hand, that
time and paper will sooner fail me then examples, if I would rehearse but
the least part of them. Letting go therefore the eldest, which by reason of
their age purchase the less credit at our hands, let us speak of a few at
the least, and such as have happened but a little before our time, or else in
this self same time of ours. There is a story recited, known unto many, and
worth ye noting: 1511.
When as Verona in the borders of Italy was besieged by the Emperor
Maximilian, there happened a Plague in the camp of the Germans, so that 2000.
or thereaboutes dyed of the same. In this slaughter this was found out for
certain, that 25. soldiers were infected and died one after another, by
means of one leather garment. For as one departed, straight way came an other,
and took the garment, as a booty for him, and put it on. And so far went on
this destruction, until that the cause of this death and infection was spied
out by the Surgeons. Which thing being known, this leathren pylch which
was in deed infectious, was cast into the fire and burnt, and after the
punishment thereof, the plague by little and little slaked, and at the lenght
quite ceased. Alexander Benedictus (who lived in the year 1493.) makes report
of a certain like matter, which happened at Venice in these words: I heard
(says he) in the days of my father, that in the city of Venice in the time
of the Plague there was a certain mattres suspected, Venice.
and cast into the inner part of the house of a certain commoner of the City,
and after seven years sought out again, which the good wife of the house
willed to be dressed up. For by lying long mustying in a secret corner, it had
gotten a great infection, by means whereof, the servants were forthwith
taken with a sudden plague. A story not dislike unto this, albeit he had it
not first from the party, was once told unto me, which else where I have
set down in Dutch, the effect whereof is thus: In the year 1564. when as
Coloine was sore visited with this sickness of the Plague, A strange story.
a certain Carrier, who dwelled four miles from thence, did by chance bring
certain wares thither, and again brought home with him (alas a most hurtful
reward for his labor) this infection, and in short time died of the same.
Six weeks after (for so long did the poison keep in without any harm doing)
died all the children in the same house, and all the servants, the good wife
of the house only remaining alive. This being done, the sickness stayed
without any hurt almost two whole months. But when as al men hoped that all
was well, behold, the widow that was left, did by chance give the shirt of
her son that was dead unto ye son of a poor body her neighbor, wherewith
the child being covered in the night, and on the sudden infected, died
forthwith together with the whole household, ye mother again excepted. The which
when after ye same manner as before, it had now stayed a long time, and at ye
length there came certain strangers to dwell with the widow ye was left, ye
plague which was thought to be dead, revived again, and together destroyed
the^ al, and continued so raging until January, until yt at the last it also
being conquered with the winter cold, died, not without ye great rejoicing of the
neighbors. There is another no less sorrowful example to be added, which I
have observed in our City of Breme. for a certain smith dying of ye plage, his
heir of ye same occupatio^, being too greedy of ye goods yt were left, Another
example.
alas together with the housholdstuf, brought both the sickness and death also
into his house. For when as among other things, there was a vessel to bath
in, made after ye manner of ye country, he with 5. of his family washed in
the same, Plague in vessel,
and the first night they were al infected with the plague, and died. Histories
doubtless worthy the noting unto the which albeit a man shall hardly find the
like, yet this which I may self have seen, I can^not keep close, namely, the
famous city of Venice, to have bin almost wholly infected only with vessel and
certain garments which were privily brought thither from Iustinopolis: albeit
through the singular wisdom of the magistrate, and the unweariable care of all
degrees, trusting unto the help of God, it neither continued long, nor took
away many. The like almost happened not many years since in the county of
Hoyen near unto us, Another example.
that a woman's garment being brought in a certain Village from the City of
Hamburg, where then the sickness was, within a very short time there dyed
fifty: and unless by and by through the grace of God it had bin stayed by the
labor and wisdom of the rulers, it had doubtless crept further, especially
through ye rashness of ye poor country people, and for want of counsel what
to do. Unto these I could add (unless some man might think the^ meeter to be
suppressed because of the outragiousnesse of the matter, Padway.
then to be put in story and published) such things as I my self have seen
in the city of Padway, namely, that the infection was wonderfully incresed
through certain things infected with the pestilent air, being partly cast
privily into other houses yt were sound, and partly given unto yo^g children
for gifts. The^ the which fact it is yet more wicked, which was told me as I
was writing this book, of a certain famous city in Germany, namely that there
were certain layers forth of the dead, and such as carry them to Church,
who being either hired of some for money, or through their own greedy
covetousness, that they might make their profit by the disprofite of others, A
wonderful thing.
infected the public Conduites and Cesternes with the infectious matter which
they had taken of the sores of such as were sick of the plague. O heinous fact,
cruel, wicked, and in the memory of man unheard of. The wicked Sorceresses,
whom they commonly call witches, deserve no question a great punishment, albeit
in many places too rashly, and sometimes unlawfully (let me here say this by
the way, He seems to dislike with certain others, the putting of witches to
death, an opinion which by the word of God cannot be mainteintd, quod pace
illorum dictum velim.
for learned men at this day have thoroughly canuazed this matter) they use to
be handeled, Moloch casting water or fire upon them on every side, who is wont
to be delighted with such sacrifices: but shall these poysoners which infect
with the plague, seem unto you worthy of less punishment?

Wherefore, when as we have now understood, of how great weight a thing it is
unto the preserving of the common wealth, and how necessary a medicine to keep
away infection, that we do not rashly receive either men, or things of what
sort soever, that come from infected places, and this so much the more (if we
believe Cardanus) by how much those places are more East (for the Plague
says he, like as other things, is wont as it were with the daily moving of
the heavens to go from the East into the West) when as I say, these things are
thus, our Preseruers must use such heed taking, De rer. var. 15. cap. 17.
that appoynting and ordeining Warders at gates, they receive no stranger, nor
suffer any things to be brought in, unless they have some written
testimonial, or sealed, being worthy credit of not being counterfeit. The
same also must be observed in Citizens, if peradventure (as they are wont to
do, which have more regard unto wealth then health* For through Sea, and Land
the mechaunt runs unto the Indes, Scribo^. Larg. de compos. medic. in
Praefat.
for wealth and gain) they come home from an other country, and from places
suspected. For albeit that this neither will be sufficient to take heed,
whilst rash headded persons, and full of prattle will some times go about
either to deceive the Porters, or openly to withstand this order as an unusual
bondage: yet many honest men will be made the more circumspect, and will
consider that our laws are not perpetual, but te^porall, which also are made
for their health sake, and shall last so much the less while, by how much the
more sooner and timely they meet with the sickness coming, and the more
diligently turn it away. For in a common adversity every man ought to put to
his helping hand, and to have more care of it, then if it were a private cause.

Objection. Hipp. 1. aph. 1. Romans 12.
But if any man shall think that it is against charity, for that I hold that
men and such as are our brethren, are to be shut out, of the which many fly
unto us as unto a sanctuary, as it were from a deadly enemy: unto him I must
make this answer, that I would have no man forsaken, Answer.
or in any case to be destitute of our help, but yet there ought to be a set
and steadfast way and order in using of help. True charity begins at it
self, but ends not in it self alone: But rather it stretches out it self
as far as it can, to every neighbor, and according unto her power,
imparteth her help with every man, and as Ambrose says of liberality, is
commended of her faith, cause, place and time. For what a kind of charity
should this be, to receive one sick sheep into the fold, and to bring the scab
unto the whole flock? If charity be a virtue (as no doubt it is a singular
and a divine virtue) it cannot be void of wisdom, which does as it were
give the shape unto true virtue, whilst (as it is manifest out of Ambrose) she
has her eye set upon necessary circumstances, with the which every virtue is
perfected and finished. For albeit charity have no end, as it is also usually
said, true love can skill no end to have, yet will she not be carried away
with rashness, and as I said even now, will not be void of wisdom. But after
what way and order, I think this duty of charity to be to be handled, shall
in that which follows be spoken more at large. Here therefore let be the end
of this first book.

Of the duty of a faithful and wise magistrate, in preserving and delivering
the common wealth from infection, in the time of the plague or pestilence. The
second Book.
Of those into whose house the Plague is gotten. Cap. 1.
THat part being finished, which rather concerns those which are whole,
then those which are sick, and therefore may be called a certain public
preservative, it remains that following the practice and order of excellent
Physicians, we treat in the same sort of that part of physic which is called
Pharmaceutica, that is, of the way to heal and deliver from sickness: if
peradventure either immediately from God, or upon some other cause this fierce
disease and cruel dragon (as Galen calls it) have assaulted the house of any
man. And yet let not any man look here to have particular medicines for
every private man set down, but yt which in this case the faithful and wise
Magistrate by public duty is bound to do: that a general way being found out
and ordained, whereby regard may be had both of the sick, and also of those
which are conversant with the^, the whole infection may be the sooner quenched,
and bring less hurt to the city.

Wherefore in the time of such sickness raygning and infecting, God first to
be called upon.
in the first kind we have said already at the beginning, that we must fly
unto God alone, and crave pardon of him for all our sins: in the latter kinds
after the calling upon of God, the preseruers must first of all and forthwith
have care of this, The infected house to be marked out by some token.
that the house infected be noted and marked out by certain signs and tokens,
as by setting of torches before ye door, which after ye manner of the Gentiles
use to be carried before the dead, or by clubbes betokening punishment, or
rolls of straw, or hanging up a black, white, or read sheet, signifiyng
sickness or death: and with all that the whole household be charged, that they
venture not to go abroad unto others, nor to receive any unto them, for the
space of vi. or vii. weeks at the least, if also in the mean season they have
used sufficient cleansing of the house and other things, which shall hereafter
expressly be spoken of. If any of his own accord shall come in unto them, let
him be bound by the same charge, but for a shorter time. In the mean season
if they have any thing to do abroad, they must cause it to be done by others.
For there ought greater care to be had of a whole society and fellowship, then
of a private family or household,

Objection.
But if any man shall think it an unreasonable and cruel law, to have sound
men shut in so straightly, and for so long time, especially in houses infected
with such deadly poison, and would also suppose this Prouerbiall chief
medicine to be better for them. With all speed, far off, long ere you
return again: and finally, that it is not convenient for the sick
themselves, especially if the house be not commodious, that they should remayn
so shut up, and not sometimes to use a more free air (for all keep not their
beds:) truly they which say this, seem to say neither nothing, nor al
things. Answer.
For I my self think it to be nothing safe, often to use the company of the
infected, and daily to draw the corrupted air. Therefore in the Chapter
following we will consider, by what means we may find remedy for these
streighnesses and discommodities, the which whilst they can be hurtful unto
none, they may be greatly profitable unto many. For to grant them free
liberty to keep company among others, should be too rash and barbarous, and
in a manner that which Luther also says in this case, Luther.
we should seem to follow them which would put lice into skins, or flies
into a chamber, or keep fire in their bosom, saving that these things are
lighter then that they may be compared with this evil. And when as we
manifestly find, that this only disorder is the cause, that the infection
many times is so speedily and so far and wide scattered abroad, we must not
by any means use the matter so, that through our own defaulte and negligence
we our selves increase our own wounds. Not that I deny, the plague sometimes
to come by the corruption of the common air (which notwithstanding is very
rare or seldom, and a thing yt many old me^ have had no experience of) and
forthwith to take very many, and scatteringly without infectio^: neither also
that I am ignorant that God being angry with our sins does sometimes use this
whip against us, and to drive us unto amendment of life, and to put us in
mind, of our obedience and service toward him (for this is apparaunt both by
profane and also holy histories) I do not (I say,) deny this, neither do I
affirm that in this case the remedies of man do any great good, but we ought
to hope well that these things will fall out but seldom, and when they do
fall out, they bewray themselves by very evident and especial tokens. As it is
plain concerning Aethiopia, by the testimonye of Thucydides: also when as God
punished the army of Maximinus, persecuting the Christians, with so great a
multitude of the^ that died, Eccl. hist. 9. cap. 9.
that the carkases were every where left unburied. Which also the history of
the kings reports of the host of David. Who would deny these things? 2. Reg.
24.
but I say once again, yt these things are seldom seen, and not agreeable
unto the plague of our countries, whose beginning, cause, and proceeding, be
that we may many times evidently enough lay down, therefore so much the more
diligence and care ought we to use, that the evil which through our own fault
and blame we have gotten unto us, or through our slothfulness received, the
same also with like endeavor and travel we should amend and drive away.

Wherefore, when a house is so marked, and as it were condemned for an
infectious Lepri, ye household either of their own accord and private charges,
if they be able to pay, or by the persuasion and charges of the preseruers, if
they be poor, must by and by send for the help of the Physicians appointed
for that purpose, Eccl. 38.39.
and making their prayers unto God, not grudgingly, but cheerfully, and with
good hope admit them and receive the^ in all things that shall be needful. For
it is to be thought, that the benefit which God here in will show, the same
oftentimes he gives by the Physicians as his ministers, no otherwise then the
good man of the house is wont by his stewards to give and point out meat and
drink unto his household. Leuin. Lem. de lib. Bibl. cap. 1. Sap. 8, cap. 2.
For Phisitio^s and physic are the good creatures of God and his ministers,
the which by the commandment of the Apostle we ought to use with thanks
giving. The which cause (albeeit besides the cause) let it be lawful for me
with the good leave of the reader, because of the unjust judgment of some
unlearned persons somewhat more at large in this place to handle.

For first of all Jesus Syrach, a man amongst the Hebrews singulerly endued
with godliness, wisdom, and the knowledge of things, and finally with the
Spirit of GOD, Of the use and praise of physic.
has left thus written: Honor the Physician, for the Lord created him for
necessity. Physic is from the highest, and of the king he shall receive
rewards. Eccle. 38.
The Lord has created medicines out of the earth, and a wise man does not
despise them. Give place to the physician, for the Lord has created him, thus
says Sirach: what I pray you means in this place this doubled and often
repeated word creation? what means his beginning and commendation, but that
we should understand yt the Physician and physic is the gift of God, the
which it is not only lawful, but also who^ we ought to use, when need is, and
necessity requires? and yt those doubtless are unskillful, and very ignorant of
ye counsel of God and block beads, who do judge physic to be needles and
unprofitable, when as without al doubt it was given of God unto mankind, for
the preserving and repayring of health sake. Scrib. Larg. de com. med.
Hereupo^ also the very heathen have acknowledged the excellency thereof, when
as they write yt not man but God was inue^ter of ye same. Polyd. de invent.
rer* 1. cap. 20.
For Apollo who^ they make ye Author thereof, they worshipped for a God: and
Aesculapius his son, who somewhat more finely garnished ye same, because of
his singular skill in the art at that time they vouchsafed ye like honor: and
Homer, Corn. Cel. lib. 1.
albeit he makes no mention of ye beginning of physic or of phisitio^s, yet
does he not doubt to renown it with a most excellent commendation, when he
says: that man which has in Physic skill, the same all others far does
pass. Which thing ye old roman emperors acknowledging, did pay yearly unto
phisitio^s a very large stipe^d, Lib. not. hist. 29. cap. 1.
of 205. Sestertia (as Pliny reports) when as they paid unto ye professors
of other arts but only an hundredth: albeit in ye times following they were
again by a law made, banished ye city. Which was enacted by reason of the
boldness of certain unskillful persons, who did abuse physic. For covetous me^
set on fire and blinded with the hope of gain, are often carried headlo^g to
the adue^turing of any thing, and sometimes refrein not from yt which is
horrible to tell. Who neither mindful of the oath of Hippocrates, nor of the
honor or safety of themselves or others, range up and down like robbers
where they be freelye without punishment. But we who being enlighted with the
light of the Gospel, ought to esteem of every thing not by the abuse but by
the lawful use, do in such sort use it, that we acknowledge it to be given not
by the counsel of man, but by the benefit of God, for the prolonging of life,
so far as concerns outward helps and aids. The judgment of Luther in a
little Dutch book of the plague, set forth at Wittenberge in the year 1527.
is most grave and godly, and a doctrine fit for this our business in hand:
God (says he) has created physic, Luther.
and given the mind, that every man should have care of his own body, be in
health and live. Who soever will not use these, when as without the hurt of his
neighbor, he may, the same betrayeth his own life, and there lacks little
but that before God he is made a murderer. For by the same reason he may
despice meat and drink, raiment and housing, and trusting too much unto his
faith, say, if God will, he can preserve me without al these things. Then the
which folly this is yet greater, that he which after this sort casts the
care of his body, and not seek that remedy against the plague, which he may,
may hurt and infect others also through this his negligence, who peradventure,
if he had suffered himself to have been looked unto, had remained unhurt and
alive. Whereof it comes to pass that he gets unto himself the blame of
an other man his death, and commits murder unto God. Such men do in deed
no otherwise, then as if a man in a common fyring* would not come and help
the City, but let the fire alone, that the whole City might be burned:
namely, upon this trust. Doubtless if God will, he can without water quench
the fire. But friend, thou ought in no case so to deal, nay it is
shameful and unlawful, which thou perswadest thy self: but rather use
remedies and medicines, and do whatsoever any way may help, perfume thine
house, Orchard, and street, fly the infected places, and men infected,
whereas thy service is not required, and so behave thy self as one willing to
quench, and not maintain the public flame, etc. For the words which
follow, albeit they be spoken very finely, yet at this time I purposedly
pass them over.

Away therefore with this more then barbarous opinion, and Cyclopical or
Giant-like stubbornness, whereby many call and defame Physic, as superfluous,
or an Art only to pick men's purses, as they do all other liberal sciences,
yea and philosophy it self as a certain sophistry, which thing Plato also
himself does, for fault not of the things, In Gorgia.
but of those persons that profess it.

Objection.
But if any man shall say: if the use of your Physic be so necessary, and
divine, as you affirm, wherefore then does Syrach himself, 38
whom you have cited in the place by you alleged, bydde the sick go unto
God, and to desire health by prayer? Why does Saint Ignatius a most godly
bishop and martyr call, Epist. ad Ephesians. Theodor. dialog. 1.
only Christ the bodily and spiritual Physician, and in death also (I say
not in sickness) the true life? But I will also my self give the adversaries
a weapon which with me is of no small force* when as I departed out of Italy,
Sebastianus Laudus a singular man, the Reader of Physic at Padway, and my
master (whom for honor sake I name) for a perpetual remembrance of his
faithfulness toward me, wrote with his own hand in my book: Remember that
only God does cure diseases. If then only God, what need is there of others?
Does God want servants for to help him? If Christ be the only Physician, which
takes away our griefs, as the Prophet is witness, and as he himself has
testified by so many exeamples in the new Testament, whom shall we need besides?
For surely that is done in vain by more, which may be done by the fewer. And
of this judgment there are also many found among the Christians, not unlike
unto the old heretics called Euchitae. But I answer, that albeit God needs
not the help of any, but rather is the only Physician, as well of the body as
soul, Answer. Esai. 38. 4. Reg. 20. Tob. 6. 11. 3. Reg. 4. 8. Joseph. 2.
and yt we do confess al health to depend on him, and to be to be craved at
his hand: yet nothing lets, but that the Lord and master may commit many
things unto his servants, and do by their hands, what he will: like as every
work man uses tools, unto whom notwithstanding the praise of the work done,
properly is neither due, nor ascribed. And I said before ye God will be asked
of us, and without means many times will give nothing unto us, yt which
means he has made for this end, that we should use them unto our profit, like
as Christ himself, and holy men of God, when as they could obtain them (for
otherwise the grace and power of God is not tied unto them) used them, and were
wont to use them. Wherefore when as these say that God only cures diseases, it
is to be referred unto the chief cause, which is God, not unto the
instrumental cause, as are men. And Syrach, when as in the beginning he had
commended the instruments themselves, and means, as it were divine and
healthful means, least happily any man trusting unto these, should cleave
unto them as the principal and chief causes, and should forget God, in the
end of the Chapter, as it were in the use of these things, he does admonish
us, that we have GOD before our eyes in our whole work, that we plye him
with prayer, and request prosperous success at his hand. As if he should
say, Physic in deed is a divine and excellent thing, but without the power
and grace of God (which power is obtained by only prayer) it brings forth
no happy success. Which was no doubt the meaning also of Herophilus,
Herophilus.
albeit a profane, and Heathen Physician, when as he says, That Physic is
both nothing, and again, that it is the hand of God: nothing (I say) as I
understand it, of it self: and the hand of God, joined with the grace and
power of God, and used in season and rightly. Then the which in mine opinion
nothing can be spoken more truly and Christianly. And the self same may we
say, if it be lawful to compare great things with small, The sacraments and
medicines are means.
of those means which are set forth unto us unto the health of the soul by
Christ, as these are for the halth of the body. Although some which think
they can cunninglye blind the eyes of wise men, or steal fire from Jupiter
out of heaven, are wont greatly and wickedly to extenuate or lessen the
dignity of these also, Theod. 2. Fabul. haeret.
when as with much a do they can allege nothing but the abuse and faults of
the receivers, and do only bewray the stinck of the Astrodutiorian and
Messalian heretics.

But least any man might think that I serve mine own turn, whilst he
hears me so diligently pleading for Physic, I will not pursue any further
the commendation of a thing sufficiently praised of it self, but will join
yet one article more unto this present Chapter, Question.
very necessary in my judgment in this cause. For a man may ask a question,
because that so earnestly and diligently I persuade all companying with the
infected with ye Plague to be to be avoided, how I think those poor women to
be to be dealt wtal, who in these infected houses, either in health or sickness
fall in travail, (which thing to have happened unto many, and the which for the
most part have dyed, I my self can be a live witness) Ought they to be
forsaken of the neighbors? What like vncurtesie in the memory of man, has
there been hard of? Here is need of a dubble answer. A duble answer.
First if any women moved not with rashness, but Christian charity and love
(the which assuredly we owe one to an Eccle. 3. 7.4. Romans 12.13.
that afterward they come not without discretion by and by unto their
household, unless having changed their apparel, and for a certain time they
abstain from the company of others. Secondly, that which more preseruers in
this case also to keep a certain order, that they get midwiues and other good
honest women, especially the wives of the ministers of the Church, of the
Surgeons, Apothecaries, Physicians, and those whom we appoint to carry
forth and bury the dead, if there shall be any fit, and will do the same,
for the executing of this charge. There they shall in no case lack the help
of woman kind, albeit they have not always at hand those which they are wont
to have in time of health, after the example of those, which by reason of the
Leprie are separated from the company of men. Let them therefore require no
more of others, then they would have others require of the^ in this case. For
so does charity bid, not to seek the things which are her own, if it cannot
be done without the hurt and danger of our neighbor.

Of building of certain public houses, called Plague houses. Chap. 2.
I Promised in ye chapter before going, yt I would set down a way, whereby such
as had rather go out of the infected houses, or the sick yt are desirous to
change ye air, may be profitably provided for. The which, yt it may fitly and
wisely be done, our Preseruers must go about a work something greater and
more chargeable. For I will yt two houses large enough, and in every point fit
for that purpose, which shall be called, Plague houses, be built of matter
convenient, in a place and air, good, both for the^ that shall use ye same,
and also for the City: in such sort notwithstanding yt not so much
gorgeousness as co^modiousnes be sought, and that the charges be reasonable,
and the use necessary: of the which severally we must briefly entreat.

And first of all concerning the matter, the same must not be clay, The matter
of the Plague houses.
lome, turfs, or straw, but wood, stone, lime, because that putrifiyng does
more easily happen, and the infection hang more longer in them, then in these.

Secondly, touching the place and situation, The place.
whereunto the air is also annexed or knit, this is to be observed, that it be
either in some out corner of the city, or (yt which I had rather) without the
City: not low, but open unto the Sun, and high, and by a river side, if it may
be. For the farnesse from others will further the let of infection: the highth
will yield a more wholesome air, and make the Sun, which refreshes all
things, to have more passage unto it: the river shall receive al ye filth and
excreme^ts, which in such houses is wont in great abundance to be heaped
together. Hitherto also pertain large orchardes within the precinctes and
compass of the same: also green walking places, gardens, in which are
wholesome trees, pleasant grass, sweet herbs, flowers giving forth pleasant
savors far and wide, and finally there must be springing waters.

Now the manner and form of buylding is after such sort to be thought upon
and devised, as the commodity and necessity, The form.
and not gorgeousness does require, as I have said before. That largeness
therefore must be kept, which is agreeable unto the City not in Geometrical,
but Arithmeticall proportion. Let the highth be twice as great as the breadth.
Let the Chambers also within be of a reasonable largenes, furnished with
Chimneies, such as the wind may blow through, not dark nor close, the
windows, as also the whole building, opening rather to the North, and Eeast,
then unto the South or North: there must also be Bathes there, of the which in
this our cause there is great use. And this whole manner of buildinge
appertains unto many things, and plainly shows, how great their error
is, which do so buyld the common Hospitalles, that the wind cannot pearse
into them, then the which, especially in this disease, Of common Hospitals.
nothing can be thought and devised more hurtefull. Neither is it any
marvel, if oftentimes the poor soul that is brought hither, dye so much
the sooner. For albeit he be not sick of this disease, but of any other
lyghter sickness, or also of a simple fever: yet being received in that
impure air, laid upon foul and stinking beds, he shall seem to be
choked, and to dye violently. I will not now speak, how indiscretlye they
which are sick in these houses, are oftentimes provided for of meat and
drink, and other necessaryes. Of which negligence they one day shall give an
accounte unto GOD, who being rulars in these offices, deal so vnfaythfullye,
when as they are no small cause of the death of the miserable sick persons.
Diligence therefore must be used, that all such houses, if it may be, be
builded by some Brook, and in a place (as has been said) open unto the
wind and air, that they may be through blown, and things defiled may be
often washed and cleansed. For the impure air may very much hurt even them
that are whole, the which daily experience shows. Also I said, that they are
to be builded in an high place, with many windows, especially toward the
North, from whence the air is more healthy. That ye windows also ought often
to be opened, I need not tell, for the thing it self does teach it. All
which things, if they be not diligently observed, they will bring more
hurt then profit, and they were better to be burned (I speak of many common
Hospitalles) in such a time of the Plague, then with hurt to be suffered, as
it is the counsel not only of Physicians, but also of Philosophers, and wise
men in Common wealths. Marcus Varo being sometimes at Corcyra, Varo.
and seeinge folk lie sick commonly in every house, bringing in the North
wind at new windows, and shutting up the South windows, and altering the
gate of the house, is reported to have preserved his companions and al his
family in health.

So Tholosa a city of Aquitania, Tholosa.
famous in respect of the Byshopprick, university, and high court, when as
commonly it was wont to be visited with a continual plague, because that the
houses in the tops or upper parts toward the high streates being builded
with certain appentices (under which men go safe from the rain) did hinder
the blowing through of the wind, Leui. Lem. 3 de occul. not. mirac. 3.
it was by the kings proclamation commanded unto all the inhabitauntes, not
only to take away those appentices, but that they should forecut and draw
in from the very bottom even unto the top, such houses, as seemed too much
to narrow the publik way. With woondefull pain taking and speedy work every
man plyeth his business, a man would have said, that they meant to pull down
and build up a new the whole City. But what was brought to pass? I will tell
you that, which I may say truly: for I was an eye witness, the winds
having somewhat a more free entrance, it made a notable drawing up and blowing
abroad of the vapors, and the plague did not so often haunte the City, as it
was wont to do, and did also less harm. A rare example of wisdom, the
which albeit it were not done without great charges, yet if the case should
so require, it is worthy the following, especyally in our plague houses, in
whose setting up it may more easily be taken heed of, that they may be so
builded, that afterward they need not be pulled down again. And because I
have once entered to speak of the hurtfulnese of ye close air, Of the
hurtfulnes of close air.
I hope I shall do a thing worth the travail, and such as shall refresh the
weariness of the Reader, if I shall allege a certain few, and the same very
fearful and strange histories, In append ad fin. 9. ca. and lib. 1.
concerning this matter.

In Hieronimus Cardanus in his book de Variet. rer. it is thus read: The 23.
day of July, in the year 1556. there happened a wonderful thing, whereat I
my self was present: Iacobus Philippus Cernuscus a month ago, wills a
priuye to be dug up out of the earth, and to be sieled, roofed and vauted.
When it was finished, that ye vaut might be made sure, he commands it to be
shut up. Twenty days after he opens it, he bids the wooden pieces,
wherewith they made hollow the vautes, to be drawn out: one that was hired
goes down by a ladder, when he came unto the middle of the ladder, he fell
down dead. The master, when as he saw him not to return, goes down him
self, and when he came thither, he by and by dyed. They that stood by put in
the third, who being on the middle of the ladder, said: be of good cheer, I
will bring up the other, but when as he once put his head under the vaute, he
straight way fell down dead. The fourth fell down dead likewise. The fifth,
called Matus (which in our tongue is a fool) being a very stout fellow went
down, but he put not in his head, and with a hook pulled out one of the dead.
Thereupon being made somewhat bolder, he came again, and went down so
far, that he put under his head, and by and by fell down. When they had
pulled him up, and perceived that there was yet breath in him, with using
helps by little and little they got life of him again, and sense, yet he
remained dumb until the rising of the Sun the next day. I, when as he
begun to speak, asked him certain questions, but he only remembered, that he
went down: they put in also a dog, and he was drawn out half dead. They
uncovered the place by the commandment of the Magistrate, at the mouth of the
den they see without any hurt, running water. Thus much Card. And because no
certain cause appeared, there were some which supposed, that a Basiliske
Serpente lay lurking there, which Basiliske, after the opinion of the common
people, is thought to come of the Egg of a Cock, being hatched by a Toad: The
fond opinion of the generation of a Basiliske.
the which I willinglye with the learned and most fine Writer L. Lemnius, the
Physician of Ziricaeum do think to be but an old Wives tale: L. Lem. 4. de
occul. not. mirac. 12. Diosc. ca. vlt. and in hunc Mat. ibidem.
When as rather the stench, poisoned breathes, filthynesse, strong smell, and
stinck, are they, which come out of foul and filthye places, take away the
breath, and sometimes strangle a man. Although that there is no cause why any
man should doubt that venomous beasts, which lie lurking in such holes, do
sometimes work the same.

The like unto this was sometimes told me by an eye witness, and such a one,
as no exception is to be taken against: to wit, the most honorable and
reverent L.L. Georg, of worthy memory, Duke of Brunswike, and Bishop of
Bream, etc, of a certain Fountayn of Petershag, A fountain of Petershag.
(which is a Castle under the Bishop of Mind) breathing out a wonderful
infectious savor, which when it was sometimes scoured of the filth, whatsoever
living thing was put into it, was by and by choked, and by death (that I may
speak with Pliny) made trial of the force of this water, and that so long
until at length casting in, and settinge on fire a vessel filled with ship
pitch, and herbs and sweete-flowers, it was so cleansed, that afterward
there might be going into it without hurt, and every manne might occupy of
the springing water thereof without harm.

The lake of Puteol.
With these stories agrees that of the Lake of Puteol, near unto Naples, into
the which a Dog being cast, dies within a little space: if when you have
taken him out again, you plunge him in the stream neereby, he reuiueth. Also
that which I my self have seen at Menapis, in the Lordship of Burchbrull
(which is under William of Braunssberge a most noble Gentleman, William of
Braunssberg.
and excelling as well in all kind of virtue, as in the praise of a most
ancient and most honorable pedigrew) of a certain Wine cellar newely
builded, casting up so sore a smell, that it could serve for no use. But more
of this sort might be brought, if I did not avoid tediousness, and being too
long. These therefore may suffice, concerning the matter, situation, and form
of the buylding: I will go forward to recite the wealth, number, and use of the
same.

Fourthly therefore, The riches of the Plague houses.
provision must be made for the rich, wherewith our plague houses are to be
furnished: which being once appointed according unto the estate and ability of
every City, it is to be hoped, that by little and little, through the
lyberalytie of good men, they will wax greater, and increase every day.
Although in this case no other riches are sought after, then such as are
needful for the maintenance of those that need, and the preservation of the
buylding. And because the Plague does not always reign, therefore there shall
not need to be any yearly charges made, but, as I have said, so much as
shall be requisite for the reparations: If there be any overplus, that shall
be laid up, either for the necessity to come, or to be to bestowed upon the
use of the poor.

Now I said at the beeginning, Two Plague houses.
that two such houses were to be builded: namelye, the one for such as are yet
sound and well, but yet by reason of the company at home, which they have
had with the sick, are to be suspected and feared: and the other for those
which lie sick, infected with the plague.

And as for other points, they may be like, but they must be convenient way,
the one from the other. For it has been marked, that this sickly infection
has been increased, eue^ by the enclosures of ye walls, and standing and
touching of the houses together. And they must in such order be severed the
one from the other, that in receiving the North wind, and Sun beams, the
one be not an hinderaunce unto the other, nor be any let to receive the free
air: especially that the South wind out of the house of the sick with his
blaste, bring no disease and plaguey vapor or ste^ch into the ground of the
whole and sound. Therefore also it shall be more conueniente, at that side to
have no windows at all, or else to keep them shut.

And hereof now also (that which in the last place was set down) appears
the use of these houses. The use of the plague houses.
For, when as we judge this disease to be by all means to be avoided, as a
present and deadly poison, the which unless it be diligently taken heed of,
does most undoubtedly infect, therefore the first use of this new buylding shall
be, to receive those, who are infected as it were with a deadly lepry, that
the other citizens may be in so much the less danger. The which of how great
weight it is, if any man will believe me, who neither have any cause to lie,
and am sorry that there are many, who in their books do lie notoriously (let
it be lawful for me to speak so with Galen, in a good testimony of my
conscience) I can show by many most true histories, yt which partly I have
seen and lived, and partly have heard of others worthy credit. For when as
being yet a boy, I went to school in the City of Dauentrie, where was then a
most flourishing school, one of the scholars was taken with the Plague, A
scholar of Dauentry.
which dwelled in his brothers house, surnamed Hercules, because of the
singular strength of his body, my bourdfellowe, who, because he was removed
beetymes into a private house, unto the which others had no access, never a
one besides was infected with this disease, or died. Afterward, when being a
young man I studied Philosophy at Colain in the College of Arts, a certain
gentleman our schoolfellow, one amongst many, A student of Colain.
when there was at ye time no plague, died of ye plague: to wit, because his
disease being known, he was by and by carried unto a peculiar and an appointed
place for this purpose. Three years after, when I dwelled at Paris in the
College of Monachus, I saw among two thousand boys only one cook visited
with this sickness, and by and by carried aside unto a little cottage, which
was builded in a large Orcharde for this purpose, to die there, A Cook of
Paris.
the rest of the company remaining altogether safe and sound. At the length in
the Cities of Venice and Padway* yt which it delights me often to remember,
when as there I haunted the Physic Schools, I saw somewhat hot
beginninges of the plague, the which notwithstanding by this wisdom, and
putting a part into such houses (for they have them always in a readiness)
and by seuering the hole and the sick, besides other kinds of policy, and
pain taking, in a very short time for the most part were appeased So true is
the common proverb, He that will fly smok, must fly the fire.

The second end shall stand them more in steed, whom the danger in deed is
nigh, but which yet are not infected with the same. For when as the houses of
many are very vncommodious, and more apt to nourish the corruption, then to
remedy the same: also when as the men that dwell in them, are often poor, or
servile persons, or weak of nature, which do tremble at the very name of such
a sore disease, whereupon also they are in the more danger, I would so have
them carried out of their infected houses, that they should forthwith be
brought in ye plague house, and there in every point after the same manner to be
handled, after which I said, they were to be handled before, when as they were
shut up in their own houses, saving that here they may have free air, and
liberty to go abroad, if they will walk forth, for the recreating of their
mind sake. But how many days are requisite for the cleansing of those, which
are so carried forth, that they may freelye return again into the City and
company of men, because that the same time neither ought nor can with safety
enough be prescribed and appointed unto al, this judgment must be left unto the
Physicians, as it were unto the Priests for this cruel leprie. To which
purpose so speaks Luther in his book of the Plague, Luther.
handling the same matter, which we now have in hand: If GOD (says he) in the
old Testament willed those to be severed, and put apart without the City,
which were defiled with the lepry, to avoid the infection, how much more
justly may we do the same in this dangerous sickness, that forth with, so
soon as one is infected therewithal, he either of his own accord remove
himself, or cause him to be removed, that the infection may in time
bequenched, not of that sick person only, but of the whole society and all
the City, the which, if the infected have free leave to go out unto others,
may by this means be infected. For such is at this time our plague of
Witeberge (he speaks of the year, 1527.) namely, that it may seem as
begun only by infection, so also gone thus far as it is. For the air
(thanks be to God) is hitherto pure and healthye, and of mere rashness and
negligence some, and the same in deed very few, have been infected: albeit
satan with unwonted fear do trouble us, and make us cowardharted. For with
sundry crafts the enemy does sport and play in the hearts of men, and does
them strike with fear most vain.

Therefore this counsel of so most wise a man is not lightly to be regarded,
but diligently to be followed as I think, so long as conuenientlye we may,
to wit, when as the disease is yet in the beeginning, and has not infected
many, Eccle. 18. Pers. sat. 3.
nor assaulted the common wealth in many places: whereunto this our counsel
chieflye tends, that it may rather be a forebewaring of this disease, then
an experyence of the same. For when the grief through long delay has gotten
strength, there can scarce any thing be done certainly and wiselye, but we
go at all adventure, and many things are to be suffered: like as the
Master of the ship seeks out many things at hab nab (as they say) when as
cutting now the seas, he is doubtefull of the dangers and also of his life.
Not that I would have men at any time go from the right rule of reason,
albeit the success answer not according unto reason, 2. Aph. 52.
which should flatlye be against the counsel of the reverent old man
Hyppocrates, our Physician. But it comes to pass, it comes (I say) to
pass, that as in the heat of battle, and amongst weapon (as is wont to be
said) laws are silent or mum, so also in this streightnes and sorrowful plight
of things a small regard is had, either of the best or rightest order. For as
there one while the stander bearer, one while the defender of the same,
sometime the soldiers of the rereward, or Sergeaunt of the band, and
sometimee also the general of the army, by whose appointment all things use
to be well governed, are on the sudden taken away: even so it fares here,
where no less slaughter, nay some times also a greater happens, not only
the common Citizens, but also sometimes those, in whose hand lies the
authority of ordering this policy, which we describe and set out, are unlooked
for pulled away, and together with the ruler of the stern, is the stern lost
also. The which case to prevent and meet withal in time, this our order and
platform such as it is, was taken in hand and set forth for.

Whether it be lawful for Christians in the time of the Plague to fly, and
to leave their City with a safe conscience. Cap. 3.
NOw albeit I may seem already to have spoken much in this matter of the
seuering of the infected: yet because of the affinity or kindred of the cause,
and diversity of opinions, I will join hereunto a very common question,
disputed not only by the Divines, but also by the learned and Christian
Physicians: namely, A question.
whether in the time of the Plague it be lawful for a man for a season to
forsake his City, and to fly with a good conscience. Of the which matter
because there are sundry opinions, I will briefly and plainly rehearse the
reasons on both sides, and in the end also will set down my judgment, which
shall be a mean between both, and gathered out of the fou^dations and grounds
of the parties at variance.

That it is lawful to fly.
The former therefore say, that we read not of any of the Saints and holy men,
which feared not death, and therefore that they feared Ephe. 4.
That no man ever hated his own flesh, but rather to nourish, cherish, and by
all means to maintain and preserve the same. Abraham (say they) for fear of
death, Genesis 20.
called his wife Sara by the name of sister, and had rather to make a lie, the^
to come in danger of his life. Jacob fled into Mesopotamia, that he might not
fall into the hands of his brother Esau. The same does David whilst he flies
from king Saul, Psalm. 3.
and his own son Absalom. Elias otherwise a most bold man, and who with his
own hand had slain the Prophets of Baal but a little before, yet feared
with the threatenings of Iesabel the Queen, conueighed himself a side into the
wilderness. Moses when as he was sought after by the king of the Egyptians,
fled into Midia. Therefore (say they) it is not only lawful to fly death, but
other also the whips of God being angry, as hunger, tyraunts, burnings,
ouerflowinges of waters, cold, Ruth. 1. Leuit. 26. Ezech. 5.4. Hierom. 14.
Deuteronomy. 28.
heat, captivity, wild beasts: to be short, all kinds of diseases, agues,
disenteries, uncleanness, the Leprie, the french pockes. etc. Which things
sithence they are so, it shall be much more lawful to fly the plague and
Peter being bold, and having trust, walked Mark. 16.
And Christ will not have the weak to be despised. Moreover, it is evident
by the doctrine of all Physicians, that such is the nature of infection, that
going from one subject and body into another, that is next and fittest to
receive it by due and convenient distance, it does infect and corrupt the same:
for two things are required, that there may be an impression, or printing and
marking: Gal. ad Pyson de Theriae.
namely, aptness of the subject and neerenesse. Therefore when as it is
manifest by their own judgment, and also daily experience, that the plague is
a most infectious disease, as which is wont to be taken by the drawing in of
the corrupted and poisoned air, they in deed give counsel, that it be
shunned, so much as may be, and amongst all kind of counsels* they
confess that none is better, then is speedy flying away, long tarrying forth,
Leonarth. Fuch. 4. de med. morb.
and slow returning again. For there is no way more commodious to avoid the
infected air, none more safe, when as the air must always be drawn yea
even against our wills, and it is drawn, such as it is. And they say that the
same remedy is with so much the more speed to be used, by how much the
evil is more hurtful and present. That we ought to fly the further, to the
end a more healthie air may be found. Finally that we must return the more
slowly, that we may be the more sure of the cleansing of the corrupted air.
Hereupon they think in time of the plague these three aduerbes, (quickly,
far, slowly) to bring more aid and safe remedy, then 3. of the best
furnished Apothecaries shops. For the plague (as Gale^ unto Piso is author) with
an airie body is as it were a certain dragon, and no common dragon, but such
a one who when as he is not seen with the eyes, does privily and by stealth,
lying as it were in ambushment, every where breath out his poison upon men, and
no common poison, but such as increasing most speedily, may in a very short
time devour the whole body of the common wealth. Mars. Ficin. de epid. cap. 6.
For the ill quality of the air (says Galen) is made a ready change unto
corruption: and when as men through the necessity of breathing cannot avoid
danger, they do by the mouth draw unto them the air it self* as a certain
poison. Wherefore the same Galen calls and praises Hypocrates, as a man many
ways wonderful, for that no otherwise then by the changing of the air, he
cured that Plague which out of Aethyopia had assaulted the Greeks. For when as
he had commanded a fire to be made throughout the whole City of Athens, he
cast into it not only a bare heap of wood, but flowers and garlands of most
sweet savor, also most fat smelling ointments, that the men might draw in unto
themselves the air thus purged as an aid and help for them. Lastly (say most
part in safety? How few also of those die, which depart out of infected
Cities, we our selves daily see: so that in this case they Demosthenes to have
place, the man that runs away, will fight again, Now if it be unlawful and
sin to shun such places, or by going aside to leave the^, then to live also,
the which notwithstanding is a singular gift of God, after a sort shall be sin.
But God will have us so long to have care of our life, which he has given us,
until he take it away, which gave it unto us. For we are in this world as it
were his soldiers, and for the most part set in the fore front of the
battle, from whence we must then only retire, when as it shall please him for
to call us. And he that either of negligence or rashness forsakes his
standing, shall be counted guilty of treason. And these for the most part are the
reasons of the^ that hold it lawful, as to fly death, so also according to
our power to fly sickness.

On the other side the other with no less earnestness affirm the contrary.
For when as diseases (say they) especially universal diseases, That it is not
lawful to fly.
are the punishment of God for our our Father, but rather to appear before
him, and patiently to wait for stripes, Wol. Musc. in explan. psalm. 86.91.
like unto boys, that have played some unhappy trick. For they say that the
examples alleged by the adversary part, make mention, not of the plague, but
of death, yea and of such a death as by the persecution of men is laid upon us
(between which two things there is great difference and odds.) For that we
may escape the hands of men, but not of God. And that men oftentimes have
unjust causes of persecuting, as tyranny, desire to reign, revenge,
covetousness, ambition, envy, anger, hatred, reproach, quarrellyng,
letcherie, incest, stealing away or desiring of another man his wife, which
things are wont to stir up men to persecute others: but that God does
punish no man save only lawfully. Heereunto is added, that the punishment of
men is not always taken in hand for amendment, but often for revenge of some
lewd act: For the magistrate (says the Apostle) bears not the sword in
vain, but is a terror and fear unto the wicked, and such for the most
part were the punishments of the old Testament: But God who is made a father
unto us in Jesus Christ his son, Prou. 2. Heb. 12. Ephe. 4.
does not punish us for revenge, but for amendment. For whom he loves, the
same he chastises. He is also faithful, and suffers us not to be tempted
above our strength: But tempts to make it knowene, Aug. sermo. 24. de tent.
Deuteronomy. 33. Jacob. 1. 1. Pet. 4. Psalm 17.
whether we love him or no. And him that abides this tentation, the same does
Saint James pronounce happy, because when he shall have been tried (says
he) he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised unto
them that love him. Hereupon says S. Peter, Well beloved, marvel ye not,
when as you are tried by fire, for this thing is done for your trial. And
David calls God, the Savior of such as trust in him: for there is a promise
of his, in which it is said: Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I
will deliver thee. Psalm. 50.
These things cannot be said of men which persecute us: like as neither can
that, whereas the book of wisdom calls God the lover of the soul: because
when as we call for his help, he cannot forget his office and mind toward
us: as he who has taken upon him the name of Father, as a most notable token
of his good will toward his creature, and given it peculiarly unto himself,
and does yet daily and bountifully by infinite benefits show his goodness
powered out upon us, and by his prophet Ezechiel cries out: I will not the
death of a sinner, but that he be converted and live. Again by Esayas, I the
Lord thy God teach thee only profitable things. Again, by the Apostle Paul,
that he will have all me^ to be saved. And can these things I pray you (say
they) be spoken likewise of angry tyrants, and those that revenge themselves on
us, such as are the examples alleged by the adversaries? Wherefore who would
distrust God so bounteous a father, and driven as it were by despair, fly his
chastizement taken in hand for our great profit. They say further,
especially such as are fullest of tongue among them, that it is regard the
authorities alleged out of the word of God and holy Scriptures: for that
Physicians seek the health of the bodies, not the health of the souls: of
which duty being mindful, they leave unto every man the care The band of
charity.
wherewith we are bound one unto an other: and especicially of ye charity of
those which live in one city, or yt which is more, in one church, and being
sworn together in one spiritual league and oath, are joined together as it
were into one loaf and body. For what a monster or strange thing (say they)
were this, if some one member of our body have caught some harm, or shall
peradventure catch hurt, shall it therefore be forsaken of the rest of the
body? or shall it not rather by all means be helped? Or if some one part of
the city burn with fire, shall it not therefore be succored, but shall the
town because of the danger be fled from and be forsaken? If a man fall into the
hands of thieves, and being wounded of them be left half alive, shall it
beseem us after the example of the Leuite and Pharisie to pass by him, and
not rather with ye Samaritane to come down from our horse, that is to say, to
come down from our own commodity, to repair ye hurt of our neighbor, and
courteously according unto our power to help and use him? That verily should
be to Heathenlike, and beastly. S. John says: Whosoever loves not his
brother, is a man slayer: and how does he love him who^ being left in great
distress by flying away he forsakes? Eccle. 1. Psalm. 40.
Is it not cast in the teeth of Sodom among her other sins, that they
forsook and cared not for their neighbors? And to speak at a word, what (I
pray you say they) shall be the principal article of God his last accusation,
and condemnation against us, saving for that we did not in time help those
which stood in need of our help, did not do them good, did not aid them
with our counsel, goods, and travel? Psalm. 41. Mat. 25. He means that by
the fruits of a true faith we must show our selves to perteine unto the
kingdom of heaven bought for us by Christ.
For (say they) we must after a certain sort buy heaven, whilst we live on
earth, if we will ever enjoy the possession thereof: we must buy (I say) not
for so much money as it is worth, but by a singular good will and love toward
GOD and our neighbor, through the only liberality of the Lord God, and the
stepping in of the Suretishippe of Jesus Christ his Son by his own blood,
who undertook for us, and bound himself unto his father.

To conclude, they which maintain this opinion (I speak of some, not of all,
for many of them have more wit) will have us so far forth boldly to
contemn and despise all both sickness and death, that they will scarce grant
any use of physic unto men, but contend that all things are to be committed
unto God alone: following the Euchite heretics, of whom I have spoken before,
who judged al things both troublesome and prosperous to be to be kept away, or
obtained by only prayer, contemning and despicing all other means.

We therefore, as we have promised, will now set in between these two parts
our judgment, the which if any man shall happily dislike, we willingly give
him leave to appeal whither soever he will. First therefore my meaning is not
by any means to undermine charity and the love of our neighbor, the which no
doubt ought to be more dear unto us then our own blood, Romans 5. 1. Cor. 12.
like as the son of God himself, whom we believe to be set forth unto us
by the father, not only for an attonment and ransom, but also for an example to
follow, gave his life for us. Further, in the former part I wish this, that
they would more diligently consider and weigh, what it is to be bound unto
some certain company, either by the common law of Citizens, or by public
duty. For albeit peradventure that we owe more unto our wives, children, and
kinsfolk, then unto others: yet that cannot be understood, when as the
question is of the helping of the common necessity of the whole weal public,
whereof thou art made a member and part to do service unto the universal body,
and the which also is far above all both affinities and kinreds. For, for this
calling sake, the which is no doubt of god, every man is bound to follow ye
other. He that forsakes not father and mother for my sake, is not worthy of
me. Therefore ye former law is corrected by the latter, and constreyned to give
place unto it: and he that before was bound unto his parents, so that he is
compelled to obey them, he afterward by a more general law ought to leave
Father and mother, and to follow God, calling him another way, that is, that he
either cleave unto his wife, or that which is of more weight, unto the whole
common wealth, or congregation of the Church. Yet let no man understand this
so, as if in the same degree we did not owe more unto our household the^ unto
others, but I speak of diverse kinds and conditions of duties. In the latter
opinion I find want in this point, that they do not plainly enough judge a
cause of so great weight. For albeit it be a certain Stoical hardness and
clubbishnes, with such stedfastnes to tarry for and abide so great an evil and
present danger: yet al me^ simply neither can nor ought to be bound unto one
law. For by what means otherwise, can so many holy fathers be justly excused,
which are read sometimes to have shu^ned such dangers, I cannot see. My meaning
is, neither to have the one too fainthearted, and as it were distrustful, nor
the other too hardy or rash: but there is a mean to be chosen of the^ both, in
the which we are wo^t to go in most safety, and wherein al virtue does consist,
and ye common people uses to say very truly. which things being diligently
considered, What is to be done in a plague or sickness immediately sent by God*
thus I say: if at any time it may be gathered by certain tokens, yt the plague
or any other kind of general sickness, has growe^ through no gross negligence
and sluggishnes of me^, or through any natural default (which in this point is
diligently to be marked) but rather by the manifest and mere indignation and
wrath of God, as sometimes it is apparent by the voices of ye prophets, and
other undoubted church histories of the time of our elders, then I think yt
the rod of God our Father ought in no case to be fled from. For who is so rude,
as to believe yt his chastiseme^t is a fighting in the night, which at al
adventures strikes them that come first to hand? nay rather let the faithful
persuade themselves assuredly of this, that albeit in the reigning of such a
Plague Noe, David, Ezech. 6.14.
and Job were present, yet through their righteousness they should but save
their own souls. For concerning such it is true, which uses to be said,
that it is foremarked out by God, who and by what means must be spared. But
if, as in these times it chieflye comes to pass, What must be done in
sicknesses procured by our own negligence. etc.
and as Luther says of the plague of Witeberge 1527. through our own
vnwarines and rashness, yt I say not envy and despising of good counsel such
common sicknesses do arise, and visit some certain city particularly and by
little and little infect those especially with are next, as pitch does those yt
touch it, I nothing doubt (I say) but that it is lawful for the godly and
wise to fly and shun such places, especially having a decree of the Magistrate
set down to that effect, as has been said before. For why, if my neighbor will
of purpose set a fire his house, shall not I fly from the flame thereof? But if
it be also ordained by the authority of the Magistrate, that he yt has no
stomach to tarry, may depart, setting his things in such order before hand,
that nothing be wanting unto any body, which in these distresses should be
greatly needful: his conscience in this case may be altogether free: but if he
command it, there can be no resistance with a good conscience. For the same in
this behalf is behooueful oftentimes, which is in great fires and burnings of
houses, to the que^ching whereof, because al persons are not fit, some certain
in some cities, are appointed, who only undertake this charge, and is not
lawful for others to come run unto it: or that which is done in the besiegings
of cities, that old men, women, children, weak persons, who may be only a
cumbrance, and no help unto the common wealth, be for a time put a side into a
more convenient haven, until the city be delivered from the enemy.

And this way I both a Christian, and also a Physician, leaning upon the
grounds of Philosophy and divinity, without affection and love to the parties,
(as in other matters) the which has always done much harm to all truth:
moreover diligently examining the reasons on both sides, with a well advised
mind have judged, that the parties at varia^ce may be made friends, unless
of striuers they will become wranglers. But yet if any man (that I may repeat
this again) will peradventure complain as one not contented, I grant him the
Apostles, let him appeal unto what higher judge he will: or returning to the
old fathers doubtless worthy men and famous for godliness, learning, and
wisdom, let him renew and wage his law a fresh. I being dispatched out of
these matters, return to mine own business.

Of carrying forth of the dead, and accompanying the corse to the burial.
Cap. 4.
IF it now fall out (which is usual in such a state of things) that some
dye, which are anon to be carried forth and buried, because such a matter
requires diligent heedtaking for the letting of infection here also must be
seen what way may be found out by the preseruers, that it may be done with as
little danger as may be. And it consists chiefly in 2. articles, to wit, by
whom, and how this thing ought to be done. Here therefore it shall be needful to
follow the custom of our Elders, who had a certain kind of Monks* whom,
because they were for the most part unlearned, they were in some places called
Ignorant brethren, Ignorant brethren.
or Begardes, as if you would say, Keepers of the sick: or Lollardes, because
they mourned for them that were dead. Whose office was, to attend upon the
dead, which required their service, but especially, to serve such as had the
plague, and the same privately, sometimes also by admonitions to strengthen and
comfort them, and to put the dead in coffins, and to carry them to burying. A
custom verily not to be despised. And there is extant or abroad a certain
treatise, which goes under the name of Saint Hierom, but falsely, in which the
first degree of orders in the Church is ordained to be of them, which burye
the dead, which office now a days is counted most vile. But howesoeuer it
be, there must needs be some certain appointed, and hired upon a public
stypende, men not of ill name, nor spendthriftes, nor of the very basest
condition, of the which some shall be called Sockers, or Buriars, or Dressers
and layers forth of the dead: other Tumbe or Grave makers: others Cleansers
and carriers forth of the dead: and their office must be to dig graves, to
make Coffins, and to put the Corses in them, to carry them forth and bury
them. Moreover also in such manner as we shall hereafter set forth for to
cleanse, wash, and make clean the infected houses, and al things appertayning
thereunto, so far as of them shall be required. And these being thus hired,
shall eftsoons be by an earnest oath, and certain penalty set down
restreined, that they go to no other nor make graves for any other, the^ such
as lie sick of ye plague, or are dead, but yt they keep themselves either at
home, or go abroad marked with some mark, as a white wande, or some such
like thing: neither yet so notwithstanding that they mix themselves in the
company of me^, or come near unto them.

I would moreover have the^ admonished, that they persuade them selves to take
in hand and execute this charge vile and reprochefull before men, not so much
for lucre sake, as for the common band of charity and humanity: but yt they
should know yt they do a most godly work: which sometimes holy me^ of God, nay
Angels themselves are read to have done.

Therefore that they behave themselves soberly, Hist. eccl. 9. cap. 8. Tob. 1.2.
Deuteronomy. 24. Bull. 1. de orig. cr.
and quietly, and honestly use the corses of the dead, as which shall be again
the holy houses of the souls, and renewed again with their souls, albeit for
a time only they have departed from them, shall rise again out of ye earth, and
being lightened with heavenly glory and divine brightness shall live with God
for ever. We do greatly esteem, Certain comparisons.
and give singular reverence unto those infants of great princes, whom we think
shall in time to come possess the kingdom, and be rulers of so great honors,
and shall we despitefully or irreverently handle those bodies, in the which we
shall one day see our God and brother Jesus Christ after like sort clothed, and
shall reign with him for ever and ever? It is an heinous offense, by any
means to violate temples made by the hands of men, and he which did ease
himself in the temple of Apollo Pithius, is noted with an immortal infamy,
and thought to have committed a most great offense, how much less shall it be
lawful for us, to handle despitefully and rashly the temples of the holy
ghost, as if they were the carkases of brute beasts, after the manner of the
Cinik Philosophers? them down, but handle them softly and handsomely, lay them
down and cover them, it is therefore much more meet and comely, reverently
to lay down our dead that sleep in the Lord, in this bed out of which they
shall be raised up unto life immortal. What

But some man may ask this question, Solemnity and honor in burial.
what solemnity then, and as it were public honor shall there be, wherewith the
dead are wont to be carried forth unto their grave? In sundry cities sundry
customs are observed, but we in this case require as little solemnity as may
be. Not that I deny it to beco^e christians to be honorably buried, but these
times require other manners. And because that now pride creeps in by little
and little, as in times past through the covetousness of Mass Priests, and
through abuse defiles a thing otherwise commendable. Budaeus and Va^aublus in
France.
I have known great men, who have by will diligently provided, that they
would be buried without all pomp. But these are outward things and
indifferent, for the which either admitted or omitted no man ought to be
judged. For albeeit the prayseable custom be not rashelie to be despised,
yet it is reason, that the solemnity give place to necessity: which
necessity in the judgment of all wise men, is not subject unto law, but the
law ought to serve and be subject unto it, which might be proved by many
examples, if it were needful. But if men can not otherwise be persuaded, but
yt there must some solemn fashion be used, the same ought to be most moderate
or measurable, least any hurt might grow thereby unto the whole society or
fellowship, and least (as that same Cato said) in death it self we might
seem to be ambitious and proud.

None of the kin to go into the houses of the infected.
Furthermore because it is the manner in some Cities, for such as are near in
kin at that time to go into the house of the sick, there must commandment
be given, that this be not lawful for any: for the houses of diverse are
very straight, and stinking, which stinck moreover is not a little increased
with the breath of sundry men, and may do very much hurt to tender and
weak natures, and such as are not used to it.

Again, None of the infected to accompany the corse.
none out of the infected and corrupted houses must be suffered to accompany
the corse, albeit custom require it never so much: likewise as we have
before appointed these things to be diligently observed. The same is to be
judged of heaps of children that are scholars, who in some places are wont
to be and sing at burials. For they are always in more danger of taking the
infected air, by reason of their tenderness of age, and unwary kind of diet.
All which things that they may by one way be avoided, I lean unto this
opinion, whereas I have said before also, that all multitude of people is to
be shunned, that this custom be so long broken of until the public
sickness cease and assuage it self. For the ceremony is not so much to be
regarded, that for it sake we should indaunger our health. For ceremonies
ought to serve us, and not we ceremonies. And we have been long sithence
persuaded, that what soever of these things is done, that it is not done for
the help of the dead (as our Auncetors have fo^dly believed) but for the
comfort of them that be alive (as S. Augustine speaks in another place)
namely, whilst they see, that even after death there shall some regard be had
of them, and that there is hope of another life, which may comfort in us this
sorrowful departing. But if any will pretend and allege the duty of charity,
the which by this means may seem to be diminished, and as it were withdrawn
from the poorer sort, they shall easily be pacified, when as they shall see the
same order to be observed in all. As for such as moved with a singular zeal
shall more earnestly urge and call for this old custom, in them their zeal is
to be praised, but knowledge is to be required. They must be instructed
therefore, that they may learn in what things the duetyes of sincere
godliness and chastity do consist, That the true honor and true burial
customs, is the praise of virtues, and remembrance of valiant deeds done,
the which albeit it be lawful in deed to solemnize with outward shows, yet is
it not always expedient. To be short, that the public health is more to be
regarded, the^ zeal of a few private persons, that I say not the will of
superstitious men, not rightly instructed: for too hot zeal and joined with
ignorance is superstition.

And these things as we have said, What superstition is.
the Preseruers must command diligently to be kept: whereunto also they shall
add this, that neither the chesting of them, nor the carrying of them forth to
their grave, be done either too slowly, or too hastily. For the one may bring
danger of increasing the infectio^, to wit, Le Lem. de occult. not. mir. 2.
cap. 3.
by carrying of ill vapors or reekes from the rotten carcass, and sometimes
also intolerable savors, and does greatly hurt the hole: the other has
sometimes been hurtful unto them that have been thought to be dead, but were
not yet dead in deed. Lib. 1. de peso cap. 1. Plin. 7. cap. 52.
We know, says Alex. Benedictus, some to have been drawn to their grave by
the hands of the buriers half alive, others of the Nobles to have been put
into their sepulchers, whose life as yet lay hid in the corners of the heart.
One of the noble matrones so buried (namely at Venice) a little while after was
seen dead, who notwithstanding sitting up, and removed from her place among
the dead carcasses had revived, Certain histories of some that have been
buried alive.
whereof her torn hair, and breast rent with her nails were a great token.
Alas, how often being alive among the dead, did she call upon the gods in
vain? The same has been told me of a certain other, the which being
great with child at Padway, and thought to be dead, and buried, a little
while after in the very sepulcher, brought forth alive two twins, who with
their crying, admonishing the keepers of the Church in the night of their
miserable case, together with their mother were delivered from the danger. And
least any man should marvel that they could remain alive, who could not
choose but be choked by reason of being kept from drawing of the air, let him
know that it is the manner of the Italians, that worshipful houses have
peculiar places in the churches, to wit, large cellars and vauted, in the which
they lay their dead, put in no coffins, nor covered with earth. The like in
manner is manifest, and that by ye testimony of a public table painted and
hanged up at the Church of the Apostles, concerning a certain woman of
Coloine, who albeit she were chested, and covered with earth, yet delivered by
chance, and returning unto her husband lived with him a long time after. For
when as he which buried her, minded in the night time by digging up the grave,
to fetch away a ring which was left upon her finger being buried, with that
stirring and pulling, her poor soul being raised up again, which was
thought to have been departed from her body, whereas it was but only in a
sown, revived. Last of all at Tholossa in Aquitania I knew a poor fellow,
who being buried after the same sort but being neither put in a coffin, nor
covered with earth, returned again unto life, which falsely he was thought to
have lost, when as he was rather taken in a long trance, at that time when as
many dyed daily of ye plague. What shall I say more? It is no easy matter
among so many dangerous and great evils not to commit some folly and oversight.
Wherefore we must deal both wisely and courteously, least whilst we go
about to save the life of the one, we rashly betray the life of the other.

Of a Church yard to be placed without the City, and of the manner of
building of the same. Chap. 5.
THere remains that we speak something also of the place of burial, the
which in respect of ye rest, wherein we wait for life everlasting with God and
his blessed Angels, or bodies being laid in the earth, Koimeterion
is called a sleep Chamber, or as we usually speak, a church yard: of the
which, when as it is the opinion of all Physicians in a manner, that there do
arise from thence infectious and corrupt exhalations or reekes, which do
infect the air, and wonderfully increase corruption (insomuch yt also in the
keeping of a healthful diet, they would have men's houses to be far from
church yards) this care also must be taken in hand by ye Preseruers of health,
that laying their heads and purses together, they build church yardes in a
place most fit for that purpose without the City. Which thing besides the
profit shall not a little make also for the public decency and comelines, and
the keeping back of profaning and abusing the same, far unbeseeming christian
Cities and intolerable, as it is eloquently and gravely some where written by
Martyn Luther, whose words because I have judged the^ meet to be set down in
this place, I have thought good thus to translate: The judgment of M. Luther
of churchyards.
First of all (says he) I leave this to be discussed by the judgments of
physicians, who understand this matter better then I, whether it be done
without danger, to have Church yardes within the walls of Cities or no. For
truly I cannot tell, whether any vapor be drawn out of graves, which may
infect the air. Which thing if it be so, that shall be cause sufficient that
they be builded without the territory of the cities. For we have said a
little before, that all men at all hands are bound to resist infection, when
as God himself has commanded us to have care of our body and life, and when
as he bids not the contrary, to take heed unto ourselves from perilles:
again with a stout courage to despise dangers, when as the case so
requires, so that we may seem ready unto him alone, both to live and also
for to die. For no man lives unto himself, neither does any man die unto
himself: as Saint Paul speaks in his Epistle unto the Romans. Chap. 14.
And this I am assured of that among the old as well Jews as Gentiles, as
well godly as ungodly, this was the custom, to have their burials and graves
without the City, who notwithstanding were no less witty nor wise then we.
That which I have said, the Gospel of Luke does show, when as Christ before
the City Naim raised from death the son of the widdowe. For the text says,
that he was carried without the City to be buried, and that many followed him.
So that there is no doubt, eue^ by the usage of this one place, that those men
had their burials without the walls of the City: as also it is evident that
the sepulcher of Christ himself was without the City Jerusalem. Abraham
bought himself a peculiar place in the field Ephron, where all the fathers
used to be buried, whereupon also the Latin word has his original, that the
dead are said to be carried out, that is, to be carried out of the town or
City, which we call to be carried to burying. Albeit some nations used also to
burn the dead carcasses, Burning of the dead.
and bring them to ashes, that there should nothing remain, that might infect
the air. This therefore shall be my counsel, that following the examples of
these, we build our Church yardes also without the city. And verily as ours
of Witeberg is placed, not only necessity but also honesty and godliness
ought worthily to admonish us, nay to force us, that another should be builded
without. For it is altogether beseeming that such a place should be reverend,
and in a quiet room, aside from the high way, as in the which a man might be
with some religion and deuoutnesse, to think upon death, the resurrection,
and last judgment, and to pray. The place (I say) ought to be honorable and
He means not popish holiness, but a separation from common use.
holy, that no man should enter into it without fear and reverence: when as it
is to be believed, that there are not wanting there many of the saints and
elect of god. As for ours it is any thing, rather then a sleep chamber, or
church yard, nay it is almost nothing else, the^ 4. or 5. common streets, and
2. or 3. maket places, so yt in a manner there is no place of the city more
trode^ and more unquiet. Over this as well Cattaile as men do course day and
night. Into this every man has either a gate open into his house, or else a way
made, in this all things are done, and oftentimes some such thing, as ought
not to be named. Hereof it comes that all reverence and honor toward the
monuments, which are there placed, is key cold, neither are they any more
esteemed, then some vile Golgotha, into the which the carcasses of brute
beasts are cast aside: so far that the very Turk does not suffer his
Church yardes so irreverently to be profaned, as we in name Christians: when
as it were meet, as I said before, in this place for us to renew the memory of
true godliness, of death, and of the resurrection, to think upon the lives of
holy men that lie buried here, and to give He speaks not of worshipping the
dead, but of thinking reverently of them.
honor unto their ghostes. Now how can these things be done conveniently
in a place lying so open and common unto every body? Truly for mine own part,
if there be any honor at all to be sought in burial of mine, I had as leeue
be buried in the River Albis, or in a wood, as in such a Church yard. But if
it were in an other place severally without the city, whereunto there were no
common entrance or passage through for every body, then doubtless it would
seem a thing religious, honorable to behold, and holy, which might stir up
the comers thither unto the study of godliness. And this my judgment, he
that list may follow: If there be any better thing revealed unto an other, let
him use his own judgment. I am not Lord over any man. Thus far the opinion
and mind of Luther, the which I have labored to interpret and translate not
so eligantly, as faithfully and plainly, when as it seems a matter of great
weight, of which we entreat, and that of greater weight, then commonly it is
supposed to be. For, albeit it be reported of certain people, that they use
every man in his own house to keep their dead put in Coffins, like as we in
a manner as fondly bury in Churches, such as many times are not worthy of the
high way: yet that is too barbarous, and unless they be well dressed with
many precious things, intolerable.

Now, concerning the situation and manner of buylding, The situation of the
churchyard.
it shall be more agreeable unto reason, that it be lying more toward the
North, then the South: and that it be set rather in a high and dry place, then
in a low and wette place. For as it has been said before, when as there
aryseth always out of Church-yardes abundance of infectious exhalations and
breathes, and corrupts the air, the situation, lownes, and moystnes of the
ground, may not a little increase this inconvenience: which they witness, who
sometimes white linen clothes there. For many times they find that they
gather an unpleasant smell from out such places: by which means it likewise
happens, that often in low and foggy places, kitchins and valleys there
appears a certain fire gentlye touching without any hurt, the hair or
garmens, Aeneid. 2. and vrb. cond. 1.
as Virgil writes of the child Ascanius, and Titus Liuius of Seruius Tull.
For this comes of a certain fat moystnes, or clammy fatnes, which is there
more plenteous, whereof aryseth somewhat a thick exhalation or fogge, but yet
not so hot, that it can get up unto the highest regio^ of the air, much
less that it can get above it. Wherefore by reason of the coldness of ye place,
it is driven down, and either through the rubbing of it self hard together, or
by the restraint of the extreme cold, Fools fire.
is by the force of it own heat set on fire. As they also say of ye rouing and
wandering fire (which some call fools fire, Pliny names it Castor and Pollux,
ye Greeks term it Polydeukes) the which is wont to follow or go before such as
travel in ye night, especially such as ride or go by sea, not without some
frighting of the ignorant, which think it to be a spirit, whereas it is a
thing altogether natural and harmless, the which hurts no body. But because
we are fallen into the mentioning of this natural imagination, I will add
hereunto, Whether it be natural for dead bodies to be seen about graves.
that wonderful fabulment or tale, which Hier. Cardanus reports of certain
dead me^, that were wont to be seen about Sepulcres and Graves. The which,
least any man should think that I forge upon him, when as it is a thing almost
incredible, I will set down his own words: Dead bodies (says he) to be seen
in fields about graves, and especially murdered, De vari. rer. 16. cap. 93.
and not deep buried, and which in their life time were fierce and cruel, to
be seen I say, in the night time, and chieflye of such as are ignoraunte of
this, is a thing altogether natural: When as the moist and fresh body of
man in the grave, does cast up a vapor always of one likeness according
unto his greatness, which carries the shape of a man. Whereas in times paste,
when the bodies were burnt, and put in a vessel, no such thing was seen. This
says he, fearful doubtless to be heard, but much more to be seen, and
the which I rather refer unto a cunning mockerye of the Devil (for Satan
mocketh in the minds of men, and after the manner of Iugglers, makes many
sights to appear, by the which he drives the fearful either into a vain
fear, or else unto idolatry) then unto the truth of a natural thing, if so
be also that they be done, as they seem to be done. The which also may
hereby be understood, in that he says, that they are cheflye seen of those,
which are ignorant of the matter. For the Devil can sooner deceive these, as
who a good season have tossed these things in their minds, and in their
though and power of imagination do conceive and bring forth unto them selves
the fantasies and imaginations of such things, Vain imaginations.
so that they think they see outwardlye, the thing which they have imprinted
and shaped in their own brain the which is no new thing in those that are
sick of the Iandice, and in melancholic persons. And that such visions do
seldom or never appear unto stout men, because that by reason of their
couragiousnesse they never fear them, or do once so much as conceive
imagination of them, Theodorus Bysantius, and after him, De praestig. them 2. ca
24. Hip. de virg. morb.
the most worthy Physician John Wierus does testify: Wherefore, if Cardanus
had said further, that those spirits had oftnest been seen of Children,
women, fearful tender, and sick persons, who by reason of the weakness of
their mind and body, are troubled with continual fear and vain dreams, that
which he says should of me more easily be credited. But now I cannot choose,
but put it among the true tales of Lucianus. In these things I am to stay no
longer, if I shall only add this one thing, that those which do in such
sort asscribe all things unto nature, do oftentimes delight them selves in
vain with their own error, and do embrace the Image of Helena, for the
Goddess her self: when as the most of such strange woonders are often done
by the sleightes of Deuilles (as I have said) and many also rather by god his
miracles, whereof men can yield no reason, then by any natural cause. Cardanus
therefore a most learned man must pardon my being against him in this point,
for as much as by his own testimony, it is always lawful to doubt of a
general truth, how good soever the man be that affirms the same.

And whereas I said that the Churchyardes are to be placed toward the North,
it has the same cause, the which has been alleged for the building of the
plague houses. The northwind
For the wind which blows from this part, with his thinness and pureness,
does easilye consume and scatter abroad all thick and troublesome vapors,
and cleanses the air. Wherefore he will not bring any infectious smell, or
hurtefull breath into the City, the which we have proved to be usual to rise
out of such places.

The figure of the churchyard round.
Furthermore, although it be but a very small matter: yet that all the
circumstances may be agreeable unto the nature of the thing, it must be made
of a round, and not square, or any other figure, and compassed with a stone
wall. Why so? whether because this figure of al other is the most capable? or
because it is the most perfect? When as all other are found in this?
Verelye for both causes, but ye former is of less force, the latter has a
more fine signification. For when as oftentimes many are to be buried,
chieflye at that time, it shall be profitable, that the space be large, least
we be driven to break up and open some graves that are not very old, and
to make bare corses half rotten, which will be evil favored and lothsom, and
brings danger of infecting the air. The roundnes of ye figure betokens
perfection, both that which they that lie there, have already received, and
that also which they yet look for. In which consideration the heaven it self
is round, and those which we reckon for saints, and which are appointed unto
blessed eternity and euerlastingnes, unto the same we are woonte to paint a
round figure. For there is no end of the circle or spear. It may also signify,
that which the Greeks say: Al things belonging unto man, Al things after a
sort may be said, to follow the moving of the heavens.
are as it were a round circle. For when as al things with are under heaven, do
after a sort frame them selves unto ye first moving of the firmament, going
from life it self as from the East, unto death, as unto the West, they finish
their circle with the motion of the whole heaven: like as he which is returned
from whence he went forth, is said to have ended his course and circle.
Hereunto also appertain the grates of iron before the door of the Church
yardes, These mysteries of this section may most of the^ happily seem more
curious then needful.
and the doors or gates, when as they are opened, falling to again of their
own accord, and shutting themselves, that the brute beasts cannot come into
them.

But now it is time, that making an end of this Chapter of the place,
situation, figure, and ornaments of common buryall, I go unto other matters
of greater weight, then those of which we have hitherto entreated.

Of the cleansing of houses, and things infected. Cap. 6.
IT follows therefore in order, that when as the sick, and those suspected,
which have been with them, have now either been carried out, or the dead
buried, we speak some thing of the cleansing of the houses, and of such
things as are in them. For this industry or pain taking seems to serve for
many things, nay without the which all other labors are taken in vain, and
the mischief does eftsoons grow again, yea after long resting, taking again
as it were new strength, does sometime rage more fiercely, then at the
beginning. For truly without al question, it is a thing worthy the wondering
at, why oftentimes so many men die in one house, in the which some body has
died of the Plague. The which thing, when as none of us doubt to happen
through the poisoned air of yt infected place, we must altogether follow the
practice of the old Testamente, when as the leprye usual unto that time
accustomed to cleave not only in bodies, but also in garments, sheets,
walls, and other parts of the house, so that those things were not only to be
washed, but also sometimes to be burned. In like manner (I say) we must deal
here, when as the poison of the Plague is no less wont to infect al things,
and many times hides it self in the chincks and walls, and lies hid many years
doing no hurt, until that getting an occasion to do harm, it breaks forth
with great force, and infecteth as many as come with impure bodies, and take in
the same by their mouth, or other passages of their body, and cease not from
hurting, before that either the subjects fit to receive it are removed, or the
naughty quality of the air, be sufficiently amended and scattered. So Alex.
Benedictus tells of a certain mattres, A Mattres lying seaue^ years in a
corner.
which through the negligence of the servant being unwashed, and undressed,
lay cast in a corner a long time, and when as after seven years it was
brought forth, and occupied, that which in the mean season by means of lying
still, and of the cold, was unhurtful, being stirred up again with the heat
of the place and of men, and drawn in by the pores or small holes of the
skin, showed forth her poison, to the destruction of the whole house. I
recited a certain like thing before of a letherne garment, and diverse other
infected things, of which I had experience. For it is manifest and undoubted,
that the pestilente air may lie long in such places and household stuff:
the which, if it be stirred up, and get into a corrupt and impure body, it
very easilye kindles. In appen. ca. 9. li. 4. de rer. variet.
H. Cardanus indeed a man much red in histories, tells, how yt in a
certain Village called Lachiarella, near unto Millain, at the buryall of a
certain old woman, there were found two chests full of lynnen cloth, and
clothing, hydden for fear of wars by the space almost of thirty years.
The which being opened when as they curiously searched, as the manner is, they
found nothing corrupted in them, yet as many as were present at it, or touched
and handled the things that were laid up in them, either then or afterward,
dyed al within three days. Marcilius Ficinus also affyrmeth, that walls, old
iron, and such things as be made of wood, unless they be helped and remedied
by washings, perfumes, De Epid. ca. 24.25.
and fires, do keeepe still their infection a whole year, or more also. Also
that garments of woollen, and such like, unless they be often ayred, washed,
perfumed, or be hanged by the fire, or in the wind or sun, do remain three
years and more, infected. You know (says he) that the smell of an hoare
orange is kept many years in the box wherein it did hoar. Likewise, that the
smell of the moss or down in ye silk worm continues long, such as it was
before in his silk worm. Truly as oil is nourishment unto fire, Wool keeps
the infection a long time.
so wol is a norishme^t unto this infection, and does so nourish it, that it
does not only preserve it, but also increase and strenthe^ it. Also in an
other place: As concerning (says he) the disposition of the only air, he
understands the common and not the private air) only speedy taking is
sufficient: so when as al men, who soever they are, have remained three
months free from this sickness, it may be judged, that the air is now
purged. But be thou most warye in coming near unto, Alex. Ben. 1 de pest.
ca. 3.
or in touching of those things, which hold the infection faster then the
air does. The boughtes of fornaces or ouens in walls do keep the infected
quality longer then wood. Wherefore all things are diligently to be purged,
with fires, washinges, ayering, purfuminges, smells etc. Men for the most part
are cleansed in the space of 14. days. Houses, wooden things etc. in 21
days: clothes, garments, and such like in 28. days. Horses, money,
household, fardelles, and such like, unless you deal merueilous warily, are
wont to keep the infection a long season. Wherefore be thou watchful, warye
and wise, and provide for all things in order.

These things hitherto in a manner has Marsilius Ficinus, at the end of
which words, that I may begin, I do by all means exhort and admonish
our Preseruers also, unto whom I must return again, that they use especial
wisdom in this point, and diligently provide for all things in order. And
first, that they give commandment, as I have said, by whom this cleansinge
must be done, and secondlye, how it ought to be done.

Wherefore, if they be yet alive, Who ought to be appointed Clensers.
and in health, which were left in the infected houses, this charge must be
committed unto them, a threatening and penalty being set upon their
negligence. But if the house be clean rid of men, this business must be
done by those, whom we before have named Buriars, Carryars forth, and
Sockers or Dressers and layers forth of the dead. And these first of of the
company of men. Fourthly, touching settles, tables, garments of some price,
cloths, beds, etc. they must not only wash them with a special care, but also
soak them in lie, beat them, and hang them out on breathing in the air: For
if it be not so done, it is to be feared, least the infection be not
sufficiently no free vent, they do much longer keep, the hidden and imprinted
infectious poison of the Plague, then those which are in an open and free air.

Of keeping of those, which have been in infected houses. Cap. 7.
WHat order is to be taken for those which have been in company with the
sick of the plague, albeit I have made some mention hereof before, yet in this
place something is to be said thereof again, and that more expressly, for it
seems not to be convenient, yt they should go every where up and down at
their pleasure, or occupy their common trades, setting open their houses
straight after the dead corses are carried to burying. Therefore they either
have been with them of necessity, as household servant, which tended upon
the sick, and Physicians, Chirurgians, Preachers, which applied medicines unto
the body and soul, and briefly others that carried forth ye dead to burying:
or else they were with them not of necessity, Those that once or twice have
visited the sick of the plague.
as those which came not unto them daily, but by the way peradventure once or
twice to see them. These if they use some dilygence in cleansing their bodies
and garments, it shall be sufficient only for the space of 14. days to keep
them selves within their own houses, if so be that no worse thing have
followed. But they which have done the office of Physician and Chirurgian, it
has been already set down, that these ought to refrain the company of
other men the whole time of the Plague. The household, and such as have daily
kept company with the sick in one house, have need of a longer time to
cleanse them. But if ye be minded to give them leave to go abroad,
nevertheless for the auoydinge of infection, they must be forbidden public
Churches and other assemblies, unless they openly carry with them a little
staff, or white wand, as a token of the plague, and that notwithstanding they
diligently shun ye company of the sound. If any shall refuse so to do, they
are to be punished by a sharp decree of the Preseruers, that for the space of
six whole weeks, they venture not to go out of their houses, yet ought they
much more straightly to be kept in, Such as have had the plague.
who themselves have had the Plague, although now they be never so much
healed of it. For in such a cleansing there needs the space of two months.
But they of all other most straightly, which presently yet now have the Plague:
of the cleansing of whom what ought to be decreed, because they have yet now
to wrestle with death, it cannot be set down. For albeit they be for the most
part weaker, then that they can go abroad out of their houses, yet it
sometimes falls out, that the sickness grants them truce for certain
days, when as the poison cannot go so speedily unto the principal members,
nor take the Castle of life, being let either by the thickness of the
body, or by the natural strength of the bowels, or else by the less or weaker
quality of the disease. These then are wont willingly to shufle in themselves
among the assemblies of men, led either by a certain simple error, for that
they think, that they the^ selves shall be delivered, if they can rub their
disease upon others. For such wit has the old Devil the master of mischief
to indue men with false belief, and (as the common people says) to turn the
wheel, promising vain hope of health: or else they are led by error joined
with lewdness: that is, with a mind to commit a most notorious and cruel
offense, namely, to infect and kill many other with them. For some are of so
pestilent a mind, that they far exceed the pestilence of the body. He that
has not had some experience in the world, A pestilent kind of people.
nor seen the towns of many men, nor known the mind, will scant give
credit unto my words: but in truth I can boldly avouch, that I have seen
with these eyes, them, who, when as they have had the sore running upon them,
so that they could not doubt of the sickness, have thrust themselves into the
Church, and secretly have together with others received ye bread of the Lord,
and out of the same cup have drunken the wine of the Lord: I tremble at the
telling of it, albeit at that time there ensued hurt unto none thereby: the
Lord doubtless so providing, who does deliver us from all evil. But who
would not think such fellows rather Devils (I speak with M. Luther) then
men? Or at the least wise to be most pestilent men, then whom the pestlence it
self is more gentle? And as privy murderers, do one while thruste these
into the heart with a dagger, and another while these, the which it is not
known unto whom it may be laid, so these most notorious infected
murderers, and mad dogs, do here infect a boy, there a man or a woman. And
when according to their power they have infected all things, they prate that
their fault is to be laid unto none but unto the will of God. And they
rejoice and laugh in their sleeue, as if the matter were well done, when as
they hear of the miseries of others, of the which they themselves were
causes. O most cruel poisoning: the which ought by no means to remain
unpunished, nay is worthy either of equal or also of greater punishment then
the murders of common robbers. De varieta. rerum 15. cap. 8.
Cardanus tells how that it happened at Casalis a City of Salassia in the
year 1536. that certain conspired together (namely forty men and women
together with the hangma^n) that they would make annoyntment, wherewith they
would annoint the bars of doors, that they which touched them, might be
infected: and would also make a powder that being secretly sprinkled upon the
garments of men, should work their destruction: (the plague had been
extreme in that place a little before, and now was ceased) but their
conspiracy being found out, they were all put to death with singular
torments. They confessed also, that they had determined at a solemn pomp upon
a certain Saint his day, by annoynting the seats to slay all the Citizens,
and that they had prepared above twenty pottes for this purpose. They
attempted the same also sometimes at Geneua, and were executed. And is the
fact of these I pray you more heinous, then of those who^ I have spoken? Or
who would think that men baptized with the Baptism of Christ, and ordained
unto the kingdom of God, could fall into so great a wickedness? Who had not
rather live among beasts, the^ in one City with such altogether unworthy of
the names of men? Wherefore it behooves our Preseruers to be stout punishers
of so great enormitie or disorder, that for the common safety of the society
and fellowship, they suffer not such privy enemies and wicked traitors to go
scotfree, after the example of most worthy common wealths, of which there
has been mention made.

The duty of such as be recovered of the Plague.
Further they which have been sick of the Plague, and now are somewhat
recovered, ought volu^tarily to admonish others, to shun their company, for
when as they, being in this misery have been courteously helped, having now
recovered health they ought again to consider, that they drive not others into
the same misery, the which were a trick of most unthankful persons. If God
himself (says Luther) in the old Testament commanded, that the Lepers
should be put a part without the City from the company of the people, for
the avoiding of infection, and that they should not be received again unless
they were judged clea^sed, it behooves us much more in this dangerous infection
to follow the same: neither in this case may we be unruly and disobedient,
etc. For I have before rehearsed more, spoken Christianly by him to this
purpose. In the which, to speak freely, albeit the counsel of seperatio^ do
greatly like me, The leprie of the old testament.
yet do I not think this opinion to be allowed of al, in the cause, wherein
this danger in the infectio^ of ye Leprous is thought to consist (unless
peradventure this sometime happen for the contempt of God his commandemente:
for their company was very straightly forbidden) into the mention of which
thing because I am fallen again, and have often before spoken of it, I will
not refuse to repeat it again in few words. For first it is not certain
that the Leprie of the old testament was a disease, hurting the actions of
nature, or curable by any counsel or remedy of man: nay in the opinion of S.
Augustine, De ciuit. dei.
it was rather a defiling and uncleanness, in deed not common, but especially
sent by God, then a disease of the body, and (as he speaks) rather a blemish
of the color and skin, then of health, or of soundenesse of the senses and
members. Wherefore the Scripture also does oftener use the word of cleansing
then of healing, when as it speaks of the curing of this grief. And in my
judgment certain famous Physicians do very well distinguishe this our
Leprie, which is called of the Greeks, Elephantiasis, from that of the
Hebrews, which of the^ is named Saharath, and of the which mention is made in
Leuiticus and in the Evangelists. For this disease (say they) is not of them,
which through error are wont to happen in six not natural things, where as
it is indeed a grief proceeding from the wrath of GOD, Amat. Lusi.
which according to the nature of the sin is wont to happen not only unto
the bodies of men, but also unto garments, and the walls of houses, in the
which those transgressors dwelled: according to the greatness (I say) of the
fault. For if the fault were small, certain small spots did arise in the
walls of the house: if it were greater, they did cleave unto garments: but if
it were a most great sin, then the body of the sinner was defiled with the
same. And those that were suspected of this Leprie, were judged of the high
Priest by the space of fourteen days, whether they were to be shut out of
the company of men or no. For there was no need of the help of man to the
curing of the same, but only of the hand of GOD. All which this (like as
many other) are now ceased.

But concerning this our Elephantiacall Leprie, Elephantiasis, or Leprie of our
time.
which does most greatly differ from this other, this is manifest out of the
books of Physicians, and nature of the same, yt it is a disease coming of the
fault of the bowels, and humors, very fierce and as it were a canker of the
whole body: the which in times past (as histories report) was peculiar unto
Egypt: and not seen in Italy before the age of Pompeius Magnus. What? that
even at this day it is more seldom in Italy, then in our country of
Germany, Ant. Be. de abd. morb. cau. cap. 98.
or the low countries of Belgia near unto it, or in France: the which some
write to happen unto the one, because of their vnsodden meats, and unto the
other by reason of the constitution or quality of the air: Lib 2. ad ad Glauc.
but how truly, see they, which make themselves so ready arbitrers, and as
it were vmpiers in weighty causes and controversies. For Galen thinks that
it is seldom seen in Germany, often in Alexandria, looking peradventure unto
his times: I with Amatus Lusitanus do rather ascribe it unto their ill manner
of diet. For they indifferently and without any choice or order feed on fish,
podware, some fruits, milk, Not. histo. 26. cap. 1.
and white meats. The Leprie called Elephantiasis is described by Pliny after
this manner, that it is said oftentimes to begin at the face, first in the
nose, as it were a little Lentill, anon going over the whole body, spottie,
of diverse colors, and the skin unequal, in some place thick, in some place
thin, with an hard or rough scab, and last of all increasing and eating the
flesh to the bones, the fingers and toes swelling both in hands and feet.
This is the definition of Pliny. That manner of curing is chiefly commended by
Galen, Gal. 11. fac. med. simp.
which is done by the use of Vipers flesh: the which I my self also in
Italy, have heard to be commended by most excellent Physicians, and have
seen also fitly used. But these things are not for this place. But this
heereout appears, that there is a great difference between the
Elephantiasis, that is the Lepri of this time, and that, when in the old
testament was an especial punishment of sinners, both as concerning their
nature, and manner of curing: the which Leonhardus Fuchsius has also observed
in his Paradoxis: Lib. 7. ca. 16.
but not in like sort Franciscus Valleriola in his medicinal enarrations. Lib.
6. cap. 5.


But some man will object: Objection.
yet both of them must be infectious, when as both that are infected with the^,
are separated from the company of men. I aunsweare, Answer.
what if there be not in them both the like cause of separation? For
peradventure they were for this cause separated among our auncetours from other
men, because it was a foulness and certain filthiness that God would not
abide in his people: as which it behooued to excel in the cleanness as well
of body as of mind: or for that they which were defiled with these spots,
should sustain some punishment: to wit, that both they should abstain
from the company of others, and others likewise from theirs: which thing in the
judgment of some was an Image of our excommunication at this day, which they
commonly call bannition or abannition, that is absence for one year. But our
Leprous are herefore removed from the company of men, because they have a
disease both grievous and also infectious: Gord. par. 1. cap. 22.
Albeeit to speak as I think, I do not judge the infection to be so great,
as many do suppose. Nay rather in my judgment that disease is more
infectious, which in our time we call the French pockes, because of either
the beginning or propagation and spreading from thence, and the which Joan.
Manard. judges to be a kind of Elephantiasis, Epist. lib. 7. Epist. 2. Iac.
Syl. in praefa. Isag. not. hist. 26. ca. 1.
but not truly in my judgment: albeeit that it be not so dangerous,
especially at this day, when as the force thereof waxes weaker by little and
little, so that we may hope that it will at length cease altogether, as of
the tetter which Pliny mentions, there remains at this day no tokens.
But as concerning the Elephantiacall lepri, I have often diligently enquired
of them, which were diseased with it, but I could seldom understand that
any was infected by their company, albeit those that are sound are often
conuersaunt with them, Leonb. Zac. 9. in Rha. ca. dephthis.
nay (that which is more wonder) albeit the sick husbands use the company of
their sound wives, and some times beget sound children: which should be
incredible, if the force of the infection were so great, as it is thought of
many for to be. Which things sithence they be so, and yet nevertheless they
are put apart from the company of other and that with great carfulness, for
what danger soever of infection, or at leastwise suspicion of infectio^: I say
again that which I have often said already, that there must far more
care be used in the infection of the Plague. But these things peradventure may
seem more at large debated then was meet: which the indifferent Reader will
easilye pardon me, if he shall consider that it is not unprofitable, that
sometimes we be put in mind of sundry matters. For this thing stirs up
wise men to a more diligent searching out of truth: which truth, as
Pythagoras said, is drowned and hidden in a most deep well.

An admonition unto every subject of the common wealth, to imploye his service
to keep away the common danger of infection by the plague. Cap. 8.
But peradventure there will not some be wanting, who with discontented minds
will speak against these our constitutions or orders, either for that through
lack of judgment they cannot thoroughly weigh and understand the matter, or for
because they cannot away with such counsel, whereby they perceive themselves
to be brought into order: for the common sort uses to be unwilling to bear
all yoke. But these are forthwith to have their answer. Such as think the
Plague to come always immediately from God.
As for those who persuade themselves that the Plague comes always
immediately from God as a peculiar and immediate whip, and therefore attribute
nothing unto the help of man, I can do no more but counsel these, to suffer
themselves to be better instructed. Such as can abide no order setting
themselves openly against our Preseruers, and will urge or be earnest for
their old custom and liberty, these I would altogether have admonished, to
consider, that they alone are not here provided for, but also their wives,
children and kinsfolk, yea the whole society and fellowship. What barbarousnes
then should it be, to be unwilling for a small time to bear that which thou
may safely do, to the end thou may be delivered from it, which if it
happen unto thee, thou can not bear but with the hazard of thy life? Go
to, who would not willingly in the time of war, or in the besieging of a
city, suffer to have some new laws, Le. Lem. 2. de occul. not. mir. cap. vlt.
but yet necessary for that state, by the Senate, or Lieuetenant of the
soldiers, to be prescribed unto him, by the which he understands that both
his goods and life, and also his country men's may be defended and preserved?
Nay who would not labor with all his might and main to keep away the enemy
from his borders, if he be absent: or to thrust him out if he be entered the
city? Who in a common ouerflowing of water, will not take pains to keep and
maintain the bays, to strengthen houses, to deliver cattle, to help men
swimming, to give if it be but a board to them that are like to be drowned,
if he can do no more? Who would not run and help the sheep, if the Wolf
somewhere breaking into the fold, should tear the flock? Who (I say) is
endued with so cruel an heart, which in these miseries would not both with
hand and foot, so far as he were able, bring aid in things going thus to
wrack and ruin? Who of tenderness could with a quiet mind behold these
miseries of his neighbors? O heart altogether deuoyde of all humanity, and as
hard as the Adamant, or rather brutish, that in this case thinks that there
is any place for sloth and sluggishenesse? Brute beasts help one an other,
and that readilye, if any trouble befall them from others: and shall manne
that has his name of manhood (which word conteyneth in it all kind of
duty) for the reteining of an unprofitable liberty in the grievous
affliction of a whole City, not be content to have commendable, commodious,
necessary laws, yet not perpetual, but temporal, prescribed unto him? And
according to the equity of these laws to have the common wealth, and the
safetye and life of his fellows mainteyned? Objection.
But (say they) the examples which you bring are unlike: because GOD is the
Author of the Plague, but men, or other creatures are the Causers of these. As
though any thing came to pass without the providence of God, yea or without
his divine decree. Answer.
As if there were any evil in the City, which God has not done. Amos 7.


But these things in times paste have been handeled by us. Go too, if we see
any manne to be pressed with hunger, do thou not think that by the
commandment of GOD we are bound to give him meat? Albeeyt he be a Turk,
albeeit he be an Heathen, albeeit he be our enemy? How much more then
do we owe this duetye unto our brethren, our neighbors, our citizens, whose
help we can never be without? Now if we withdraw our help from those
which are in such sort in need, be we not murderers before God? Saint
John says, he that loves not his neighbor, commits murder, and that
love does not remain in him. And such was one of the sins which GOD laid
against Sodom, as Ezechiel says, Behold these are the sins of thy sister
Sodom, idleness, riot, not regarding of her neighbor. After the self same sort
shall Christ say at the last judgment: I was an hungered and ye gave me no
meat, I was sick, and ye did not visit me, and if then it be so great a
fault, to deny meat, or not to visit the sick, how much more great a fault
shall it be, not to take away according to our power as it were present death
and destruction? I would to God that with these pratlers and contemners of the
public safety, the counsel of the most excellent and noble M. Luther might
find place, who so wisely, so godly, Luther.
and finally, so carefully persuades al kind of helps to be used, which by
any means may profit: and will by no means have any thing omitted, which any
way may quench such a fire. So behave thy self (says he) as one that is
desirous to quench a common fire in a city. The Plague is a fire.
For what else is the plague, then a certain fire, which does not consume and
devour wood or chaff, but the life and body? Therefore every one of us ought
thus for to think: if Satan by the will of God, either by him self or his
ministers has wrought us this deadly infection, I on the other side before
all things will pray unto God, that of his mercy he will take away the same
from us: Then I will put to my simple helping hand, both by perfuming and
cleansing of the air, both by using of medicines, and also in shunning the
infection, where my presence is not necessary, least I might seem my self to
have neglected some thing, or be cause of death unto others, who through my
negligence may take harm. But if God nevertheless will have me visited with
this sickness, or call me out of this world unto him, at leastwise I have done
that which was my duty, neither have offended any thing, either against my
self, or my neighbor. But where my service is needful, there I will let
pass nothing of all things which either can or ought to be done of me.
Behold this is that godly faith indeed, which does nothing rashly, neither
tempts God in any thing. Thus much in a manner after this sort has Luther,
but in Dutche. Therefore if such wisdom and fidelity were seen first in the
Magistrate, then in the Citizens, truly the Plague would be much more
tolerable. But whereas the one are too rash and careless, and the other
contrariwise too fearful, there Satan easily at his pleasure tosseth all
things up side down, and the misery does so far daily increase, that at
the length there is a pitiful plight of ye whole city. Miseries that happen in
the time of a common Plague.
For traffic waxes cold, there grows a dearth of al things, the Church
assemblies cease, charity is in ieopardy, al things are suspected, and as the
Poet says, The wandering guest does stand in danger of his host, the host in
danger of his guest, and fathers of their son in laws, yea seldom time
does rest between borne brothers such accord and love as ought to be. Due
honor is given neither unto the magistrate, nor unto parents, al discipline is
neglected. Nothing but trembling, despair, crying of yo^g children, a noise of
women, weeping, mourning, sorrow, fear, dying of families, falsifiing or
staying of testaments and wills, confusion of inheritaunces, wasting of the
City, decay of the common wealth, and to conclude, nothing is heard or seen
but al kind of misery. All which things they ought worthily to set before
their eyes, which do so little esteem of this cause, yt they will bear
nothing, no not for a small time only, for the sake thereof, the which is
both easy to be done, and unhurtful, nay profitable for them: but either
under color of religion, whose force they know not, or through rebellion they
despice commendable and profitable laws to the common wealth: and unthankfully
reiecte those, which give the^ healthful counsel with great travail, and
faithful carefulnes, which they may use and cost them no money: unto whose
ignorance notwithstanding in respect of the public profit, our Preseruers
ought in no case to yield: but rather ought to follow that excellent counsel of
Hippocrates, that they constauntly follow and continue in the same, which at
the beginning they have by grave advice thought most expedient.

Let every man think these things to be said unto him either in my name, or
in the name of the Preseruers, and earnestlye endeavor faithfullye to help his
distressed Country. Which if he do not, let him fear punishment both at
the hands of God and men.

Of the punishment of such as rashly offend. Chap. 9.
WHerefore, because that hitherto we have set down what is needful to be
done, neither have let pass any thing yt by reason might be said, or is
appertaining profitably unto the matter: and also have exhorted all men
diligently and earnestly unto the observation or keeping of these constitutions
or orders, it now follows, that if any man be found slack or unfaithful in
his office, that he, the cause being known, suffer punishment according unto
the greatness of the fault. For what shall it profit to have made many good
laws, if they be not kept? And they will not be kept, unless there be due
punishment upon the offenders. For such as are good, will of their own accord
do all those things which are best. For the law is not made for the just, but
for transgressors or offenders. The Magistrate also carries not the sword in
vain, but is a fear unto those that do evil. There is one has said very
well, yt no common wealth can stand without laws, that laws are worth
nothing, if there be no action: and that al action is in vain, if there be no
execution. Let us therefore begin at the beginning, and let us see, what
penalty is to be set down to every one that shall rashelye break the laws of
these ordinances, the which I protest that I fear not to make, if I should
be in danger to loose my life for the same.

First of all concerning the Preseruers themselves, The Preseruers.
albeit they shall be the rulers and overseers of these laws, yet they ought not
to claim unto themselves more liberty, then the highest Emperor his majesty it
self would have unto himself: who although he confess himself to be above the
laws: yet he says yt he will obey and be subject unto the laws. L. O worthy
voice. cod. de begib. Item L. princeps ff. de legib.
And truly equity does require, that look what every man ordeineth unto others
the same also he bear himself. It is ye saying of Isocrates, that the common
people willingly follow the same which they see their rulers to be delighted
withal. Therefore let the Preseruers by all means endeavor to maintein their
authority, and let them labor not only in name, but also in deed to be
Preseruers of health, and from their hearts to procure the common safety. But
if either they themselves shall do any thing neglige^tly, or of favor (which in
ye judgment of the very heathen becomes not a magistrate) bear with others:
by the decree of ye Senate or whole benche, which thing will procure them
infamy, let them be put from their office, and be brought into the order of
common Citizens.

Physicians, Chirurgians, Apothecaries.
Physicians, Chirurgians, Apothecaries, if they commit any thing through
oversight, which men never know of (for oftentimes such things may happen
(let them know that they shall have God a revenger. But if they shall be found
guilty of some light fault, let the^ recompense it with greater diligence. They
which cannot do all things so handsomely and skilfully as only ye most
excellent Physicians ca^ do, they are cleared by the law it self. For it is
always a hard thing to attain unto that which is rightest, L. lat. L. mag.
ff. de ver. and re. sig.
neither can we all be Hippocrateses or Galenes. As for such as have made an
open fault, that is of gross and purposed ignorance, have offended in that
the which for the most part all men of their calling would have done
otherwise, and better, let them sustain some arbitrary penalty according to
the pleasure of the magistrate, which may consist either in putting the^ out of
office, or abridging of their stipe^d, or finallye in impayring their
estimation and good name. Other faults are left to be punished according unto
ye imperial laws or constitutions and statutes of princes. In the mean season
both these and the ministers of the Church that follow, must abstain from the
company of others, or else sustain an arbitrary punishment.

The ministers of the Church, who are the Physicians of the souls, Ministers.
cannot easily offend in their office, if they be desirous from their heart to
be that which they are called, and show not themselves slow unto any, nor have
respect of persons, which does at no hand beseem them. Wherefore public
crimes excepted, if they shall do any thing negligently, Pro. 15.
or not behave themselves godly, we will leave them to be punished unto God the
vncorrupt judge, and searcher of things, and of the heart, or at the most
suspend them from their office, and in the mean season take from them a
months wages.

Among the Citizens, Citizens.
whosoever shall be found a breaker or transgressor of ye order appointed, let
him have punishment according unto the nature of his fault. If any man be
found drunken, Drunkards.
he is to be punished either by some public shame, or forfeyture of money,
observing the circumstance of person, occasion, oftennes, and greatness. They
that shall dance, Dauncers.
trim up or go unto public bathes, or be married, shall have some small
punishment: but if they get a special privilege, no punishment at al. For
there may such causes fall out, why some thing may be granted unto some, the
which ought not commonly to be done unto all.

They that shall adventure to bring into the city, Sellers and buyers of things
unlawful.
and to sell things forbidden, are worthily to be punished with the loss of ye
things themselves. The same punishment is to be laid upon ye buiers, if they
yet now have with the^ the things hole and untouched: otherwise let the
punishment be equal unto the price of the things.

Inst. de re. diuis. cum in alieno solo.
He that is found selling of profitable things, as meats, or drinks, in any
other place then in the place appointed, let him bear the loss of all that he
sets to sale.

Whosoever of his own private authority shall couetously increase the price of
things saleable above that is reasonable, Sellers above the stinted rate.
or above the appointed rate, let him be under the punishment of unlawful
vsuries, and for a time forbidden to occupy any more.

Whosoever shall not put away beasts forbidden, Penalty for not removing of
cattle and their filth.
nor carry away the filth which they make, let him be punished with a certain
sum of money: but if he throw it into the public street, let him be
punished double, and nevertheless compelled to carry it out of the City on
his own charges. If he shall forslow it, let the punishment be increased
according to the number of every day: or else let it be caused by the officers
to be carried away upon his double charges.

Dogs, cats, goats, etc. Dogs, cats, etc.
which severally belong to every man, unless he keep them at home, let him
pay an arbitrarie sum of money: and let it be lawful for every one yt takes
them, to kill or keep them, unless it may be proved to be done without the
negligence of the owner. Horses, if they break out of the stable, and run
away, must be restored unto ye owner. For such are not wont to run up and
down.

If any either stranger or citizen coming from infected, or suspected places,
Comers from places infected.
have not a testimonial of health, and of the soundnes of the things that he
brings with him, let him be shut out: and if he shall privily come into ye
city, let him suffer ye loss of his things, and concerning himself being
punished let him be put back for a time, or else shut out for altogether.

Keepers of gates.
The keeper of the gates which shall receive any coming from a strange place
without a testimonial of health, if he do it wittingly, let him for certain
days be imprisoned: but if he do it unwittingly, as it may come to pass in a
multitude passing by, yet he is to be punished with some money penalty. The
same is to be ordained concerning Inkeepers, and such as lodge strangers.

Comers out of infected houses.
Whosoever after the prohibition of the Preseruers shall dare to go out of any
house infected with the plague without an appointed mark, shall be punished with
a money punishment: but if noted with some mark, he shall rashly go into
other folks houses, or thrust himself into the company of me^, let him want
liberty to go out afterward, or let him be carried into the Plague houses.
The same is to be ordained against the^, which go out of one plage house into
another.

Contemners of Physic.
He yt being in health or sick shall contemn Physic, let him be condemned of
stubbornes, and counted as an heretic: unto who^ also afterward, less
benefit and duty is due from others, nay he shall be counted unworthy the
fellowship of Citizens. For he has tempted God, and with the rebellious Jews
required miracles, when as without miracles he might have had experience of the
grace of God.

Whosoever shall affirm, Forsakers of their city, etc.
yt it is lawful for christians in the time of ye plague without a lawful
cause, and consent of the rulers, to leave his city and church, he is worthy
the name of a schismatike: and if so be he so run away, he is to be deprived
of the freedom of the city. And he yt shall hold every plague to be as an
immediate punishment from God, is to be condemned of ignorance, and to be
despised as an evil speaker: as one yt lays upon God his own rashness, and
blame of his own rechlesse negligence.

They yt have charge about burials, Officers about burials, etc.
grave makers, cleansers, and such as are put in office about carrying forth
of the dead, if they refrain not themselves from the company of others, as
those that in houses infected have been of ye household (if they offend after ye
same sort) are to be punished. If they have at any time buried any that were
not dead, as we have said yt it does at some time happen, if they have don it
willingly, let the^ be held for murderers: but if they have done it
ignorantly, let the^ ask god forgiveness for their fault.

Inst. de pub. Iud.. Item lex Cornel.
If they shall steal away any thing out of houses that they had to cleanse, let
them be guilty of theft: but if they have given the same unto any other, let
the^ be guilty of giving of poison, and be punished with a bodily punishment.

Goers abroad before the time prescribed, etc.
If any man before the time prescribed, shall go out of his house without
license, and thrust himself into the company of others, he shall be bound to
begin afresh the time of shutting in, and be punished beside with an
arbitrarie punishment. But if the same party being infected before, and yet
scarce well recovered, or but meetly recovered, shall adventure to do the like,
he is to be accused of great unthankfulness, and to be deprived of all
benefits usual to be done unto him, and besides to be restrained with longer
keeping in. But if being now in very deed infected with the plague, he shall be
found to have committed this heinous offense, upon notorious and wicked
boldness, as a murderer, after the loss of his goods (if he be without
children) let him be delivered over unto the hangman.

Let these then be the punishments of such as offend rashly: the which
according unto the circumstance of time, place, person, age, sex, greatness of
the fault, and often committing of the same, the preseruers may either increase
or alter. Whatsoever penalties or forfaitures shall be gathered the same must be
bestowed partly upon the relief of ye poor, and partly employed upon the
plague houses.

A register or brief rehearsal, containing the orders set down in these two
books, Chap. 10.
AFter that hitherto we have set forth such things as we thought to
appertain unto the office of a faithful and wise Magistrate, in preserving
and delivering the common wealth from the infection in the time of the plague,
and have handled many things somewhat at large: it seems not amiss, to
repeat briefly, and after ye manner of a register, the more profitable and
chief orders: if happily any man have not either leisure, or else like not to
read the whole discourse: for so he may both the more easily remember the^,
and be less weary.

Therefore when as we shall be persuaded that it appertains unto the office of
the governors of the common wealth, not only to furnish the city with things
necessary, but also to keep away things hurtful and discommodious (amongst
which hurtful things are especially contained common and general diseases,
which hurt men by infection, such as chiefly the plague is) the magistrates
must beware of this, that here they give no place to slougth or negligence,
but rather with all endeavor, study, faithfulness, and wisdom, perform ye,
which they shall understand to concern the profit and health of the whole
fellowship and all their subjects.

And first of al, yt they command unto their subjects

shall be great barbarousnes, in other things to have good rules, and in ye
breaking in of diseases as it were of cruel beasts to use no wisdom, to make
no laws agreeable unto reason. Wherefore as the natural Philosophers do appoint
unto every sphere of the heaven, his mouer, and as it were governor: and as
common wealths do set over every office a several ruler: so also in ye care
of ye public health, some certain magistrates must be ordained, who both
indeed and name must be preseruers, and by their authority procure all matters
of this treatise, and yt in such order as follows.

First, they shall provide ye common wealth of being wicked persons they
persuade themselves to spread and increase the same.





In things concerning meat and drink, Theo. Tabe. de pest. ca. 8.
according unto the natures of the things and countries, and ability of the
buyars. Concerning which notwithstanding it is not easy by certain laws to
make prouiso, or exactly enough to prescribe, but only charity must needs
appoint the measure and rule of this equity.

Kyne, Hogs, Geese, and other filthye does greatly defile the air, and
yields norishment unto the infection.



And here the custom of the Sarmations shall nothing move us, who in the time
of the plague use to cast dead Dogs every where in the streets, to quench
infection with infection. For this is barbarous, and peradventure commodious
only for that place. But we must rather amend our air with sweet things:
and chiefelye by making every where great and bright fires and flames. For in
a general sickness the pureness of the air is a chief remedy, as
Hippocrates and Galen, and all ancient wise men do witness. And the fire
does cleanse, dry up and purify all things, and is unto the air, as it
were the Sun, soul, and life: Pli. hist. not. 56. cap. vlt.
Insomuch as look what that notable preservative Triacle does unto compound
bodies, that does fire unto the air, of all simple bodies, as in place, so
also in virtue the highest elemente: De var. rer. lib. 1.
the which let it be lawefull for me to speak with the leave of Cardanus, who
denies the fire to be an element. And it is very pretily said, Le. Lem. de
ocul. not. mir. 3.
By how much the air is better, by so much the mind is better. For men for
the most part are disposed according unto the quality of the air.

Dogs also, Cattes, Goats, and other

Wherefore such as cannot easilye be kept at home, as Cattes, it is better
that they be killed, then suffered, and in the room of them, to use ginnes
and mouse trappes.

scattered the present sickness far and wide.

Into whose houses the Plague is lighted, gives health: albeit when he will,
he can do it without them, which can do al things. But it is not lawful to
tempt him, neither ought we to ask miracles, when as without miracles, we
may obtain the thing which we require.

Hereunto also appertains, that regard be had of women in travel, which are
not to be forsaken for fear of infection, but if they be suspected, they are
faithfully to be helped, especially of the midwiues and other women, which by a
public stipend must be hired for this purpose.

Two houses, called Plague houses must infected is smaller. For in a great
company of sick persons, and in an universal visitation of the city, these
things will scarce be sufficient, albeit al things be well observed.

The Magistrate, when as the necessary persons and matters of the common
wealth

But if it be plain by evident tokens, that this punishment is sent
immediately by god, without the negligence of men, and natural causes, so
far of is it that we should fly away, that we ought rather patiently to
abide his fatherly correction, and humbly to pray for mitigation and slacking
of the same. But every plague cannot properlye be called the plague of God, but
comes sometimes by nature, sometimes by our negligence and rashness. In such a
case there is no doubt but that we may desire and follow al wholesome
counsels and remedies.



a stone wall, with grates at the entry, and doors falling too of their own
accord after they be opened, to keep out cattle.

After that the Corse is carried forth,

All those which are left alive, must be by certain laws kept in, such in
manner, as has been said of them household servants, which have been with
the sick. Those therefore which shall be in health among the^, if they will go
abroad, must, as well as they, carry a white rod in their hand.

Those which have been infected, and so so recovered, but yet not fully, may
not rashlye go abroad, until they be throughlye cleansed, unto the which the
space of two months is requisite at the least. But such as indeed are now
presentlye sick of this disease, may in no case be found amongst the
assemblies of men, as in the old testament it was not lawful for the leprous
to be in the company of the clean.



the last punyshmente of putting to death.

And thus far has hitherto been spoken of the duty of a faithful and
wise Magistrate to be used in the time of the plague. Which if it shall seem
peradventure new unto any man, albeit that in many places it is not
altogether unusual: let him understand that we go about a new work:
New, I say, in some place perchance, or at least wise in some part new, but
yet notwithstanding not unprofitable, or not necessary. And wholesome counsayles
are not therefore to be despised, Al new things are not to be despised.
because they are new: For all things, which now are old, and with reason
long ago ordained, were once new. Neither does it follow: this is new,
therefore it is to be refused. For is the hand of GOD shortened, so that in our
times he can reveal nothing, which was not known of our forefathers? Do
there not daily come abroad new medicines, the use whereof being unknown unto
our Elders, has been with great fruit and profit known unto us?

Wherefore they which judge thus, that which is unto any man straung and
unusual, the same by no means is to be received and allowed: do tie the
Magistrate unto too straight bands, to cut away from him all liberty, to
take advice upon most weighty matters, and such as he never before heard of:
Far disagreeing from the counsel of that Prince in Homer, who (necessity
enforcing) says He that can better counsel give, who so he be, now let
him come, for be he young, or be he old, most willingly the same I take.

When as therefore there are some Rulars over al offices of the common wealth,
who especially take charg of those things, the dooinge whereof is committed
unto them, least any thing should be done amiss, or disorderlye: I hope
that wise Magistrates will herein easily also agree, to receive this newenesse
into their common wealth. The which albeit it shall peradventure seem
somewhat hard unto such as are not acquainted with it: yet by use it will wax
mild, and by the profit thereof make it self by little and little more
commendable. But if quarrellars shall cry out, that I have taken some things
out of other Authors into this Treatise, I have examples, by which examples I
think it lawefull for me to do that, which they have done. How many
things, nay almost al things has Terence taken into his Commedies out of
Menander? Terence.
And Virgil into his poesy out of Homer, Cicero although of singular wit and
eloquence, Virgill.
nay the father of eloquence, was not ashamed every where out of the Greeks,
to conueigh so many things into his writings, that he may seem rather the
Translator then Author of some things. In the law, Physic, Divinity, the
new writers have almost nothing, or very little, the which they have not taken
from the old: out of whose books also they are not afraid to write out many
things word for word, and to stuff them in their works for the maintenance
of their cause, albeit sometimes not without suspicion of falsehood. And these
things they often do in the same matter which has sometimes been handeled
before by others: with how much more right I then who do handle a matter not
perhaps so very new, yet thoroughly and as it were from point by point, set
forth hitherto by no man, that I know, if out of the works of good Authors
I have fitted to my purpose such things as seem to serve the turn. It is no
hanging matter, to take from others that which a man may profitably use
without wronging any body. Aesops crow.
It is the part of Aesop his Crow vnbesittingly to garnishe her self with the
feathers of other birds not agreeing unto her, and vainly to boast of the
same: and it is the point of a wise man, from every where to take, and rightly
to apply to his matter, such things as are fit and profitable for the thing in
hand. For it is a great praise diligently to search the writings of our Elders:
but a greater, faithfully to keep the things found out: for they have by their
virtues opened the way of labor, and by their wisdom left unto us the path
of understanding.

Now if many of the things which I here require shall seem hard to be
compassed, because that some lack wealth, some opportunity, some wisdom: yet
is it not to be disalowed, yt the best rule be set down, according unto the
which, every man so far as he may, may order his matters. For ye example and
pattern, according unto ye which a thing ought to be done, ought in every
point to be most perfect, The most perfect way is in every thing to be set
down, though it cannot be by others attained unto.
that the following of the same may be most commodious. For whereas in a manner
nothing by following may be so set out as that it be made like to the first
pattern, nay that it will not many ways be thereunto inferior, this shall be a
great praise unto the follower, yt in the next degree he come near unto that
which he has purposed to follow. The Poet says: Look what we can attain
unto, some praise it is, though that we can perform no more: And of the wise
men in the gospel it is said in a common verse: They went so far as they
could go, where that they could no further pass, there stood they still. I
know it to be more easy to give counsel then to follow ye same: yet
notwitstanding the best counsel is to be given. For if some thing be wanting
in the setting down how a thing should be done, no doubt some thing will be
wanting in the action it self, that must according to that rule be performed.
There was never such an Orator as Cicero and Quintilian do describe unto us:
Nor such a Physician, as Galen requires: nor such a common wealth as Plato
shapeth, nor such a Preacher, as Erasmus painteth out: Nor finally such a
Church as Christ desires. These, I say, albeit at no time they have been
found so perfect, as of the^ they are perfectly portraitured, yet they thought
good to set a most perfect pattern of them all before our eyes, by the view
whereof all our thoughts and actions should be governed. Which things since they
are so, who can justly find fault with me, for that I require some things
more exactly peradventure then some common wealths by following can be able
to perform? Wherefore those which can plead no other let but want of
ability, will at leastwise take in good part that good and wholesome counsel,
which comes from a good heart: And concerning the rest, must pray earnestly
with me unto God the father, and Jesus Christ his son, the true turner away,
and driuer back of all evil, yt he will maintain sound in us the gift of
life, wc he has bestowed upon us, and preserve or deliver us from this
infectio^ of the plague, unto the glory of his name, the amendment of our
lives, and health of our souls: calling upon him after this manner.

A Prayer.
O God in all adversity
the only hope and stay,
Th'assured help and certain aid
of life of mine always:
Unmindful of deserved ire,
O Father help at need,
Spare and behold of people thine
the tears which they do sheede.
Regard us for thy Christ's sake,
with humble voice we crave:
And deal not with us guilty souls,
as we deserve to have.
How some time David for his sin
committed, grievous pain
Did suffer, holy scripture does
report unto us plain.
When seven thousand ten times told
(a miserable sight)
With rage of plague in three days space
did loose this joyful light.
But when with tears he did again
his sin confess and wayle,
Of frindly pardon at thy hands
forthwith he did not fail.
His wickedness, and also guilt
of wickedness committed,
Which uses to provoke thy wrath,
was by and by remitted.
We also now have made the like,
or greater far offense,
To which of pain is likewise due
as just a recompense.
But yet O God and father dear
with humble suite we pray,
That us most wretched wights,
in wrath so great thou will not pay.
Have pity Lord on us,
on us that humbly sue to thee:
And suffer not our prayers made,
in vain or void to be.
Unmindful of deserved ire,
O father help at need,
Spare, and behold of people thine
the tears which they do sheede.
Behold I pray for Chirste his sake,
in name of whom who use
All prayers unto thee to make,
thou cannest not refuse.
To whom, as coeternall God
with thee, like laud and praise,
Like honor, equal glory,
renown is due always.
Amen.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson. 1583.


