Mathematical Recreations.

Or a Collection of sundry Problemes, ^xtracted out of the Ancient and Modern
Philosophers, as secrets in nature, and experiments in Arithmeticke, Geometry,
Cosmographia, Horologographie, Astronomy, Navigation, Music, Optics,
Architecture, Staticke, Machanicks, Chimestrie, Waterworkes, Fireworks, etc.
Not vulgarly made manifest until this time: Fit for Scholars, Students, and
Gentlemen, that desire to know the Philosophical cause of many admirable
Conclusions.

Useful for others, to acuate and stir them up to the search of further
knowledge; and serviceable to all for many excellent things, both for pleasure
and Recreation.

Most of which were written first in Greek and Latin, lately compiled in
French, by Henry Van Etten Gent. And now delivered in the English tongue, with
the Examinations, Corrections, and Augmentations.

Printed at London by T. Cotes, for Richard Hawkins, dwelling in Chancery Lane,
near the Rowles, 1633.

TO The thrice Noble and most generous Lo. the Lo. Lambert Verreyken, Lo. of
Hinden, Wolverthem, etc.
My honorable Lo.
AMongst the rare and curious Propositions which I have learned out of the
studies of the Mathematics in the famous University of Pont a Mousson, I have
taken singular pleasure in certain Problemes no less ingenious than
recreative, which drew me unto the search of demonstrations more difficult and
serious; some of which I have amassed and caused to pass the Press, and here
dedicate them now unto your Honor; not that I account them worthy of your
view, but in part to testify my affectionate desire to serve you, and to
satisfy the curious, who delight themselves in these pleasant studies, knowing
well that the Nobillitie, and Gentry rather study the Mathematical Arts, to
content and satisfy their affections, in the speculation of such admirable
experiments as are extracted from them, than in hope of gain to fill their
Purses. All which studies, and others, with my whole indevours, I shall always
dedicate unto your Honor, with an ardent desire to be accounted ever,

Your most humble and obedient Nephew, and Servant H. VAN ETTEN.

To the Reader.
IT has been observed by many, that sundry fine wits as well amongst the
Ancient as Modern, have sported and de^ghted themselves upon several things
(...) small consequence, as upon the foot ^a fly, upon a straw, upon a point,
nay ^on nothing; striving as it were to show ^e greatness of their glory in
the smal^sse of the subject: And have amongst most solid and artificial
conclusions, com^^sed and produced sundry Inventions both Philosophical and
Mathematical, to solace the mind, and recrea^^ the spirits, which the
succeeding ag^^ have embraced; and from them gleane^ and extracted many
admirable, and rai^^ conclusions, judging that borrowed matter oftentimes
yields praise to the industry of its author. Hence for thy us^ (Courteous
Reader) I have with great search and labor collected also, and heaped up
together in a body of these pleasant and fine experiments to stir u^ and
delight the affectionate, (out of the writings of Socrates, Plato, Aristotle*
Demosthenes, Pythagoras, Democrates, Pliny, Hiparchus, Euclides* Vitruvius,
Diaphantus, Pergaeus, Archimedes, Papi Alexandrinus, Vitelius, Ptolomeus,
Copernicus, Proclus, Mauralicus, Cardanus, Valalpandus, Kepleirus, Gilbertus,
Tychonius, Dureirus, Iosepheus, Clavius, Gallileus, Maginus, Euphanus Tyberill,
and others) knowing that Art ^itating nature, glories always in the ^ariety of
things, which she produces to ^isfie the mind of curious inquisitors. and
though perhaps these labors to ^me humorous persons may seem vain, and
ridiculous; for such it was not under^ken. But for these which intentively ^ve
desired and sought after the know^dge of these things, it being an invita^on
and motive to the search of greater ^atters, and to employ the mind in use^^ll
knowledge, rather than to be busied (...) vain Pamphlets, Play-bookes,
^ruitlesse Legends, and prodigious Histories that are invented out of fan^ie,
which abuse many Noble spirits, ^ull their wits, and alienate their thoughts
from laudable and honorable studies. ^n this Tractate thou may therefore
^ake choice of such Mathematical Problemes and Conclusions as may delight
thee; which kind of learning does excellently adorn a man, seeing the
usefulness thereof, and the manly accomplishments it does produce: profitable
and delightful for all sorts of people, who may furnish and adorn themselves
with abundance of matter in that kind to help them by way of use, and
discourse* And to this we have also added our Pyrotechnie, knowing that Beasts
have for their object only the surface of the earth; but hoping that thy
spirit which follows the motion of fire, will abandon the lower Elements, and
cause the^ to lift up thine eyes to soar in a higher Contemplation, having so
glittering (...) Canopie to behold; and these pleasant and recreative fires
ascending may cause thy affections also to ascend. The Whole whereof we send
forth to thee, that desire the scrutabillity of things; Nature having
furnished us with matter, thy spirit may easily digest them, and put them
finely in order, though now in disorder.

(...) dry persons, how subtillie to discover whi^ of those numbers each of
them took. ^^ PROBBLEM. IIII. That a staff may be broken, placed upon (...)
Glasses, without hurting of the Glasses. ^^ PROBLEM. VII. How to dispose lots
that the 5. 6. 9. etc. of (...) number of persons may escape. ^^ PROBLEM. XIII.
How the weight of smoke of a combustible bod^ which is exhaled, may be weighed.
^^ PROBLEM. XII. Of three knives which may be so disposed to ha^ in the air,
and moove upon the Point of^ needle. ^^ PROBLEM. XVII. Of a deceitful bowl,
to bowl withal. ^^ PROBLEM. XVI. A ponderous, or heavy body may be supported
(...) the air without any one touching it. ^^ PROBLEM. XVIII. How a Pear, or
Apple may be parted into (...) parts, without breaking the rind thereof. ^^
PROBLEM. XV. Of a fine kind of door which opens and shuts (...) both sides. ^^
PROBLEM. IX. How the half of a vessel which contains (...) measures may be
taken, being but only (...) other measures, the one being 3, and the oth^ 8,
measures. ^^ PROBLEM. VIII. Three persons having taken each of them sever^
things, to find which each of them has taken. 19 PROBLEM. VI. ^ow to dispose
three staves which may support ^ach other in the air. 15 PROBLEM. XIIII. Many
things being disposed Circular (or ^therwise) to find which of them any one
thinks upon. 28 PROBLEM. XIX. (...) find a number thought upon without asking
^uestions. 33 PROBLEM. XI. ^ow a Millstone or other ponderosity may hang upon
the point of a Needle without bowing, or ^any wise breaking of it. 26 PROBLEM.
XX. and XXI. ^ow a body that is uniforme and inflexible may (...) pass through
a hole which is round, square, and Triangular; or round, square and ovall^
wise, and exactly fill these several holes. 35, 37 PROBLEM. X. How a stick
may stand upon ones finger or a (...) Pick in the middle of a court without
falling. 24 PROBLEM. XXII. ^o find a number thought upon after another manner
than these which are formerly delivered. 39 PROBLEM. XXIII. ^o find out many
numbers that sundry persons ^or any one has thought upon. 40 PROBLEM. XXIIII.
How is it that a man in one and the same time may have his head upward, and his
feet upward, being in one and the same place. 41 PROBLEM. XXV. Of a Ladder by
which two men ascending at one time, the more they ascend the more they shall
be asunder, notwithstanding the one be as high as the other. 42 PROBLEM. XXVI.
How is it that a man having but a Rod or Pole of land, does brag that he may in
a right line pass from place to place 3000 miles. 42 PROBLEM. XXVII. How is it
that a man standing upright, and looking which way he will, he looks true
North or South. 43 PROBLEM. XXVIII. To tell any one what number remains after
certain operations being ended, without asking any question. 44 PROBLEM. XXIX.
Of the play with two several things. 45 PROBLEM. XXXI. How to describe a
circle that shall touch 3. points placed howsoever upon a plain, if they be
not in a right line. 47 PROBLEM. XXXII. How to change a circle into a square
form. 48 PROBLEM. XXXIII. With one and the same compasses, and at one and the
same extent or opening, how to describe many circles concentricall, that is,
greater or lesser one than another. 49 PROBLEM. XXXIIII. Any numbers under 10.
being thought upon, to find what numbers they were. 51 PROBLEM. XXXV. Of the
play with the ring. 52 PROBLEM. XXXVI. The play of 3, 4. or more Dice. 53
PROBLEM. XXXVIII. Of a fine vessel which holds wine or water being cast into
it at a certain height, but being filled higher it will run all out of its
own accord. 56 PROBLEM. XXXIX. Of a glass very pleasant. 58 PROBLEM. XXXX. If
any one should hold in each hand as many pieces of money as in the other, how
to find how much there is. 59 PROBLEM. XXXXI. Many Dice being cast, how
artificially to discover the number of the points that may arise. 60 PROBLEM.
XXXXII. Two metals as gould and silver or of other kind, weighing alike, being
privately placed into two like boxes, to find in which of them the gold or
silver is in. 62 PROBLEM. XXXXIII. Two globes of diverse mettels (as one gold,
the other copper) yet of equal weight, being put in a box as B.G. to find in
which end the gold or copper is. 65 PROBLEM. XXXXIIII. How to represent diverse
sorts of Rainebowes here below. 66 PROBLEM. XXXXV. How that if all the powder
in the world were enclosed in a bowl of paper or glass, and being fired on
all parts, it could not break that bowl. 68 PROBLEM. XXXXVI. To find a
number which being divided by 2. there will remain 1. being divided by 3.
there will remain 1. and so likewise being divided by 4, 5, or 6. there would
still remain one; but being divided by 3. will remain nothing, 69 PROBLEM.
XXXXVII. One had a certain number of Crowns and counting them by 2, and 2.
there rested 1. counting them by 3, and 3. there rested 2. counting them by 4,
and 4, there rested 3. counting them by 5, and 5, there rested 4. counting them
by 6, and 6, there rested 5. but counting them by 7, and 7, there rested
nothing, how many crowns might he have. 71 PROBLEM. XXXXVIII How many sorts of
weights in the least manner must there be to weigh all sorts of things between
one pound and 121. pound, and so unto 364. pound. 71 PROBLEM. XXXXIX. Of a
deceitful balance which being empty seems to be just, because it hangs in
Aequilibrio, notwithstanding putting 12. pound in one balance, and 11. in the
other, it will remain in Aequilibrio. 72 PROBLEM. L. To heave on life up a
bottle with a straw. 74 PROBLEM. LI. How in the middle of a wood or desert,
without the sight of the Sun, Stars, shadow or compass, to find out the
North or South or the 4. Cardinal points of the world, East, West, etc. 75
PROBLEM. LII. Three persons having taken Counters, Cards, or other things, to
find how much each one has taken. 77 PROBLEM. LIII. How to make a consort of
music of many parts with one voice or one instrument only. 78 PROBLEM.
LIIII. To make or describe an ovall form, or that which is near resemble unto
it at one turning, with a pair of common compasses. 79 PROBLEM. LV. Of a purse
difficult to be opened. 80 PROB. LVI. Whether is it more hard and admirable
without compasses to make a perfect circle, or being made to find out the
center of it. 82 PROB. LVI. Any one having taken 3 Cards, to find how many
points they contain. 83 PROB. LVII. Many Cards placed in diverse ranks, to
find which of these Cards any one has thought. 85 PROB. LVIII. Many Cards
being offered to sundry persons, to find which of those Cards any one thinks
upon. 86 PROBLEM. LIX. How to make an instrument that helps to hear, as
Gallileus made to help to see. 87 PROBLEM. LX. Of a fine lamp which goes not
out, though one carries it in ones pocket, or being rolled on the ground will
still burn. 88 PROBLEM. LXI. Any one having thought a card amongst many cards,
how artificially to discover it out. 89 PROBLEM. LXII. Three women A, B, C.
carried Apples to a market to sell: A, had 20. B, had 30. C, 40. they sold as
many for a penny one as the other, and brought home one as much money as
another, how could this be? 90 PROBLEM. LXIII. Of the properties of some
numbers. 91 PROBLEM. LXIIII. Of an excellent lamp which serves or furnishes
it self with oil, and burns a long time. 95 PROBLEM. LXV. Of the play at
keyles or nine pins. 97 PROBLEM. LXVI. Of Spectacles of pleasure. Of Spectacles
which give several colors to the visage. 98 Of Spectacles which make a Town
seem to be a City, one armed man as a company, and a piece of gold as many
pieces. 99 How out of a chamber to see the objects which pass by according to
the lively perspective. 100 Of Gallileus admirable opticke Glass, which helps
one to see the beginning and ending of Eclipses the spots in the Sun, the
Stars which moves about the Planets, and perspiouously things far remote.
Of the parts of Gallileus his Glass. 102
PROBLEM. LXVII. Of the Magnes and Needles touched therewith. How Rings of Iron
may hang one by another in the air. 103 Of Mahomets Tomb which hangs in the
air by the touch of the Magnes. 104 How by the Magnes only to find out North
and South. 105 Of a secrecy in the Magnes, for discovering things far
remote. 106 Of finding the Poles by the Magnes. 107
PROBLEM. LXVIII. Of the properties of Aeolipiles or bowls to blow the fire.
108 PROBLEM. LXIX. Of the Thermometer, or that which measures the degrees of
heat and cold by the air. 110 Of the proportion of humane bodies, of statues,
of Colosses, or huge Images and monstrous Giants. 113 Of the commensuration of
the parts of the body the one to the other in particular, by which the Lion
was measured by his claw, the Giant by his thumb, and Hercules by his foot.
115, 116 Of statues, or Colosses, or huge Images; that mount Athos,
metamorphised by Dynocrites into a statue, in whose hand was a Town able to
receive ten thousand men. 117 Of the famous Colossus at Rhodes which had 70.
cubits in height, and loaded 900. Cammels, which weighed 1080000. pound. 118 Of
Nero his great Colossus which had a face of 12. foot large. 119 Of monstrous
Giants. Of the Giant Ogge and Goliath. 119, 120 Of the Carcass of a man found
which was in length 4.9. foot; and of that monster found in Creet, which had
46. Cubits of height. 120 Of Campesius his relation of a monster of 300 foot
found in Sicile, whose face according to the former proportion should be 30.
foot in length. 121
PROBLEM. LXXI. Of the game at the Palm, at Trap, at Bowls, Paile-maile, and
others. 122 PROBLEM. LXXII. Of the game of square forms. 124 PROBLEM. LXXIII.
How to make the string of a violl sensibly shake without any one touching it.
126 PROBLEM. LXXIIII. Of a vessel which contains 3. several kinds of liquor,
all put in at one bunghole, and drawn out at one Tap severally without
mixture. 128 PROBLEM. LXXV. Of burning Glasses. Archimedes his way of burning
the ships of Syracuses. 129 Of Proclus his way, and of concave and sphericall
Glasses which burn; the cause and demonstration of burning with Glasses. 131
Of Maginus his way of setting fire to Powder in a Mine by Glasses. 131 Of the
examination of burning by Glasses. 133
PROBLEM. LXXVI. Of pleasant questions by way of Arithmetike. Of the Ass and
the mule. 134 Of the number of soldiers that fought before old Troy. 135 Of
the number of Crowns that two men had. 136 About the hour of the day. 137 Of
Pythagoras Scholars. 137 Of the number of Apples given amongst the Graces and
the Muses. 138 Of the testament or last will of a dying father. 138 Of the cups
of Craessus. 139 Of Cupids Apples. 139 Of a Man's Age. 140 Of the Lion of Bronze
placed upon a fountain with his Epigramme. ibid
PROBLEM. LXXVII In Optics, excellent experiments. Principles touching
reflections. 141 Experiments upon flat and plain Glasses. 142 How the Images
seems to sink into a plain glass, and always are seen perpendicular to
the glass, and also inversed. 143 The things which pass by in a street may by
help of a plain glass be seen in a Chamber, and the height of a tower or
tree observed. 143 How several Candles from one Candle are represented in a
plain glass, and glasses alternatly may be seen one within another, as also
the back parts of the body, as well as the foreparts are evidently
represented. 144 How an Image may be seen to hang in the air by help of a
glass: and writing read or easily understood. 146 Experiments upon Gibbous, or
unequal Sphericall glasses. How lively to represent a whole City,
fortification, or Army, by a Gibbous glass. 147 How the Images are seen in
Concave Glasses. 149 How the Images are transformed by approaching to the center
of the Glass, or point of concourse; and of an exceeding light that a concave
Glass gives by help of a candle. 151 How the Images: as a man, a sword, or
hand, does come forth out of the Glass. 152, 153 Of strange apparitions of
Images in the air, by help of sundry Glasses. 153, 154 Of the wonderful
augmentation of the parts of man's body coming near the point of inflammation,
or center of the Glass. 155 How writing may be reverberated from a glass upon
a wall, and read. 156 How by help of a concave glass to cast light into a
Camp, or to give a perspective light to Pyoners in a mine, by one candle
only. 156 How excellen^ly by help of a concave glass and a candle placed in
the center, to give light to read by. 157 Of other glasses of pleasure. 158 Of
strange deformed representations by glasses; causing a man to have four eyes,
two mouths, two noses, two heads. Of glasses which give a color to the
visage, and make the face seem fair and foul. 160
PROBLEM. LXXVIII. How to show one that is suspicious, what is in another
Chamber or Room, notwithstanding the ^nterposition of that wall. 160 ^rollary,
1. to see the Assiegents of a place, upon (...) the Rampart of a fortification.
161 ^orollary, 2. and 3. notwithstanding the interposition of walls, and
chambers, by help of a Glass things may be seen, which pass by. 162
PROBLEM. LXXIX. How with a Musket to strike a mark not looking toward it, as
exactly as one aimed at it. 162 How exactly to shoot out of a Musket to a place
which is not seen, being hindered by some obstakle or other interposition. 163
PROBLEM. LXXX. How to make an Image to be seen hanging in the air, having
his head downward. 164 PROBLEM, LXXXI. How to make a company of representative
Soldiers seem to be as a regiment, or how few in number may be multiplied to
seem to be many in number. 165 COROLARIE. ^f an excellent delightful Cabinet
made of plain glasses. 165 PROBLEM. LXXXII. Of fine and pleasant Dyalls in
Horologographie. Of a Dyall of herbs for a Garden. 166 Of the dyall upon the
finger and hand, to find what of the Clock it is. 167 Of a Dyall which was
about an Obeliske at Rome, 168 Of Dyals with Glasses. 168 Of a Dyall which has
a glass in the place of the style 169 Of Dyals with water, which the Ancients
used, 171
PROBLEM. LXXXIII. Of shooting out of Cannons or great Artillery How to charge
a Cannon without powder. 173 To find how much time the Bullet of a Cannon
spends in the Air before it falls to the ground. 174 How it is that a Cannon
shooting upward, the Bullet flies with more violence, than being shot point
blanke, or shooting downward. 174 Whether is the discharge of a Cannon so much
the more violent, by how much it has the more length. 176
PROBLEM. LXXXIIII. Of prodigious progressions, and multiplications of
creatures, plants, fruits, numbers, gold, silver, etc. Of grains of
Mustardseede, and that one grain being sown, with the increase thereof for
20. years will produce a heap greater than all the earth a hundred thousand
times. 178 Of Pigges, and that the great Turk with all his revenue, is not
able to maintain for one year, a Sow with all her increase for 12. years 179
Of grains of Corn, and that 1. grain with all its increase for 12. years,
will amount to 244140625000000000000 grains, which exceeds in value all the
treasures in the world. 183 ^f the wonderful increase of sheep. 181 Of the
increase of Cod fish. 182 Of the Progressive multiplication of souls; that
from one of Noah's sons, from the flood unto Nimrods Monarchy, should be
produced 111350. souls. 183 Of the increase of numbers in double proportion,
and that a pin being doubled as often as there are weeks in the year, the
number of pins that should arise is able to load 45930 ships of a thousand
Tun a piece, which are worth more than ten hundred thousand pounds a day.
183, 184 Of a man that gathered Apples, stones or such like upon a condition.
185 Of the changes in Bells, in musical instruments, transmutation of Places,
in numbers, letters, men and such like. 185 Of the wonderful interchange of
the letters in the Alphabet: the exceeding number of men, and time to express
the words that may be made with these letters, and the number of books to
comprehend them. 187, 188 Of a servant hired upon certain condition, that he
might have land lent him to sow one grain of Corn with its increase for 8.
years time, which amounted to more than four hundred thousand Acres of land.
188
PROBLEM. LXXXV. Of Fountains, Hydriatiques, Stepticks, Machinecks, and other
experiments upon water, or other liquor. First, how water at the foot of a
mountain may be made to ascend to the top of it, and so to descend on the
other side of it. 19^ Secondly, to find how much liquor is in a vessel only
by using the tap hole. 19^ Thirdly, how is it, that a vessel is said to houl^
more water at the foot of a mountain, tha^ at the top of it. 19^ 4 How to
conduct water from the top of on^ mountain to the top of another. 19^ 5 Of a
fine fountain which spouts water ver^ high and with great violence, by turning
of ^ Cock. 19^ 6 Of Archimedes screw which makes water ascend by descending.
19^ 7 Of a fine fountain of pleasure. 19^ 8 Of a fine watering pot for
gardens. 19^ 9 How easily to take wine out of a vessel at the bunghole without
piercing a hole in the vessel* 19^ 10 How to measure irregular bodies by help
of water. 19^ 11 To find the weight of water. 19^ 12 To find the charge that
a vessel may carry as ships, boats or such like. 20^ 13 How comes it that a
ship having safely sailed in the vast Ocean, and being come into the port or
harbor, will sink down right. 20^ 14 How a gross body of mettle may swim
upon the water. 201 15 How to weigh the lightness of the air. 20^ ^6 Being
given a body, to mark it about, and show how much of it will sink in the
water, or swim above the water. 204 ^7 To find how much several mettles or
other bodies do weigh less in the water than in the air. 204 ^8 How is it
that a balance having like weight in each scale, and hanging in Aequilibrio in
the air, being removed from that place (without deminishing the weights in
each balance, or adding to it) it shall cease to hang in Aequilibrio sencibly,
yea by ae great difference of weight. 205 ^9 To show what waters are heavier
one than another, and how much. 206 ^0 How to make a pound of water weigh as
much as 10. 20. 30. or a hundred pound of Lead; nay as much as a thousand or
ten thousand pound weight. 207
PROBLEM. LXXXVI. Of sundry questions of Arithmeticke, and first of the number
of sands calculated by Archimedes and Clavius. 208 ^^ Diverse mettles being
melted together in one body, to find the mixture of them. 210 ^^ A subtle
question of three partners about equality of wine and vessels. 213 ^^ Of a
Ladder which standing upright against a wall of 10. foot high, the foot of it
is pulled out 6. foot from the wall upon the pavement, how much has the top of
the Ladder descended. 214
PROBLEM. LXXXVII. Witty suits or debates between Caius and Serpronius, upon
the form of fingers; which Geometricians call Isoperimeter, or equal in
circuit, or Compass. 214 Incident: of changing a field of 6. measures square,
for a long rectangled field of 9. measures in length and 3. in breadth: both
equal in circuit but not in quantity. 215 2. Incident: about two sacks each
of them houlding but a bushel, and yet were able to houl^ 4. bushels. 217 3
Incident: shows the deceit of pipes which conveies water, that a pipe of two
inches diameter, does cast out four times as much water as a pipe of one such
diameter. 218 7. heaps of Corn of 10. foot every way, is not a^ much as one
heap of Corn of 20. foot every way. 218
PROBLEM. LXXXVIII. Of sundry questions in matter of Cosmographie, and
Astronomy. In what place the middle of the earth is supposed to be. 219 Of the
depth of the earth, and height of the heavens, and the compass of the world,
how much. 219 How much the starry Firmament, the Sun, and the Moon are
distant from the center of the earth. 220 How long a Millstone would be falling
to the cen- of the earth from the superficies, if it might^er have passage. 220
How long time a man or a bird may be in compassing the whole earth. 220 ^n man
should ascend by supposition 20. miles ^e very day: how long it would be before
he approach to the Moon. 221 The Sun moves more in one day than the Moon in
20. days. 221 ^a millstone from the orb of the Sun should descend a thousand
miles in an hour, how long ^t would be before it come to the earth. 221 ^f the
Suns quick motion, of more than 7500. ^iles in one minute. 221 Of the rapt
and violent motion of the starry Firmament, which if a horseman should ride
every day 40. miles, he could not in a thousand (...) years make such a
distance as it moves every (...) hour. 221 (...) find the Circle of the Sun
by the fingers. 213
PROBLEM. LXXXXIII. ^f finding the new and full Moon in each month. 224
PROBLEM. LXXXXIIII. ^o find the Latitude of Countries. 225 PROBLEM. LXXXXV. ^f
the Climats of Countries, and how to find them. 225 PROBLEM. LXXXXVI. ^f
Longitude and Latitude of the places of the earth and of the Stars of the
Heavens. 227 ^o find the Longitude of a Country. 228 ^f the Latitude of a
Country. 229 ^o find the Latitude of a Country. 230 ^o find the distance of
places. 2^0 Of the Longitude, Latitude, Declination, and distance of the
stars. 231 How is it that two Horses or other creatures coming into the
world at one time, and dying at one and the same instant, yet the one of them
to be a day older than the other. 23^
Certain fine Observations. In what places of the world is it that the needle
hangs in Equilibrio, and vertical. 233 In what place of the world is it the
sun is East or west but twice in the year. 233 In what place of the world is
it that the Suns Longitude from the Equinoctial points and Altitude, being
equal, the Sun is due East or West. That the Sun comes twice to one point
of the Compass in the forenoone or afternoon. 233 That in some place of the
world there is but two kinds of wind all the year. 233 Two ships may be two
leagues asunder under the equinoctial, and sailing North at a certain
parallel they will be but just half so much. 133 To what inhabitants and at
what time the Sun will touch the north part of the Horizon at midnight. 234
How a man may know in his Navigation when he is under the Equinoctial. 234 At
what day in the year the extremity of the stils shadow in a Dyall makes a
right line. 234 What height the Sun is of and how far from the Zenith, or
Horizon, when a man's shadow is as long as his height. 234
PROBLEM. LXXXXVII. (...) make a Triangle that shall have three right Angles.
234 PROBLEM. LXXXXVIII. To divide a line in as many parts as one will, without
compasses or without seeing of it. 235 PROBLEM. LXXXXIX. To draw a line which
shall incline to another line, ^et never meet, against the Axiom of
Pa^allels. 236 PROBLEM. C. To find the variation of the Compass by the Sun
shining. 237 PROBLEM. CI. To know which way the wind is in ones Chamber
without going abroad. 238 PROBLEM. CII. How to draw a parallel sphaericall
line with great ^ase. 239 PROBLEM. CIII. (...) measure an hight only by help
of ones Hat. 240 PROBLEM. CIIII. (...) take an height with two strawes. 240
(...) Architecture how statues or other thing in ^igh buildings shall bear a
proportion to the ^e below either equal double, etc. 242
PROBLEM. CVI. (...) deformed figures which have no exact proportion, where to
place the eye to see then direct. 243 PROBLEM. CVII. How a Cannon that has
shot may be covered from the battery of the enemy. 244 PROBLEM. CVIII. Of a
fine Lever by which one man alone may place a Cannon upon his Carriage. 245
PROBLEM. CIX. How to make a Clock with one wheel. 246 Of waterworkes.
PROBLEM. CX. How a child may draw up a hogshead of water with case. 247
PROBLEM. CXI. Of a Ladder of Cords to carry in ones pocket, by which he may
mount a wall or Tower alone 24^ PROBLEM. CXII. Of a marvelous Pumpe which
draws up great quantity of water. 249 PROBLEM. CXIII. How naturally to cause
water to ascend out of Pit. 25^ PROBLEM. CXIIII. How to cast water out of a
fountain very high 25^ PROBLEM. CXV. How to empty the water of a Pit by help
of Cisterne. 25^ PROBLEM. CXVI. How to spout out water very high. 25^ PROBLEM,
CXVII. How to re-animate simples though brought thousand miles. 25^ PROBLEM.
CXVIII. How to make a perpetual motion. 15^ PROBLEM. CXIX. (...) the admirable
invention of making the Philosophers Tree, which one may see to grow by little
and little. 256 PROBLEM. CXX. How to make the representation of the great
world. 257 PROBLEM. CXXI. Of a Cone, or Pyramidall figure that moves upon a
Table. 258 PROBLEM. CXXII. How an Anvill may be cleaved by the blow of a
Pistol. 258 PROBLEM. CXXIII. How a Capon may be roasted in a man's travells at
his saddle bow. 259 PROBLEM. CXXIIII. How a Candle may be made to burn three
times longer than usually it does. 259 PROBLEM. CXXV. How to draw wine out of
water. 260 PROBLEM. CXXVI. Of two Marmouzets, the one of which lights a Candle
and the other blows it out. 261 PROBLEM. CXXVII. How to keep wine fresh
without Ice or Snow in the height of Summer. 262 PROBLEM. CXXVIII. To make a
Cement which lasted as marble, resisting air and water. 262 PROBLEM. CXXIX.
How to melt mettle upon a shell with little fire. 263 PROBLEM. CXXX. Of the
hardening of Iron and Steel. ^63 PRROBLEM. CXXXI. To preserve fire as long as
you will, imitating the inextinguable fire of Vestales. 264
FINIS.
By way of advertisement. Five or six things I have thought worthy to declare
before I pass further.
FIrst, that I place not the speculative demonstrations with all these
Problemes, but content my self to show them as at the fingers end: which was
my ^ot and intention, because these which under^and the mathematics can
conceive them ^sily; others for the most part will content themselves only
with the knowledge of them, without seeking the reason.

Secondly, to give a greater grace to the practice of these things, they ought
to be concealed as much as they may, in the subtlety of the way; for that
which does ravish the spirits is, an admirable effect, whose cause is unknown:
which if it were discovered, half the pleasure is lost, therefore all the
finenesse, consists in the dexterity of the Act, concealing the means, and
changing often the stream.

Thirdly, great care ought to be had that one deceive not himself, that would
declar^ by way of Art to deceive another: this will make the matter
contemptible to ignoran^ Persons, which will rather cast the fault upon the
Science, than upon he that shows it: when the cause is not in the
Mathematical principles, but in him that fayles in the acting of it*

Fourthly, in certain Arithmeticall propositions they have only their answers
as I found them in sundry Authors, which an^ one being studious of
Mathematical learning, may find their original, and also the way of their
operation.

Fifthly, because the number of these Problemes, and their dependences are many,
an^ intermixed, I thought it convenient to gathe^ them into a Table: that so
each one according to his fancy, might make best choice o^ that which might
best please his palet; the ma^ter being not of one nature, nor of like
subtlety: But whosoever will have patience (...) read on, shall find the end
better than (...) beginning.

MATHEMATICAL RECREATION.
PROBLEM. I. To find a number thought upon.
BId him that he Quadruple the Number thought upon, that is, multiply it by 4
and unto it bid him to add, 6. 8. 10. or any Number at pleasure: and let him
take the half of the sum, ^^en ask how much it comes to: for then if ^ou
take away half the Number from it which ^ou willed him at first to add to it,
there shall remain the double of the number ^^ought upon.

Example.

^he Number thought upon. 5. ^he Quadruple of it. 20. ^he 8. unto it, makes 28.
^he half of it is 14. Take away half the number added from it, viz. 4. the
rest is 10. The double of the number thought upon, viz. 10.

Another way to find what number was thought upon.
BId him which thinks, double his Number, and unto that double add 4. and
bid him multiply that same product by 5. and unto that product, bid him add
12. and multiply that last number by 10. (which is done easily by setting a
Ciphar at the end of the number:) then ask him the last number or product, and
from it secretly subtract 320. the remainder in the hundredth place, is the
number thought upon.

Example.

The number thought upon 7. For which 700. account only but the number of the
hundreds viz. 7. so have you the number thought upon. His double 14. To it add
4, makes 18. Which multiplied by 5. maks 90. To which ad 12 makes 102. This
multiplied by 10 which is only by adding a Ciphar to it, makes 1020. From this
subtract 320. Rest 700.

To find numbers conceived upon otherwise than the former.
BId the party which thinks the number, that he triple his thought, cause him
to take the half of it: if it be odd take the least half and put one unto
it: then will him to Triple the half and take half of it as before; lastly,
ask him how many nines there is in the last half, and for every 9. account 4.
in your memory, for that shall show the number thought upon, if both the
Triples were even: but if it be odd at the first Triple, and even at the
second, for the one added unto the least half keep one in memory: if the
first Triple be even and the second odd, for the one added unto the least
half keep two in memory: lastly if at both times in tripling, the numbers be
odd, for the two added unto the least halfes, keep three in memory, these
cautions observed and added unto as many fowe^s as the party says there is
nines contained in the last half, shall never fail you to declare, or
discern truly what number was thought upon.

Example.

The number thought upon, 4. or 7. The Triple 12. or 21. The half there of 6.
or 10. 1 put to it makes 11. The Triple of the half 18. or 33. The half 6. or
16. 1 put to it maks 17. The number of nines in the last half 1. or 1.

The first 1. represents the 4. number thought upon, and the last 1. with the
caution makes 7. the other number thought upon.

Note.
Order your method so that you be not discovered: which to help you may with
dexterity, and industry make additions, subtractions, multiplications,
divisions, etc. and in stead of asking how many nines there is: you may ask
how many eights, tens, etc. there is, or subtract 8. 10. etc. from the number
which remains, for to find out the number thought upon.

Now touching the Demonstrations of the former directions, and others which
follow, they depend upon the 2. 7. 8. and 9. Book of the Elements of Euclid:
upon which 2. Book and 4. proposition this may be extracted for these which
are more learned for the finding of any number that any one thinks on.

Bid the party that thinks, that he break the number thought upon into any
two parts, and unto the squares of the parts, let him add the double product
of the parts: then ask what it amounts unto, so the Root Quadrat shall be
the number thought upon.

The number thought upon 5. the parts suppose 3. and 2.

The square of 3. maks 9. The sum of these three numbers 25. the square Root
of which is 5. the number thought upon. The square of 2. maks 4 The product of
the parts viz. 3. by 2. makes 6. which 2. doubled makes 12

Or more compendiously, it may be delivered thus,

Break the number into two parts, and to the product of the parts, add the
square of half the difference of the parts, then the Root Quadrate of the
aggregate is half the number conceived.

EXAMINATION.
THe Problemes which concern Arithmetic, we examine not, for these are easy
to any one which has read the grounds and principles of Arithmeticke: but we
especially touch upon that, which tends to the speculations of Physic,
Geometry and Optickes, and such others which are of more difficulty, and more
principally to be examined and considered.

PROBLEM. II. How to represent to these which are in a chamber that which is
without, or all that which passes by.
THis is one of the finest experiments in the Opticques, and it is done thus,
choose a Chamber or place which is toward the street, frequented with people,
or which is against some fair flourishing object, that so it may be more
delightful and pleasant to the beholders, then make the Room dark by
shutting out the light, except a small hole of six pence broad, this done, all
the Images and species of the object which are without, will be seen within:
and you shall have pleasure to see it not only upon the wall but especially
upon a sheet of white paper or some diagram white cloth hung nere the hole:
and if unto the hole you place a round Glass, that is, a Glass which is
thicker in the middle than at the edge: such as is the common burning Glasses,
or such which old people use, for then the Images which before did seem dead,
and of a darkish color, will appear and be seen upon the paper, or white
cloth, according to their natural colors, yea more lively than their
natural; and the appearances will be so much the more beautiful, and perfect,
by how much the hole is lesser, the day clear and the sun ^hining. It is
pleasure to see the beautiful and goodly representation of the Heavens,
intermixed with clouds in the Horizon, upon a woody situation, the motion of
Birds in the Air, of Men, and other Creatures upon the ground, with the
trembling of Plants, tops of Trees, and such like, for every thing will be
seen within even to the life, but inversed: notwithstanding this beautiful
paint will so naturally represent it self in such a lively perspective, that
hardly the most accurate Pain^er can represent the like. Now the reason why ^he
Images and objects without are inversed, is because the species do intersect
one another in the hole: so that the species of the feet ascend, and these of
the head diagram descend.

But here note, that they may be Represented right two manner of ways; first
with a concave glass, ^econdly, by help of another unequal glass: disposed or
placed be^weene the paper and the other Glass: as may be seen here by the
figure.

Now I will add here only by passing by, for such which affect painting, and
portraiture, that this experiment may excellently help them, in the lively
painting of things perspective wise, as Topographicall cards, etc. and for
philosophers, it is a fine secret to explain the organ of the sight, for the
hollow of the eye is taken as the close Chamber, the balle of the Aple of the
eye, for the hole of the Chamber, the Crystalline humor at the small of the
Glass and the bottom of the eye, for the wall, or leaf of Paper.

EXAMINATION.
IT is false that the species being pressed together or contracted does
perform it upon a wall, for the species of any thing does represent it self
not only in one hole of a window, but in infinite holes; even unto the whole
Sphere, or at least unto a Hemispheare (intellectual in a free medium) if the
beams or reflections be not interposed, and by how much the hole is made less
to give passage to the species, by so much the more lively are the Images
formed.

In convexe, or concave Glasses the Images will be disproportionable to the
eye, by how much they are more concave, or convexe, and by how ^^^h the parts
of the Image comes near to the ^s, for these that are near are better
propor^ated, than these which are farther off.

But to have them more lively, and true, a^^ording to the imaginary conicall
section, let ^ole be no greater than a pins head made (...) a piece of thin
Brass, or such like, ^ch hole represents the top of the Cone, and the ^e
thereof the term of the species: this ^ctice is best when the Sun shines
upon the (...), for then the objects which are opposite to (...) plain, will
make two like Cones, and will lively represent the things without, in a perfect
inversed perspective, which drawn by the Pensell of some artificial Painter,
turn the paper upside ^ne, and it will be direct, and to the life.

But the apparences may be direct, if you place ^ther hole opposite unto the
former so that the ^ctator be under it; or let the species reflect ^^on a
Concave Glass, and let that Glass reflect ^n a paper, or some white thing.

PROBLEM. III. To tell how much waighs the blow of ones fist, of a Mallet,
Hatchet or such like, or resting without giving the blow.
(...) Caliger in his 331. exercise against Cardan, (...) relates that the
Mathematitians of Maximillian the Emperor did propose upon a day this
Question, and promised to give the re^^lution; notwithstanding Scaliger
delivered (...) not, and I conceive it to be thus. Take a Bala^^ and let the
fist, the Mallet or Hatchet rest up^ the Scale or upon the beam of the Ballan^
and put into the other scale, as much wei^^ as may counterpoyse it; then
charging or l^ing more weight into the Scale, and striking (...) on the other
end: you may see how much (...) blow is heavier than another, and so co^quently
how much it may waygh: for as A^stotle says; the motion that is made in strike
ads great weight unto it, and so much (...) more, by how much it diagram is
quicker: therefore in effect if there were placed a thousand mallets, or a
thousand pound weight upon a stone, nay though it were exceedingly pressed
down by way of a vice, by levers or other mechanic Ingine, it would be
nothing to the rigor and violence of a blow.

Is it not evident that the edge of a knife lai^ upon butter, and a hatchet
upon a leaf of P^per, without striking makes no impression, o^ at least enters
not; but striking upon the wo^ a little, you may presently see what effect it
has which is from the quickness of the motion which breaks and enters
without resistance extreme quick, as experience shows ^he blows of Arrows,
of Cannons, Thun^ts, and such like.

EXAMINATION.
His Problem was extracted from Scaliger, who had it from Aristotle, but
somewhat refractory compiled, and the strength of the ^he says depends only
in the violence of ^otion; then would it follow that a little ^hammer upon a
piece of wood being quick^ed to smite, would give a greater blow and ^ore hurt
than a great sledge striking soft; (...) absurd, and contrary to experience:
there^^^ consists not totally in the motion, for if two ^all hammers, the one
being 20. times hea^^^ than the other, should move with like quick^ the effect
would be much different: there ^n some thing else to be considered besides the
^on which Scaliger understood not, for if should have asked him, what is the
reason (...) stone falling from a window to a place (...) at hand is not so
forceable, as if it fell far^ down; and when a bullet flying out of a (...)
and striking the mark near at hand, ^ot make such an effect as striking the
mark ^her off: but we suppose that Scaliger and ^anus who handles this
subject, would not be less troubled to resolve this, than they h^^ been in
that.

PROBLEM. IIII. How to break a staff which is laid upon (...) Glasses full of
water, without breaking the Glass, spilling the water, or upon two Reeds or
Strawes without breaking of them.
FIrst place the Glasses which are full of n^ upon two joint stools, or such
like, (...) one as high as the other from the ground, (...) distant one from
another by 2. or 3. foot, t^ place the ends of the staff upon the edges of
(...) two Glasses so that they be sharp; this d^^ with all the force you can,
with another st^ strike the staff which is upon the two Gla^ in the middle,
and it diagram will break without breaking the Glasses or spilling the water.
In like manner may you do upon two Reeds, held in the air without breaking
them: thence Kitchinboyes often break bones of mutton upon their hand, or with
a (...) without any hurt, in only striking up^ ^e middle of the bone, with a
knife.

N^w in this act the two ends of the staff in ^ing slides away from the
Glasses, upon (...) they were placed; hence it comes ^^e Glasses are no wise
endangered, no more ^he knee upon which a staff is broken, (...) much as in
breaking it presses not: as ^otle in his Mechanicke questions obser^.

EXAMINATION.
(...) were necessary here to note, that this thing ^ay be experimented, first,
without Glasses, ^acing a small slender Staff upon two props, ^hen making
trial upon it, by which you may ^ow the Staff will either break, bow, or de^
from his props: and that either directly, ^bliquely: But why by this violence,
that (...) Staff striking another, (which is supported ^o Glasses) will be
broken without offending (...) Glasses, is as great a difficulty to be resol^
as the former.

PROBLEM. V. How to make a fair Geographicall Card in Garden Plot, fit for a
Prince, or great personage.
IT is usual amongst great men to have (...) Geographicall mappes, large
Cards, and g^ Globes, that by them they may as at once h^ a view of any place
of the world, and so ^nish themselves with a general knowled^ not only of
their own kingdoms for situation, Longitude, Latitude, etc. but o^ other
places in the whole Universe, with t^ Magnitudes, Positions, Climats, and
distanc^

Now I esteem that it is not unworthy (...) the meditations of a Prince, seeing
it ca^ with it many profitable and pleasant cont^ments: if such a Card or Map
by the ad^ and direction of an able Mathematitian (...) Geographically
described in a Garden (...) form, or in some other convenient place, (...) in
stead of which general description mi^ particularly, and Artificially be
prefigured (...) whole kingdoms and dominions, the Mo^taines and Hills being
raised like small hill^ (...) with curfes of earth, the valleys somewhat (...)
cave; which will be more agreeable and pleas^ to the Eye, than the description
in p^^ Mapps and Cards, within which may be pre^ted, the towns, villages,
Castles, or other re^keable edifices in small green Mossie ban^ or springworke
proportional to the plat for^ forests and woods represented according to ^ir
form and capacity, with herbs and ^abs, the great rivers, lakes and ponds,
to dilate ^mselves according to their course from ^^e Artificial fountain
made in the Garden ^passe through Channels; then may there be ^^posed walks of
pleasure, Ascents, places (...) repose adorned with all variety of de^^tfull
herbs and flowers, both to please the eye, other senses. A Garden thus
accommodated ^ll far exceed that of my Lo. of Verulams ^cified in his
Essays; that being only for ^ight and plasure, this may have all the pro^ties
of that, and also for singular use, by which a Prince may in little time
personally ^ite his whole kingdom, and in short time ^ow them distinctly, and
so in like manner ^y any particular man Geographically prefi^e his own
possession, or heritage.

PROBLEM. VI. ^w three staves, knives, or like bodies may be conceaved to hang
in the Air, without being supported by any thing, but by themselves.
TAke the first staff A. B. raise up in the Air, the end B. and upon him
croswise ^ce the staff C. B. then lastly in Triangle wise ^ce the third staff
E.F. in such manner that may be under A. B. and yet upon C. D. I (...) that
these staves so disposed cannot fall, and the space C. B. E. is made the
stronger, (...) how much the more it is pressed down, if the staves break
not, or sever themselves from the triangular form* diagram so that always the
Center of gravitie be in the Center of the Triangle: for A. B. is supported by
E. F. and E. F. is held up by C. D. and C. D. is kept up from falling by A. B
therefore one of these staves cannot fall, and so by consequence none.

PROBLEM VII. How to dispose as many men, or other thing in such sort that
rejecting, or casting away the 6. 9. 10. part, unto a certain number, there
shall remain these which you would have.
ORdinarily the proposition is delivere^ in this wise: 15. Christians and 15.
Turke^ being at Sea in one Ship, an extreme tempel being risen, the Pilot of
the Ship say it is necessary to cast over board half of the number of
Persons to disburthen the Ship, an^ to save the rest: now it was agreed to
be done by lot and therefore they consent to put themselves in rank, counting
by nine and nine the ninth Person should always be cast into the Sea, until
there were half thrown over board; Now the Pilote being a Christian
endeavored to save the Christians, how ought he therefore to dispose the
Christians, that ^he lot might fall always upon the Turks, and that none of
the Christians be in the ninth place?

The resolution is ordinarily comprehended in this verse, Populeam virgam matter
regina ferebat:

For having respect unto the vowels, making (...) one, e two, i three, o four
and u five: o the ^^rst vowell in the first word shows that ^^ere must be
placed 4. Christians, the next ^owell u, signifies that next unto the 4.
Christi^^s must be placed 5. Turks, and so to place ^oth Christians and Turks
according to the ^antitie and value of the vowels in the words (...) the verse,
until they be all placed: for then ^unting from the first Christian that was
^aced, unto the ninth, the lot will fall upon (...) Turk, and so proceed. And
here may be ^rther noted that this Problem is not to be ^^ited, seeing it
extends to any number and ^^er whatsoever, and may many ways be ^full for
Captains, Magistrates, or others ^ich have diverse persons to punish, and would
^stise chiefly the unruliest of them, in taking ^ 10. 20. or 100. person, etc.
as we read was commonly practiced amongst the ancient Romans: herefore to
apply a general rule in counting the third, 4. 9. 10. etc. amongst 30. 40. 50.
persons, and more or less; this is to be observed: take as many unites as
there are persons, and dispose them in order privately: as for example, let 24.
men be proposed to have committed some outrage, 6. of them especially are
found accessory: and let it be agreed that counting by 8. and 8. the eight man
should be always punished: Take therefore first 24. unites, or upon a piece of
paper write down twenty four Ciphars, and account from the beginning to the
eighth, which eighth mark, and so continue counting always marking the
eighth, until you have marked 6. by which you may easily perceive how to place
those 6. men that are to be punished, and so of others. It is supposed that
Josephus the Author of the Jewish History, escaped the danger of death by help
of this Problem; for a worthy Author of belief reports in his eighth Chapter
of the third Book of the destruction of Jerusalem, that the Town of Iotapata
being taken by maine force by Vespatian; Josephus being governor of that Town
accompained with a troop of 40. Soldiers, hid themselves in a Cave in which
they resolved rather to famish than to fall into the hands of Vespatian: and
with a bloody resolution in that great distress would have butchered one
another for sustenance: had not Josephus persuaded them to die by lot, and
order, upon which it should fall: Now seeing that Josephus did save himself by
this Art: It is thought that his industry was exercised by the help of this
Problem; so that of the 40. persons which he had, the third was always
killed. Now by putting himself in the 16. or 31. place he was saved, and one
with him which he might kill, or easily persuade to yield unto the Romans.

PROBLEM. VIII Three things, and three persons proposed, to find which of them
has either of these three things.
LEt the three things be a Ring, a piece of Gold, and a piece of Silver, or
any other such like, and let them be known privately to your self, by these
three vowels, a e i: or let there be three persons that have different names,
as Ambrose, Edmond and John; which privately you may note or account to your
self once known by the aforesaid vowels, which signify for the first vowell
1. for the second vowell 2. for the third vowell 3.

Now if the said three persons should by the mutual consent of each other
privately change their names, it is most facill by the course and excellency of
numbers, distinctly to declare each ones name, so interchanged: or of three
persons in private, the one should take a Ring, the other a piece of Gold, and
the third should take a piece of Silver; it is easy to find which has the
Gold, the Silver, or the Ring, and it is thus done.

Take 30. or 40. Counters (of which there is but 24. necessary) that so you may
conceal the way the better, and lay them down before the parties, and as they
sit or stand give to the first 1. Counter, which signifies a the first vowell,
to the second 2. Counters which represents e the second vowell, and to the
third 3. Counters which stands for i. the third vowell: then leaving the other
Counters upon the Table, retire apart, and bid him which has the Ring, take as
many Counters as you gave him, and he that has the Gold, for every one that
you gave him, let him take 2. and he that has the Silver for every one that
you gave him let him take 4. this being done, consider to whom you gave one
Counter, to whom two, and to whom three; and mark what number of Counters you
had at the first, for there are necessarily but 24. as was said before, the
surpluse you may privately reject. And then there will be left either 1. 2. 3.
5. 6. or 7. and no other number can remain, which if there be, then they have
failed in taking according to the directions delivered: but if either of these
numbers do remain, the resolution will be discovered by one of these 6.
words following, which ought to be had in memory, viz.

Salve, certa, anima, semita, vita, quies. 1. 2. 3. 5. 6. 7.

As suppose 5. did remain, the word belonging unto it is semita, the vowels in
the first two sillables are e and i, which shows according to the former
directions that to whom you gave 2. Counters he has the Ring (seeing it is the
second vowell represented by two as before) and to whom you gave the 3.
Counters he has the Gould, for that i represents the third vowell, or 3. in
the former direction, and to whom you gave one Counter, he has the Silver, and
so of the rest: the variety of changes in which exercise, is laid open in the
Table following.

diagram

rest men hid rest men hid 1 1 a 5 1 e 2 e 2 i 3 i 3 a 2 1 e 6 1 i 2 a 2 a 3 i
3 e 3 1 a 7 1 i 2 i 2 e 3 e 3 a

This feat may be done also without the former words by help of the Circle A.
for having divided the Circle into 6. parts, write 1. within and 1. without, 2.
within and 5. without, etc. the first 1. 2. 3. which are within with the
numbers over them, belongs to the upper semicircle; the other numbers both
within and without, to the under semicircle; now if in the Action there
remains such a number which may be found in the upper semicircle without,
then that which is opposite within shows the first, the next is the second,
etc. as if 5. remains, it shows to whom he gave 2. he has the Ring, to
whom you gave 3. he has the Gould, etc. but if the remainder be in the under
semicircle, that which is opposite to it, is the first; the next backwards
toward the right hand is the second, as if 3. remains, to whom you gave 1. he
has the Ring; he that had 3. he had the Gould, etc.

PROBLEM. IX. How to part a vessel which is full of wine containing 8. Pints,
into two equal parts, by two other vessels which contained as much as the
greater vessel; as the one being 5. Pints, and the other 3. Pints.
LEt the 3. vessels be represented by A. B. C. A. being full, the other two
being empty; first power out A. into B. until it be full: so there will be
in B. 5. Pints and in A. but 3. Pints; then power out of B. into C. until it
be full: so in C. shall be 3. Pints, in B 2. Pints, and in A. 3. Pints; then
power the wine which is in C. into A. so in A. will be 6. Pints, in B 2. Pints,
and in C. nothing: then power out the wine which is in B. into the pot C. so in
C. there is now 2. Pints, in B. nothing and in A. 6. Pints. Lastly, power out
of A. into B. until it be full, so there will diagram be now in A. only 1.
Pint, in B. 5. Pints, and in C. 2. Pints: But it is now evident that if from B.
you power in unto the pot C. until it be full, there will remain in B. 4.
Pints, and if that which is in C. viz. 3 Pints be powered into the vessel A.
which before had 1. Pint, there shall be in the vessel A. but half of its
liquor that was in it at the first, viz 4. Pints as was required. Otherwise
power out of A. into C. until it be full, which power into B then power out of
A. into C. again until it be full, so there is now in A. only 2. Pints, in
B. 3. and in C 3. then power from C into B. until it be full, so in C. there
is now but 1. Pint, 5. in B. and 2. in A. power all that is in B. into A. then
power the wine which is in C. into B. so there is in C. nothing, in B. only 1
Pint, and in A. 7. Pints: Lastly out of A. fill the pot C. so there will
remain in A. 4. Pints, or be but half full: then if the liquor in C. be
powered into B. it will be the other half. In like manner might be taken the
half of a vessel which contains 12. Pints, by having but the measures 5. and
7. or 5. and 8. Now such others might be proposed, but we omit many, in one
and the same nature.

PROBLEM. X. To make a stick stand upon the tipp of ones finger, without
falling.
FAsten the edges of two knives or such like of equal poise, at the end of the
stick, leaning out somewhat from the stick, so that they may counterpoise one
another; the stick being sharp at the end and held upon the top of the
finger, will there rest without supporting: if it fall it must fall together,
and that perpendicular or diagram plumbe wise, or it must fall side-wise or
before one another; in the first manner it cannot: for the Center of gravitie
is supported by the top of the finger: and seeing that each part by the knives
is counter-poysed it cannot fall sidewise, therefore it cannot fall no wise.

In like manner may great pieces of Timber as Ioists etc. be supported, if unto
one of the ends be applied convenient proportional counterpoises, yea a Lance
or Pike, may stand perpendicular in the Air upon the top of ones finger: or
placed in the midst of a Court by help of his Center of gravitie.

EXAMINATION.
THis Proposition seems doubtful for to imagine absolutely, that a Pike, or
such like, armed with two knives, or other things shall stand upright in the
Air, and so remain without any other support, seeing that all the parts has
an infinite difference of propensitie to fall; and it is without question that
a staff so acco^modated upon his Center of gravitie, but that it may incline
to some one part without some remedy be applied, and such as is here specified
in the Problem will not warrant the thing, nor keep it from falling; and if
more knives should be placed about it, it should cause it to fall more swiftly,
for as much as the superior parts (by reason of the Centricall motion) is made
more ponderous and therefore less in rest.

To place therefore this prop really, let the two knives, or that which is for
counterpoise, be longer always than the staff and so it will hang together as
one body: and it will appear admirable if you place the Center of gravitie,
near the side of the top of the finger or point; for it will then hang
Horizontall, and seem to hang only by a touch, yet more strange if you turn
the point or top of the finger upside down.

PROBLEM. XI. How a millstone or other Ponderositie, may be supported by a small
needle, without breaking or any wise bowing the same.
LEt a needle be set perpendicular to the Horizon, and the center of gravitie
of the stone, be placed on the top of the Nedle: it is evident that the stone
cannot fall, for as much as it hangs in aequilibra, or is counterpoysed in all
parts alike; and moreover it cannot bow the Needle more on the one side, than
on the other, the Needle will not therefore be either broken or bowed; if
otherwise, then the parts of the Needle must penitrate and sink one with
another: that which is absurd and impossible to nature: therefore it shall be
supported. The experiments which are diagram made upon trencher plates, or such
like lesser thing does make it most credible in greater bodies.

But here especially is to be noted that the Needle ought to be uniforme in
matter and figure, and that it be erected perpendicular to the Horizon, and
lastly that the Center of gravitie be exactly found.

PROBLEM. XII. To make three knives hang and move upon the point of a Needle.
FIt the three knives in form of a balance, and houlding a Needle in your
hand, and place the back of diagram that knife which lies crossewise to the
other two, upon the point of the Needle: as the figure here shows you; for
then in blowing softly upon them, they will easily turn and move upon the
point of the needle without falling.

PROBLEM. XIII. To find the weight of smoke, which is exhaled of any
combustible body whatsoever.
LEt it be supposed that a great heap of Fagots, or a load of straw waying
500. l should be fired, it is evident that this gross substance will be all
inverted into smoke and Ashes: now it seems that the smoke waighes nothing;
seeing it is of a thin substance now delated in the Air, notwithstanding if
it were gathered and reduced into the thickest that it was at first, it would
be sensibly weighty: weigh therefore the ashes which admit 50 pound, now
seeing that the rest of the matter is not lost, but is exhaled into smoke, it
must necessarily be, that the rest of the weight (to wit) 450 pound, must be
the weight of the smoke required.

EXAMINATION.
NOw although it be thus delivered, yet here may be noted, that a ponderositie
in his own medium is not weighty: for things are said to be weighty, when
they are out of their place, or medium: and the difference of such gravitie, is
according to the motion: the smoke therefore certainly is light being in its
true medium (the air) if it should change his medium, then would we change our
discourse.

PROBLEM. XIIII. Many things being disposed circular, (or otherwise) to find
which of them, any one thinks upon.
Suppose that having ranked 10 things, as A B C D E F G H I K, Circular (as the
figure shows) and that one had touched or thought upon G. which is the 7:
ask the party at what letter he would begin to account (for ^^count he must,
otherwise it cannot be done) which suppose, at E which is the 5 place, then
^^d secretly to this 5. 10. (which is the number of the Circle) and it makes
15, bid him account 15. backward from E, beginning his account with that
diagram number he thought upon, so at E he shall account to himself, 7, at D
account 8, at C account 9 etc. So the account of 15 will exactly fall upon G,
the thing or number thought upon: and so of others: but to conceal it the
more, you may will the party from E to account 25. 35 etc. and it will be the
same.

There are some that use this play at cards, turned up side down, as the ten
simple Cards, with the King and Queen, the King standing for 12, and the
Queen for 11, and so knowing the situation of the Cards: and thinking a
certain hour of the day: cause the party to account from what Card he
pleases: with this Proviso, that when you see where he intends to account set
12. to that number, so in counting as before, the end of the account shall fall
upon the Card: which shall denote or show the hour thought upon, which being
turned up will give grace to the action, and wonder to those that are ignorant
in the cause.

PROBLEM. XV. How to make a door, or a Gate, which shall open on both sides.
ALL the skill and subtlety of this, rests in the artificial disposer of 4
plates of Iron, two at the higher end, and two at the lower end of the Gate: so
that one side may move upon the hooks or hindges of the Posts, and by the
other end may be made fast to the Gate, and so moving upon these hindges, the
Gate will open upon one side with the aforesaid plates, or hooks of Iron: and
by help of the other two plates, will open upon the other side.

PROBLEM. XVI. To show how a Ponderositie, or heavy thing, may be supported
upon the end of a staff (or such like) upon a Table, and nothing holding or
touching it.
TAke a paile which has a handle, and fill it full of water (or at pleasure:)
then take a staff or stick which may not roll upon the Table as E C, and
place the handle of the Paile upon the staff; then place another staff, or
stick, under the staff C E, which may reach from the bottom of diagram the
Paile unto the former staff C E, perpendicular wise: which suppose F.G, then
shall the Paile of water hang without falling, for if it fall it must fall
perpendicularly, or plumbe wise: and that cannot be seeing the staff C E,
supports it, it being parallel to the Horizon and sustained by the Table, and
it is a thing admirable that if the staff C E, were alone from the table, and
that end of the staff which is upon the Table were greater and heavier than
the other: it would be constrained to hang in that nature.

EXAMINATION.
NOw without some experience of this Problem, a man would acknowledge either a
possibility or impossibility; therefore it is that very touchstone of
knowledge in any thing, to discourse first if a thing be possible in nature,
and then if it can be brought to experience and under sense without seeing it
done. At the first, this proposition seems to be absurd, and impossible at the
first. Notwithstanding, being supported with two sticks as the figure
declares, it is made facill: for the Horizontall line to the edge of the
Table, is the Center of motion; and passes by the Center of gravitie, which
necessarily supporteth it.

PROBLEM. XVII. Of a deceitful Bowl to play withal.
MAke a hole in one side of the Bowl, and cast moulten Lead therein, and then
make up the hole close, that the knavery or deceit be not perceived: you will
have pleasure to see, that notwithstanding the Bowl is cast directly to the
play, how it will turn away side-wise: for that on that part of the Bowl
which is heavier upon the one side than on the other, it never will go truly
right, if artificially it be not corrected; which will hazard the game to
those which know it not: but if it be known that the leady side in rolling,
be always under or above, it may go indifferently right; if otherwise, the
weight will carry it always sidewise.

PROBLEM. XVIII. To part an Apple into 2. 4. or 8 like parts, without breaking
the Rind.
Pass an needle and thread under the Rind of the Apple; and then round it with
diverse turnings, until you come to the place where you began: then draw out
the thread gently, and part the Apple into as many parts as you think
convenient: and so the parts may be taken out between the parting of the
Rind, and the rind remaining always whole.

PROBLEM. XIX. To find a number thought upon without asking of any questions,
certain operations being done.
BId him add to the number thought (as admit 15) half of it, if it may be,
if not the greatest half that exceed the other but by an unite, which is 8;
and it makes 23: Secondly, unto this 23. add the half of it if it may be, if
not the greatest half viz 12. makes 35. in the mean time; note that if the
number thought upon cannot be halfed at the first time as here it cannot: then
for it keep 3. in the memory, if at the second time it will not be equally
halfed, reserve 2. in memory, but if at both times it could not be equally
halved, then may you together reserve five in memory: this done, cause him from
the last sum, viz. 35. subtract the double of the number thought, viz. 30.
rest 5. will him to take the half of that if he can, if not, reject 1. and
then take the half of the rest: which keep in your memory: then will him to
take the half again if he can, if not take one from it, which reserve in your
memory, and so perpetually halveing until 1. remain: for then mark how many
halfes there were taken, for the first half account 2, for the second 4, for
the third 8, etc. and add unto those numbers the ones which you reserved in
memory, so there being 5 remaining in this proposition, there were 2 halfeings:
for which last I account 4, but because it could not exactly be halved without
rejecting of 1: I add the 1 therefore to this 4, makes 5, which half or sum
always multiplied by 4, makes 20: from which subtract the first 3 and 2,
because the half could not be formerly added, leaves 15, the number thought
upon.

Other examples.

the number thought upon The number thought 79 The greatest half 40 3 The
sum 119 The number thought 12 The greatest half of which is 60 2 The half
of it 6 The sum of it is 179 The sum 18 The double of 79 is 158 The half
of it 9 Which taken from it, rests 21 The sum of it 27 The lesser half 10.
which halve: The double of the number 24 The half of this is 5 which makes Which
taken away, rests 3 The half of it 1 The half of this is 2 which is 10 For which
account 2 The half of this is 1, with 10 and 11 is 21. this 21 which is the
double of the last half with the remainder being multiplied by 4 makes 84,
from which take the aforesaid 3 and 2, rest 79, the number thought upon. and 1
put to it because the 3 could not be halfed, makes 3 this multiplied by 4
makes 12

PROBLEM. XX. How to make an uniforme, and an inflexible body, to pass through
two small holes of diverse forms, as one being circular, and the other square,
Quadrangular, and Triangularwise, yet so that the holes shall be exactly filled.
THis Problem is extracted from Geometrical observations, and seems at the
first somewhat obscure, yet that which may be extracted in this nature, will
appear more difficult and admirable. Now in all Geometrical practices, the
lesser or easier Problemes do always make way to facilitate the greater: and
the aforesaid Problem is thus resolved. Take a Cone or round Pyramedie, and
make a Circular hole in some board, or other hard material, which may be
equal to the bases of the Cone, and also a Triangular hole, one of whose sides
may be equal to the Diamiter of the circle, and the other two sides equal to
the length of the Cone: Now it is most diagram evident that this Conicall or
Pyramidall body, will fill up the Circular hole, and being placed side-wise
will fill up the Triangular hole: moreover if you cause a body to be turned,
which may be like to two Pyramides conjoined, then if a Circular hole be made,
whose Diamiter is equal to the diamiter of the Cones conjoined, and a
Quadrangular hole, whose slopeing sides be equal to the length of each side
of the Pyramidie, and the breadth of the hole equal to the diamiter of the
Circle, this conjoined Pyramidie shall exactly fill both the Circular hole, and
also Quadrangle hole.

PROBLEM. XXI. How with one uniforme body or such like to fill three several
holes: of which the one is round, the other a just square; and the third an
ovall form.
THis proposition seems more subtle than the former, yet it may be practiced
two ways: for the first, take a Cilindricall body as great or little as you
please: Now it is evident that it will fill a Circular hole, which is made
equal to the basis of it: if it be placed down right, and will also fill a
long square; whose sides are equal unto the Diamiter and length of the
Cylinder, and diagram according to Pergeus, Archimedes, etc. in their
Cylindricall demonstrations, a true Ovall is made when a Cylinder is cut
slopewise, therefore if the Ovall have breadth equal unto the Diamiter of the
Basis of the Cylinder, and any length whatsoever: the Cylinder being put into
his own Ovall hole shall also exactly fill it.

The second way is thus, make a Circular hole in some board, and also a square
hole, the side of which Square may be equal to the Diamiter of the Circle:
and lastly make a hole Ovall wise whose breadth may be equal unto the diagonall
of the Square; then let a Cylindricall body be made, whose Basis may be equal
unto the Circle, and the length equal also to the same: Now being placed down
right shall fall in the Circle, and flat-wise will fit the Square hole, and
being placed sloping-wise will fill the Ovall.

EXAMINATION.
YOu may note upon the last two Problemes farther, that if a Cone be cut
Ecliptickewise, it may pass through an Issocele Triangle through many Scalen
Triangles, and through an Ellipsis; and if there be a Cone cut scalen wise, it
will pass through all the former, only for the Ellipsis place a Circle: and
further if a sollid Colume be cut Eclipticke-wise it may fill a Circle, a
Square, diverse Parallelogrames, and diverse Ellipsis, which have different
Diamiters.

PROBLEM XXII. To find a number thought upon after another manner, than that
which is formerly delivered.
BId him that he multiply the number thought upon, by what number he pleases,
then bid him divide that product by any other number, and then multiply that
Quotient by some other number; and that product again divide by some other,
and so as often as he will: and here note that he declare or tell you by what
number he did multiply and devide. Now in the same time take a number at
pleasure, and secretly multiply and divide as often as he did: then bid him
devide the last number by that which he thought upon. In like manner do yours
privately, then will the Quotient of your devisor be the same with his, a thing
which seems admirable to those which are ignorant of the cause. Now to have
the number thought upon without seemeing to know the last Quotient, bid him
add the number thought upon to it, and ask him how much it makes: then
subtract your Quotient from it, there will remain the number thought upon. For
example, suppose the number thought upon were 5, multiply it by 4 makes 20:
this divided by 2, the Quotient makes 10, which multiplied by 6 makes 60, and
divided by 4 makes 15: in the same time admit you think upon 4, which
multiplied by 4 makes 16, this divided by 2 makes 8, which multiplied by 6
makes 48, and divided by 4 makes 12; then divide 15 by the number thought which
was 5, the Quotient is 3; divide also 12 by the number you took, viz. 4, the
Quotient is also 3 as was declared; therefore if the Quotient 3 be added unto
the number thought viz 5, it makes 8, which being known the number thought upon
is also known.

PROBLEM. XXIII. To find out many numbers that sundry persons, or one man has
thought upon.
IF the multitude of numbers thought upon be odd, as three numbers, five
numbers, seven etc. as for example let 5 numbers thought upon be these, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6. Bid him declare the sum of the first and second, which will be 5; the
second and third which makes 7, the third and fourth which makes 9, the fourth
and fifth which makes 11, and so always adding the two next together; ask him
how much the first and last makes together, which is 8: then take these sums
and place them in order, and add all these together which were in the odd
places: that is the first, third, and fifth, viz. 5. 9, 8, makes 22. In like
manner add all these numbers together which are in the even places, that is in
the second and fourth places, viz. 7 and 11 makes 18, subtract this from the
former 22, then there will remain the double of the first number thought upon,
viz. 4, which known the rest is easily known: seeing you know the sum of
the first and second; but if the multitude of numbers be even as these six
numbers, viz. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, cause the party to declare the sum of each
two, by antecedent and consequent, and also the sum of the second and last
which will be 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 10, then add the odd places together, except
the first that is 9, and 13, makes 22; add also the even places together, that
is 7, 11, 10, which makes 28; subtract the one from the other, there shall
remain the double of the second number thought upon, which known all the rest
are known.

PROBLEM. XXIIII. How is it that a man in one and the same time, may have his
head upward, and his feet upward, being in one and the same place.
THe answer is very facill, for to be so he must be supposed to be in the
center of the earth: for as the heavens is above on every side, Coelum undique
sursum, all that which looks to the heavens being distant from the center is
upward; and it is in this sense that Maurolyeus in his Cosmographie, and first
dialogue, reported of one that thought he was led by one of the Muses to hell,
where he saw Lucifer sitting in the middle of the world, and in the center of
the earth as in a Throne: having his head and feet upward.

PROBLEM. XXV. Of a Ladder by which two men ascending at one time; the more
they ascend the more they shall be asunder, notwithstanding one being as high
as another.
THis is most evident, that if there were a Ladder half on this side of the
Center of the earth, and the other half on the other side: and that two at the
Center of the world at one instant, being to ascend the one toward us, and the
other toward our Antipodes, they should in ascending go farther and farther,
one from another; notwithstanding both of them being of like height.

PROBLEM. XXVI. How it is that a man having but a Rode or Pole of land; does
brag that he may in a right line pass from place to place above 3000 miles.
THe opening of this is easy, forasmuch as he that possesses a Rode of ground
possesses not only the exterior surface of the earth, but is master also of
that which extends even to the center of the earth, and in this wise all
heritages and possessions are as so many Pyramides, whose summets or points
meet in the center of the earth, and the basis of them are nothing else but
each man's possession, field, or visible quantity; and therefore if there were
made or imagined so to be made, a descent to go to the bottom of the
heritage, which would reach to the center of the earth; it would be above 3000
miles in a right line as before.

PROBLEM. XXVII. How it is that a man standing upright, and looking which way
he will, he looks true North or South.
THis happens that if the party be under either of the Poles, for if he be
under the North pole, then looking any way he looks South, because all the
Meridians concur in the Poles of the world, and if he be under the South
pole, he looks directly North by the same reason.

PROBLEM. XXVIII. To tell any one what number remains after certain
operations being ended, without asking any question.
BId him to think upon a number, and will him to multiply it by what number
you think convenient: and to the product bid him add what number you please,
provided that secretly you consider, that it may be divided by that which
multiplied, and then let him divide the sum by the number which he first
multiplied by, and subtract from this Quotient the number thought upon: In the
same time divide apart the number which was added by that which multiplied, so
then your Quotient shall be equal to his remainder, wherefore without asking
him any thing, you shall tell him what did remain, which will seem strange to
him that knows not the cause: for example, suppose he thought 7, which
multiplied by 5 makes 35, to which add 10, makes 45, which divided by 5
yeeldes 9; from which if you take away one the number thought, (because the
Multiplier divided by the divisor gives the Quotient 1,) the rest will be 2,
which will be also proved, if 10 the number which was added, were divided by 5,
viz. 2.

PROBLEM. XXIX. Of the play with two several things.
IT is a pleasure to see and consider how the science of numbers does furnish
us, not one^y with sports, to recreate the spirits, but al^o bring us to the
knowledge of admirable things, as shall in some measure be shown in this
ensuing progression. In the mean time to produce always some of them: suppose
that a man hold diverse things in his hand, as Gould and Silver, and in one hand
he held the Gould, and in the other hand he held the Silver: to know subtly,
and by way of divination, or artificially in which hand the Gold or Silver si;
attribute to the gould, or suppose it have a certain prise, and so likewise
attribute to the Silver another price, conditionally that the one be od and the
other even: as for example, bid him that the Gould be valued at 4. Crowns, or
shillings, and the Silver at 3. Crowns or 3. Shillings or any other number so
that one be odd, and the other even as before: then bid him triple that which
is in the right hand, and double that which is in the left hand, and bid him
add these two products together, and ask him if it be even or odd, if it be
even then the Gould is in the right hand, if odd the Gould is in the left hand.

PROBLEM. XXX. Two numbers being proposed unto two several parties, to tell
which of these numbers is taken by each of them.
AS for example: admit you had proposed unto two men whose names were Peter,
and John, two numbers, or pieces of money, the one even, and the other odd, as
10. and 9. and let the one of them take one of the numbers, and the other
party take the other number, which they place privately to themselves: how
artificially, according to the congruitie, and excellency of numbers, to find
which of them did take 10. and which 9. without asking any question: and this
seems most subtle, yet delivered howsoever differing little from the former,
and is thus performed: Take privately to your self also two numbers, the one
even and the other odd, as 4. and 3. then bid Peter that he double the number
which he took, and do you privately double also your greatest number; then
bid John to triple the number which he has, and do you the like upon your
last number: add your two products together, and mark if it be even or odd,
then bid the two parties put their numbers together, and bid them take the
half of it, which if they cannot do, then immediately tell Peter he took 10.
and John 9. because the aggregate of the double of 4. and the triple of 3.
makes odd; and such would be the aggregate or sum of ^he double of Peter's
number and John's number, ^f Peter had taken 10. if otherwise, then they might
have taken half, and so John should have taken 10. and Peter 9. as suppose
Peter had taken 10. the double is 20, and the triple of ^9. the other number is
27. which put together makes 47. odd: in like manner the double of your number
conceived in mind, viz. 4. makes 8. and the triple of the 3. the other number,
makes 9. which set together makes 17. odd: Now you cannot take the half of
17. nor 47. which argues that Peter had the greater number, for otherwise the
double of 9. is 18. and the triple of 10. is 30. which set together makes 48.
the half of it may be taken: therefore in such case Peter took the less
number: and John the greater, and this being done cleanly carries much grace
with it.

PROBLEM. XXXI. How to describe a Circle that shall touch 3. Points placed
howsoever upon a plain, if they be not in a right line.
LEt the three points be A. B. C. put one foot of the Compass upon A. and
describe an Arch of a Circle at pleasure: and placed at B. cross that Arc in
the two points E. and F. and placed in C. cross the Arc in G. and H. then lay
a ruler upon G.H. and draw a line, and place a Ruler upon E. diagram and F. cut
the other line in K. so K. is the Center of the Circumference of a Circle,
which will pass by the said three points A. B. C. or it may be inverted
having a Circle drawn, to find the Center of that Circle. Make 3. points in
the circumference, and then use the same way: so shall you have the Center a
thing most facill, to every practitioner in the pinciples of Geometry.

PROBLEM. XXXII. How to change a Circle into a square form.
MAke a Circle upon pastboard or other material, as the Circle A. C. D. E. of
which A. is the Center; then cut it into 4. quarters and dispose them so, that
A. at the center of the Circle may always be at the Angle of the square, and
so the four quarters of the Circle being placed diagram so, it will make a
perfect square, whose side A.A. is equal to the diamiter B. D. Now here is to
be noted that the square is greater than the Circle by the vacuity in the
middle, viz. M.

PROBLEM. XXXIII. With one and the same compasses, and at one and the same
extent, or opening, how to describe many Circles concentricall, that is,
greater or lesser one than another.
IT is not without cause that many admire how this proposition is to be
resolved; yea in the judgment of some it is thought impossible: who consider
not the industry of an ingenious Geometritian, who makes it possible, and that
most facill, sundry ways; for in the first place if you make a Circle upon a
fine plain, and upon the Center of that Circle, a small pegge of wood be
placed, to be raised up and put down at pleasure by help of a small hole
made in the Center, then with the same opening of the Compasses, you may
describe Circles Concentricall: diagram that is, one greater or lesser than
another: for the higher the Center is lifted up, the lesser the Circle will be.
Secondly, the compass being at that extent upon a Gibus body, a Circle may be
described, which will be less than the former, upon a plain, and more
artificially upon a Globe, or round bowl: and this again is most obvious upon
a round Pyramide, placing the Compasses upon the top of it which will be far
less than any of the former; and this is demonstrated by the 20. Pro. of the
first of Euclids, for the Diamiter E.D. is less than the line A D. A E. taken
together, and the lines A D. A E. being equal to the Diamiter B C. because of
the same distance or extent of opening the Compasses, it follows that the
Diamiter E D. and all his Circles together is much less than the Diamiter, and
the Circle B C. which was to be performed.

PROBLEM. XXXIIII. Any numbers under 10. being thought upon, to find what
numbers they were.
LEt the first number be doubled, and unto it add 5. and multiplied that sum
by 5. and unto it add 10. and the next number thought upon; multiplye this
same again by 10. and add unto it the next number, and so proceed: now if he
declare the last sum; mark if he thought but upon one figure, for then
subtract only 35. from it, and the first figure in the place of tens is the
number thought upon: if he thought upon two figures, then subtract 35. also,
and the 2. also the said 35. from his last sum, and the two figures which
remains are the number thought upon: if he thought upon three figures, then
subtract 350. and then the first 3. figures are the numbers thought upon, etc.
so if one thought upon these numbers 5.7. 9, 6. double the first, makes 10. to
which add 5. makes 15. this multiplied by 5. makes 75. to which add 10. makes
85. to this add the next number, viz. 7. makes 92. this multiplied by 10.
makes 920. to which add the next number, viz. 9. makes 929. which multiplied
by 10. makes 9290. to which add 6. makes 9296. from which subtract 3500.
rests 5796. the four numbers thought upon. Now because the two last figures
are like the two numbers thought upon: to conceal this bid him take the half
of it, or put first 12. or any other number to it, and then it will not be so
open.

PROBLEM. XXXV. Of the Play with the Ring.
AMongst a company of 9. or 10. persons, one of them having a Ring, or such
like: to find out in which hand: upon which finger, joint it is; this will
cause great astonishment to ignorant spirits, which will make them believe that
he that does it works by magic, or witchcraft: But in effect it is nothing
else but an nimble act of Arithmeticke, founded upon the precedent Problem:
for first it is supposed that the persons stand or sit in order that one is
first, the next second, etc. likewise there must be imagined that of these two
hands the one is first and the other second: and also of the five fingers the
one is first, the next is second, and lastly of the joints, the one is as 1.
the other as 1. the other is as 2. the other as 3. etc. from whence it appears
that in performing this Play there is nothing else to be done than to think 4.
numbers: for example if the forth person had the Ring in his left hand: and
upon the fifth finger and third joint, and I would divine and find it out thus:
I would proceed as in the 35. Problem: in causing him to double the first
number: that is, the number of persons, which was 4. and it makes 8. to which
ad 5. makes 13. this multiplied by 5. makes 65. put 10. to it, makes 75. unto
this put 2. for the number belonging to the left hand, and so it makes 77.
which multiplied by 10. makes 770. to this add the number of the fingers upon
which the Ring is, viz. 5. makes 775. this multiplied by 10 makes 7750. to
which add the number for the joint upon which the Ring is viz. the third
joint, makes 7753. to which cause him to add 14. or some other number, to
conceal it the better: and it makes 7767. which being declared unto you,
subtract 3514. and there will remain 4. 2. 5. 3. which figures in order
declares the whole mystery of that which is to be known, 4. signifies forth
person, 2. the left hand, 5. the fifth finger, and 3. the third joint of that
finger.

PROBLEM. XXXVI. The Play of 3 4. or more Dice.
THat which is said of the two precedent Problemes may be applied to this of
Dice (and many other particular things) to find what number appear upon each
Dice being cast be some one, for the points that are upon any side of a Dice
are always less than 10. and the points of each side of a Dice may be taken
for a number thought upon: therefore the Rule will be as the former: As for
example, one having thrown three Dice and you would declare the numbers of
each one, or how much they make together, bid him double the points of one of
the Dice, to which bid him add 5. then multiply that by 5. and to it add 10.
and to the sum bid him add the number of the second Dice: and multiply that
by 10. lastly, to this bid him add the number of the last Dice, and then let
him declare the whole number: then if from it you subtract 350. there will
remain the number of the three Dice thrown.

PROBLEM. XXXVII. How to make water in a Glass seem to boil and sparkle.
TAke a Glass near full of water or other liquor; and setting one hand upon
the foot of it, to hold it fast: turn slightly one of the fingers of your
other hand upon the brimme, or edge of the Glass; having before privately wet
your finger: and so passing softly on with your finger in pressing a little:
for then first the Glass will begin to make a noise: secondly the parts of the
Glass will sencibly appear to tremble, with notable rarification and
condensation: thirdly the water will shake, seem to boil: fourthly it will
cast it self out of the Glass, and leap out by small drops, with great
astonishment to the standers by; if they be ignorant of the cause of it, which
is only in the Rarifaction of the parts of the Glass: occasioned by the
motion and pressure of the finger.

EXAMINATION.
THe cause of this, is not in the rarifaction of the parts of the Glass, but
it is rather in the quick local motion of the finger, for reason shows us
that by how much a Body draws nearer to a quality, the less is it subject
or capable of another which is contrary unto it: now condensation, and
rarifaction are contrary qualities and in this Problem there is three bodies
considered, the glass, the water, and the air; now it is evident that the
Glass being the most solid, and impenitrable Body, is less subject, and
capable of rarifaction than the water, the water is less subject than the
air, and if there be any rarifaction, it is rather considerable in the air
than in the water, which is inscribed by the Glass, and above the water, and
rather in the water than in the Glass: the agitation, or the trembling of the
parts of the Glass to the sense appears not: for it is a continued body; if
in part why then not in the whole; and that the water turns in the Glass this
appears not, but only the upper contiguous parts of the water: that at the
bottom being less subject to this agitation, and it is most certain that by
how much quicker the circular motion of the finger upon the edge of the Glass
is, by so much the more shall the Air be agitated, and so the water shall
receive some apparent affection more or less from it, according to that
motion: as we see from the quickness of wind upon the Sea, or calm
thereof, that there is a great or lesser agitation in the water; and for
further examination, we leave it to the search of these which are curious.

PROBLEM XXXVIII. Of a fine vessel which holds wine or water, being cast into
it at a certain height, but being filled higher, it will run out of its own
accord.
LEt there be a vessel A. B. C. D. in the middle of which place a Pipe; whose
ends both above at E, and below at the bottom of the vessel as at F. are
open; let the end E. be somewhat lower than the brimme of the Glass: about
this Pipe place another Pipe as H. L, which mounts a little above E, and let it
most diligently be closed at H. that no Air enter in thereby, and this Pipe at
the bottom may have a small hole to give passage unto the water: then power in
water or wine, and as long as it mounts not above E, it is safe; but if you
power in the water so that it mount above it, farewell all: for it will not
cease until it be all gone out: the same may be diagram done in disposing any
crooked Pipe in a vessel in the manner of a faucet or funnell, as in the
figure H: for fill it, under H. at pleasure, and all will go well; but if you
fill it unto H. you will see fine sport, for then all the vessel will be
empty incontinent, and the subtlety of this will seem more admirable, if you
conceal the Pipe by a Bird, Serpent, or such like, in the middle of the
Glass. Now the reason of this is not difficult to these which know the nature
of a Cock or Faucet; for it is a bowed Pipe one end of which is put into the
water or liquor, and sucking at the other end until the Pipe be full, then
will it run of it self; and it is a fine secret in nature to see, that if
the end of the Pipe which is out of the water be lower than the water, it will
run out without ceasing: but if the mouth of the Pipe be higher than the
water or level with it, it will not run, although the Pipe which is without
be many times bigger than that which is in the water: for it is the property of
water to keep always exactly level.

EXAMINATION.
HEre is to be noted that if the face of the water without be in one and the
same plain, with that which is within, though the outtermost Pipe be ten times
greater than that which is within: the water naturally will not run, but if
the plain of the water without be any part lower than that which is within, it
will freely run: and here may be noted further that if the mouth of the Pipe
which is full of water, does but only touch the superficies of the water
within, although the other end of the Pipe without be much lower than that
within, the water it will not run at all: which contradicts the first ground;
hence we gather that the pressure or ponderositie of the water within, is the
cause of running in some respect.

PROBLEM. XXXIX. Of a Glass very pleasant.
SOmetimes there are Glasses which are made of a double fashion, as if one
Glass were within another, so that they seem but one, but there is a little
space between them. Now power wine or other liquor between the two edges by
help of a Tunnell, into a little hole left to this end: so will there appear
two fine delusions or fallacies; for though there be not a drop of wine
within the hollow of the Glass, it will seem to these which behold it that it
is an ordinary Glass full of wine, and that especially to these which are
sidewise of it; and if any one moove it, it will much confirm it, because of
the motion of the wine: but that which will give most delight, is that if any
one shall take the Glass, and putting it to his mouth shall think to drink
the wine; instead of which he shall suppe the air: and so will cause laughter
to these that stand by: who being deceived, will hold the Glass to the light;
and thereby considering that the rays or beams of the light are not reflected
to the eye, as they would be if there were a liquid substance in the Glass:
hence they have an assured proof to conclude, that the hollow of the Glass is
totally empty.

PROBLEM. XL. If any one should hold in each hand, as many pieces of money as
in the other, how to find how much there is.
BId him that holds the money that he put out of one hand into the other what
number you think convenient: (provided that it may be done,) this done, bid
him that out of the hand that he put the other number into, that he take out of
it as many as remain in the other hand, and put it into that hand: for then be
assured that in the hand which was put the first taking away: there will be
found just the double of the number taken away at the first. Example, admit
there were in each hand 12 Shillings or Counters, and that out of the right
hand you bid him take 7 and put it into the left: and then put into the right
hand from the left as many as does remain in the right, which is 5: so there
will be in the left hand 14, which is the double of the number taken out of
the right hand, to wit 7: then by some of the rules before delivered, it is
easy to find how much is in the right hand, viz. 10.

PROBLEM. XLI. Many Dice being cast, how artificially to discover the number of
the points that may arise.
SVppose any one had cast three Dice secretly, bid him that he add the points
that were upmost together: then putting one of the Dice apart, unto the former
sum add the points which are under the other two, then bid him throw these
two Dice, and mark how many points a pair are upwards, which add unto the
former sum: then put one of these Dice away not changing the side, mark the
points which are under the other Dice, and add it to the former sum: lastly
throw that one Dice, and whatsoever appears upward add it unto the former
sum; and let the Dice remain thus: this done, coming to the Table, note
what points does appear upward upon the three Dice which add privately
together, and unto it add 21 or 3 times 7: so this Addition or sum shall be
equal to the sum which the party privately made of all the operations which
he formerly made. As if he should throw three Dice, and there should appear
upward 5, 3, 2. the sum of them is 10: and setting one of them aparte as 5.
unto 10, add the points which are under 3 and 2, which is 4 and 5; and it
makes 19: then casting these two Dice suppose there should appear 4 and 1,
this added unto 9 makes 24: and setting one of these two Dice aparte as the 4.
unto the former 24, I add the number of points which is under the other Dice,
viz. under 1, that is 6, which makes 30. Last of all I throw that one Dice, and
suppose there did appear 2, which I add to the former 30, and it makes 32:
then leaving the 3 Dice thus, the points which are upward will be these, 5, 4,
2, unto which add secretly 21, (as before was said) so have you 32 the same
number which he had: and in the same manner you may practice with 4, 5, 6, or
many Dice or other bodies, observing only that you must add the points
opposite of the Dice: for upon which depends the whole demonstration or secret
of the play; for always that which is above and underneath makes 7: but if it
make another number, then must you add as often that number.

PROBLEM. XLII. Two metals as Gold and Silver, or of other kind weighing
alike, being privately placed into two like Boxes, to find which of them the
Gold or Silver is in.
IT is said that an Emperor was requested by one of his servants after he had
long time remained with him, to assign him some reward: to which after few
days the Emperor condescended, and caused him to come into his Treasury,
where he had prepared two Boxes, one full of Gold, and the other full of Lead,
both weighing, and of form and magnitude alike: and bid him choose which he
would have. Now many think that in this Problem one must be guided only by
fortune in this choice, and it is that which most makes a man happy in such a
choice: but the want of knowledge causes them so to judge which knows not
otherwise. A Mathematician accounts it an easy proposition and will infallibly
choose the chest of gold, and leave the chest of lead, without either breaking,
or opening any of the chests, and not go by chance and fortune: for if he may
be permitted to weigh those chests first in the air, then in the water: it is
a thing clear by the proportion of diagram mettalls, and according to the
principles of Archimedes, that the Gold shall be less weighty by his
eighteenth part, and the lead by his eleventh part; wherefore there may be
gathered in which is the Gold, and in which is the lead.

But because that this experiment in water has diverse accedents, and
therefore subject to a caution; and namely because the matter of the chest,
mettle, or other things may hinder:

Behold here a more subtle and certain invention to find and discover it out
without weighing it in the water: Now experience and reason shows us that two
like bodies or magnitudes of equal weight, and of diverse mettalls, are not of
equal quantity: and seeing that gold is the heaviest of all mettalls, it will
occupy less room or place; from which will follow that the like weight of
lead in the same form, will occupy or take up more room or place. Now let
there be therefore presented 2 globes or chests of wood or other matter alike,
and equal one to the other, in one of which in the middle there is another
Globe or body of lead weighing 12 pound (as C,) and in the other a Globe or
like body of gold weighing 12 pound (as B.) Now it is supposed that the wooden
globes or chests are of equal weight, form, and magnitude^ and to discover in
which the gold or lead is in, take a broad pair of Compasses and clip one of
the coffers or globes somewhat from the middle as at D; then fix in the chest
or globe a small piece of iron between the feet of the compasses, as E K, at
the end of which hang a weight G so that the other end may be counterpoysed,
and hang in aequilibro: and do the like to the other chest or globe. Now if
that the other chest or globe being clipsed in like distant from the end, and
hanging at the other end the same weight G. there be found no difference: then
clipse them nearer toward the middle, that so the points of the Compass may
be against some of the mettell which is enclosed: or just against the
extremity of the gold as in D, and suppose it hang thus in aequilibrio; it is
certain that in the other coffer is the lead; for the points of the Compasses
being advanced as much as before, as at F. which takes up a part of the lead,
(because it occupies a greater place than the gold) therefore that shall help
the weight G to weigh, and so will not hang in aequilibrio except G be placed
near to F: hence we may conclude that there is the lead; and in the other
chest or globe there is the gold.

EXAMINATION.
IF the two Boxes being of equal magnitude weighed in the air be found to be
of equal weight, they shall necessarily take up like place in the water, and
therefore weigh also one as much as another: hence there is no possibility to
find the inequallitie of the mettells which are enclosed in these Boxes in the
water: the intention of Archimedes was not upon contrary mettells enclosed in
equal Boxes, but consisted of comparing mettels, simple in the water one with
another: therefore the inference is false and absurd.

PROBLEM: XLIII. Two Globes of diverse mettles, (as one gold and the other
copper) yet of equal weight being put into a box as B. G. to find in which
end the gold or copper is.
THis is discovered by the changing of the places of the two Bowls or Globes
having the same counterpoyse H. to be houng at the other side as in N. and if
the Gould which is the lesser Globe were before the nearest to the handle D.E.
having now changed his place will be farthest from the handle D. E. as in K.
therefore the Center of gravitie of the two Globes taken together, shall be
farther separate from the middle of the diagram handle (under which is the
Center of gravitie of the Box) than it was before, and seeing that the handle
is always in the middle of the box, the weight N. must be augmented, to keep
it in aequilibria: and by this way one may know, that if at the second time,
the counterpoise be too light, it is sign that the Gould is farthest off the
handle, as at the first trial it was nearest.

PROBLEM. XLIIII. How to represent diverse sorts of Rainebowes here below.
THe Rainebow is a thing admirable in the world, which ravisheth often the eyes
and spirits of men in consideration of his rich intermingled colors which are
seen under the clouds, seeming as the glistering of the stars, precious
stones, and ornaments of the most beauteous flowers: some part of it as the
resplendant stars, or as a rose, or burning cole of fire: in it one may see
dies of sundry sorts, the violet, the blew, the orion, the saphir, the jacint,
and the emeraud colors, as a lively plant placed in a green soil: and as a
most rich treasure of nature, it is a high work of the Sun who casts his
rays or beams as a curious Painter draws strokes with his pensell, and
places his colors in an exquisite situation; and Solomon says, Eccles. 43.
it is a chief and principal work of God. Notwithstanding there is left to
industry how to represent it from above, here below, though not in perfection
yet in part, with the same intermixture of colors that is above.

Have you not seen how by Oars of a Boat it does exceeding quickly glide
upon the water with a pleasant grace? Aristotle says that it colors the
water and makes a thousand atoms, upon which the beams of the Sun
reflecting makes a kind of colored Rainebow: or may we not see in houses or
gardens of pleasure artificial fountains, which power forth their droppie
streams of water, that being between the Sun and the fountain, there will
be presented as a continual Rainebow? But not to go farther, I will show you
how you may do it at your door, by a fine and facill experiment.

Take water in your mouth, and turn your back to the Sun, and your face
against some obscure place, then blow out the water which is in your mouth,
that it may be sprinkled in small drops and vapors: you shall see these
atoms vapors in the beams of the Sun to turn into a fair Rabinebow, but
all the grief is that it lasts not but soon is vanished.

But to have one more stable and permanent in his colors, take a Glass full
of water and expose it to the Sun, so that the rays that pass through
strike upon a shadowed place, you will have pleasure to see the fine form of a
Rainebow by this reflection. Or take Trigonall Glass or Cristall Glass of
diverse Angles, and look through it, or let the beams of the Sun pass
through it, or with a candle let the appearances be received upon a shadowed
place: you will have the same contentment.

PROBLEM. XLV. How that if all the Powder in the world were enclosed within a
bowl of paper or glass, and being fired on all parts, it could not break
that bowl.
IF the bowl and the powder be uniforme in all his parts, the^ by that means
the powder would press and move equally on each side, in which there is no
possibility whereby it ought to begin by one side more than another. Now it is
impossible that the bowl should be broken in all his parts: for they are
infinite.

Of like finenes or subtlety may it be that a bowl of iron from a high place
upon a plain pavement of thin Glass, it were impossible any wise to break
it; if the bowl were perfectly round, and the Glass flat and uniforme in all
his parts: for the bowl would touch the Glass but in one point, which is in
the middle of infinite of parts which is about it: neither is there any cause
why it ought more on one side than on another, seeing that it may not be done
with all his sides together; it may be concluded as speaking naturally, that
such a bowl falling upon such a glass will not break it. But this matter is
mere Metaphysicall, and all the workmen in the world cannot ever with all
their industry make a bowl perfectly round, or a Glass uniforme.

PROBLEM. XLVI. To find a number which being divided by 2 there will remain
1, being divided by 3, there will remain 1; and so likewise being divided by
4, 5, or 6. there would still remain 1: but being divided by 7, there will
remain nothing.
IN many Authors of Arithmeticke this Problem is thus proposed: A woman
carrying eggs to market in a basket, met an unruly fellow who broake them;
who was by order made to pay for them: and she being demanded what number she
had, she could not tell: but she remembered that counting them by 2, and 2;
there remained 1: likewise by 3 and 3, by 4 and 4, by 5 and 5, by 6 and 6;
there still remained 1: but when she counted them by 7 and 7, there remained
nothing: Now how may the number of eggs be discovered?

Find a number which may exactly be measured by 7, and being measured by 2, 3,
4, 5, and 6; there will still remain a unity: multiply these numbers together,
makes 702, to which add 1; so have you the number, viz. 721: in like manner
301 will be measured by 2, 3, 4, 5, 6; so that 1 remains: but being measured
by 7, nothing will remain; to which continually add 220, and you have other
numbers which will do the same: hence it is doubtful what number she had,
therefore not to fail it must be known whether they did exceed 400, 800, etc.
in which it may be conjectured that it could not exceed 4 or 5 hundred, seeing
a man or woman could not carry 7 or 8 hundred eggs; therefore the number was
the former 301. which she had in her basket: which being counted by 2 and 2,
there will remain 1, by 3 and 3, etc. but counted by 7 and 7, there will
remain ^.

PROBLEM XLVII. One had a certain number of crowns, and counting them by 2
and 2, there rested 1: counting them by 3 and 3, there rested 2: counting them
by 4 and 4, there rested 3: counting them by 5 and 5, there rested 4: counting
them by 6 and 6, there rested 5: but counting them by 7 and 7, there remained
nothing: how many crowns might he have.
THis Question has some affinity to the precedent, and the resolution is
almost in the same manner: for here there must be found a number, which
multiplied by 7, and then divided by 2, 3, 4, 5, 6; there may always remain a
number less by 1 than the divisor: Now the first number which arives in this
nature is 119, unto which if 420 be added, makes 539, which also will do the
same: and so by adding 420, you may have other numbers to resolve this
proposition.

PROBLEM. XLVIII. How many sorts of weights in the least manner must there be
to weigh all sorts of things between 1 pound and 10 pound, and so unto 121,
and 364 pound.
TO weigh things between 1 and 40: take numbers in triple proportion, so that
their sum be equal, or somewhat greater than 40, as are the numbers 1. 3. 9.
27. I say that with 4 such weights, the first being of 1 pound, the second
being 3 pound, the third being 9 pound, and the fourth being 27: any weight
between 1 and 40 pound may be weighed. As admit to weigh 21 pound, put unto
the thing that is to be weighed the 9 pound weight, then in the other balance
put 27 pound and 3 pound which does counterpoise 21 pound and 9 pound: and if
20 pound were to be weighed, put to it in the balance 9 and 1, and in the
other balance put 27 and 3, and so of others.

In the same manner take those 5 weights, 1, 3, 9, 27, 81, you may weigh with
them between 1 pound, and 121 pound: and taking those 6 weights, as 1, 3, 9,
27, 81, 243, you may weigh even from 1 pound unto 364 pound: this depends upon
the property of continued proportionalls, the latter of which containing twice
all the former.

PROBLEM. XLIX. Of a deceitful balance which being empty seems to be just,
because it hangs in aequilibrio: notwithstanding putting 12 pound in one
balance, and 11 in the other, it will remain in aequilibrio.
ARistotle makes mention of this balance in his mechanicke Questions, and
says that the Merchants of purpose in his time used them to deceive the world:
the subtlety or craft of which is thus, that one arm of the balance is
longer than another, by the same proportion, that one weight is heavier than
another: As if the beam were 23 inches long, and the handle placed so that 12
inches should be on one side of it, diagram and 11 inches on the other side:
conditionally that the shorter end should be as heavy as the longer, a thing
easy to be done: then afterward put into the balance two unequal weights
in such proportion as the parts of the beam have one unto another, which is 12
to 11; but so that the greater be placed in the balance which hangs upon the
shorter part of the beam, and the lesser weight in the other balance: it is
most certain that the balances will hang in aequilibrio, which will seem
most sincere and just; though it be most deceitful, abominable, and false.

The reason of this is drawn from the experiments of Archimedes, who shows
that two unequal weights will counterpoyse one another, when there is like
proportion between the parts of the beam (that the handle separates) and the
weights themselves: for in one and the same counterpoise, by how much it is
farther from the Center of the handle, by so much it seems heavier; therefore
if there be a diversity of distance that the balances hang from the handle,
there must necessarily be an inequallity of weight in these balances to make
them hang in aequilibrio, and to discover if there be deceit, change the
weight into the other balance, for as soon as the greater weight is placed in
the balance that hangs on the longer parts of the beam: it will weigh down
the other instantly.

PROBLEM. L. To heave or lift up a bottle with a straw.
TAke a straw that is not bruised, bow it that it make an Angle, and put it
into the bottle: so that the greatest diagram end be in the neck; then the
Reed being put in the bowed part will cast sidewise, and make an Angle as in
the figure may be seen; then may you take the end which is out of the bottle
in your hand, and heave up the bottle: and it is so much surer, by how much the
Angle is acuter or sharper; and the end which is bowed approaches to the other
perpendicular parts which comes out of the bottle.

PROBLEM. LI. How in the middle of a wood or desert, without the sight of the
Sun, Stars, Shadow or Compass, to find out the North or South, or the
four Cardinal points of the world, East, West, etc.
IT is the opinion of some, that the winds are to be observed in this: if it
be hot, the South is found by the winds that blow that way, but this
observation is uncertain and subject to much error: nature will help you in
some measure to make it more manifest than any of the former from a tree, thus:
cut a small tree off even to the ground, and mark the many circles that is
about the sap or pith of the tree, which seem nearer together in some part
than in other, which is by reason of the suns motion about the tree: for that
the humiditie of the parts of the tree toward the South by the heat of the
Sun is rarefied and caused to extend: and the Sun not giving such heat
toward the North part of the tree, the sap is lesser rarefied but condensed;
by which the circles are nearer together on the North part, than on the South
part: therefore if a line be drawn from the widest to the narrowest diagram
part of the circles, it shall show the North and South of the world: Another
experiment may be thus, take a small needle such as women work with: place it
gently down flatwise upon still water and it will not sink, (which is against
the general tenet that iron will not swim) which needle will by little and
little turn to the North and South points. But if the needle be great and
will not swim, thrust it through a small piece of cork or some such like
thing, and then it will do the same: for such is the property of iron when it
is placed in aequlibrio, it strives to find out the Poles of the word, or
points of North and South: in a manner as the magnes does.

EXAMINATION.
HEre is observable that the moisture which aydeth to the growth of the tree,
is dilated and rarefied by the Meridionall heat, and contracted by the
Septentrionall cold: this rarifaction works upon the part of the humor or
moisture that is more thin, which does easily dissipate and evaporate: which
evaporation carries a part of the salt with it; and because that solidation or
condensation, so that there is left but a part of the nourishment which the
heat bakes up and consumes: so contrarily on the other side the condensation
and restrictive quality of the moisture causes less evaporation and
perdition: and so consequently there remains more nourishment, which makes a
greater increase on that side than on the other side: for as trees have their
growth in winter, because their powers, and these of the earth are shut up: so
in the spring when their powers are open, and when the sap and moisture is
drawn by it, there is not such cold on the North side that it may be
condensed at once: But contrarily to the side which is South, the heat may be
such, that in little time by continuance, this moisture is dissipated greatly:
and cold is nothing but that which hardneth and contracteth the moisture of the
tree, and so converteth it into wood.

PROBLEM. LII. Three persons having taken Counters, Cards, or other things, to
find how much each one has taken.
CAuse the third party to take a number which may be divided by 4, and as often
as he takes 4, let the second party take 7, and the first take 13, then cause
them to put them all together and declare the sum of it: which secretly
divide by 3, and the Quotient is the double of the number which the third
person did take. Or cause the third to give unto the second and first, as many
as each of them has; then let the second give unto the first and third, as
many as each of them has: lastly let the third give unto the second and first,
as many as each of them has; and then ask how much one of them has: (for
they will have then all alike,) so half of that number is the number that the
third person had at the first: which known all is known.

PROBLEM LIII. How to make a consort of music of many parts with one voice,
or one instrument only.
THis Problem is resolved, so that a singer or player upon an instrument, be
near an Echo which answers his voice or instrument; and if the Echo
answers but once at a time, he may make a double; if twice, then a triple; if
three times, then an harmony of four parts; for it must be such a one that is
able to exercise both tune and note as occasion requires. As when he begins ut,
before the Echo answer, he may begin sol, and pronounce it in the same tune
that the Echo answers, by which means you have a fifth, agreeable consort of
music: then in the same time that the Echo follows, to sound the second
note sol, he may sound forth another sol higher or lower to make an eight; the
most perfect consort of music, and so of others; if he will continue his
voice with the Echo: and sing alone with two parts. Now experience shows this
to be true, which often comes to pass in many Churches; making one to believe
that there is many more parts in the music of a Quier, than in effect truly
there is, because of the resounding and multiplying of the voice, and
redoubling of the Quire.

PROBLEM. LIIII. To make or describe an Ovall form, or that which near
resembles unto it, at one turning with a pair of a common Compasses.
THere is many fine ways in Geometrical practices, to make an Ovall figure or
one near unto it, by several centers: any of which I will not touch upon; but
show how it may be done promptly upon one center only. In which I will say
nothing of the Ovall form which appears, when one describes circles with the
points of a common compasses, somewhat deep upon a skin stretched forth
hard: which contracting it self in some parts of the skin makes an Ovall
form. But it will more evidently appear upon a column or cylinder: if paper
be placed upon it, then with a pair of Compasses describe as it were a circle
upon it, which paper afterward being extended, will not be circular but
ovall-wise: and a pair of Compasses may be so accommodated that it may be done
also upon a plain thus. As let the length of the Ovall be H. K, fasten 2 pinnes
or nails near the end of that line as diagram F. G, and take a thread which
is double to the length of G. H, or F. K: then if you take a Compass which may
have one foot lower than another, with a spring between his legs: and
placing one foot of this Compass in the Center of the Ovall, and guiding the
thread by the other foot of the Compasses, and so carrying it about: the spring
will help to describe and draw the Ovall form. But in stead of the Compasses
it may be done with ones hand only, as in the figure may appear.

PROBLEM. LV. Of a purse difficult to be opened.
IT is made to shut and open with ring first at each side there is a strap or
string, as A B and CD, at the end of which are 2 rings, B and D, and the string
C D passes through the ring B, so that it may not come out again; or be
parted one from another: and so that the ring B, may slide up and down upon
the string C D, then over the purse there is a piece of leather E. F. G. H.
which covers the opening of the purse, and there is another diagram piece of
leather A. E. which passes through many ringes: which has a slitte toward
the end I. so great that the string B. C. may slide into it: Now all the
cunning or craft is how to make fast or to open the purse, which consists in
making the string B.C. slide through the side at I; therefore bring down B. to
I, then make the end I. pass through the ring B: and also D. with his string
to pass through the slit I, so shall the purse be fast; and then may the
strings be put as before: and it will seem difficult to discover how it was
done. Now to open the purse, put through the end I. through the ring B, and
then through the slit I; by which you put through the string D C: by this way
the purse will be opened.

PROBLEM. LVI. Whether it is more hard and admirable without Compasses to make
a perfect circle, or being made to find out the Center of it.
IT is said that upon a time past, two Mathematicians meet, and they would
make trial of their industry: the one made instantly a perfect circle without
Compasses, and the other immediately pointed out the center thereof with the
point of a needle: now which is the chiefest action: it seems the first: for
to draw the most noblest figure upon a plain Table without other help than
the hand, and the mind, is full of admiration: to find the center is but to
find out only one point, but to draw a round, there must be almost infinite
points, equidistant from the center or middle: that in conclusion it is both
the circle and the center together. But contrarily it may seem that to find
the center is more difficult, for what attention, vivacitie, and subtlety must
there be in the spirit, in the eye, in the hand, which will choose the true
point amongst a thousand other points? He that makes a circle keeps always
the same distance, and is guided by a half distance to finish the rest; but he
that must find the center, must in the same time take heed to the parts about
it, and choose one only point which is equal distant from an infinite of
other points which are in the circumference: which is very difficult. Aristotle
confirms this amongst his moralls, and seems to explain the difficulty
which is to be found in the middle of virtue; for it may want a thousand ways
and be far separated from the true center of the end of a right mediocritie
of a virtuous action: for to do well it must touch the middle point which is
but one, and there must be a true point which respects the end, and that's but
one only. Now to judge which is the most difficults as before is said, either
to draw, the round or to find the center; the round seems to be harder than
to find the center, because that in finding of it, it is done at once, and
has an equal distant from the whole: But as before to draw a round there is a
visible point imagined, about which the circle is to be drawn. I esteem that
it is as difficult therefore if not more, to make the circle without a center,
as to find the middle or center of that circle.

PROBLEM. LVI. Any one having taken 3 Cards, to find how many points they
contain.
THis is to be exercised upon a full pack of Cards of 52, then let one choose
any three at pleasure secretly from your sight: and bid him secretly account
the points in each Card: and will him to take as many Cards as will make up 15
to each of the points of his Cards; then will him to give you the rest of the
Cards, for 4 of them being rejected, the rest shows the number of points that
his three Cards which he took at the first did contain. As if the 3 Cards
were 7, 10, and 4; now 7 wants of 15, 8: take 8 Cards therefore for your first
Card: the 10 wants of 15. 5, take 5 Cards for your second Card: lastly 4 wants
of 15, 11, take 11 Cards for your third Card, and giving him the rest of the
Cards, there will be 25; from which take 4, there remains 21: the number of
the three Cards taken, viz. 7, 10, and 4.

Whosoever would practice this play with 4, 5, 6, or more Cards, and that the
whole number of Cards be more or less than 52; and that the term be 15, 14,
12, etc. this general rule ensuing may serve: multiply the term by the number
of Cards taken at first: to the product add the number of Cards taken, then
subtract this sum from the whole number of Cards; the remainder is the number
which must be subtracted from the Cards, which remains to make up the game:
if there remain nothing after the substraction, then the number of cards
remaining does justly show the number of points which were in the Cards chosen.
If the substraction cannot be made, then subtract the number of Cards from that
number, and the remainder added unto the Cards that did remain, the sum will
be the number of points in the Cards taken, as if the Cards were 7, 10, 5, 8,
and the term given were 12; so the first wants 5, the second wants 2, the
third wants 7, and the fourth wants 4 Cards, which taken, the party gives you
the rest of the Cards: then secretly multiply 12 by 4, makes 48; to which add
4 the number of Cards taken, makes 52, from which 52 should be taken, rest
nothing: therefore according to the direction of the remainder of the Cards
which are 30, is equal to the points of the four Cards taken, viz. 7, 10, 5,
8. Again let these five Cards be supposed to be taken, 8, 6, 10, 3, 7; their
differences to 15, the terms are 7, 9, 5, 12, 8, which number of Cards taken,
there will remain but 6 Cards: then privately multiply 15 by 5, makes 75, to
which add 5 makes 80, from this take 52 the number of Cards, rest 28, to which
add the remainder of Cards, make 34: the sum with 8, 6, 10, 3, 7.

PROBLEM. LVII. Many Cards placed in diverse ranks, to find which of these
Cards any one has thought.
TAke 15 Cards and place them in 3 heaps in ranke-wise, 5 in a heap: now
suppose any one had thought one of these Cards in any one of the heaps, it is
easy to find which of the Cards it is, and it is done thus: ask him in which
of the heaps it is, which place in the middle of the other two: then throw
down the Cards by 1 and 1 into three several heaps in ranke-wise, until all
be cast down; then ask him in which of the ranks his Card is: which heap
place in the middle of the other two heaps always; and this do four times
at least, so in putting the Cards altogether, look upon the Cards, or let
their back be toward you, and throw out the eight Card: for that was the
Card thought upon without fail.

PROBLEM. LVIII. Many Cards being offered to sundry persons, to find which of
those Cards any one thinks upon.
ADmit there were 4 persons, then take 4 Cards and show them to the first: bid
him think one of them, and put these 4 away; then take 4 other Cards and show
them in like manner to the second person, and bid him think any one of these
Cards: and so do to the third person, and so the fourth, etc. Then take the 4
Cards of the first person, and dispose them in 4 ranks: and upon them the 4
Cards of the second person, upon them also these of the third person, and
lastly upon them these of the fourth person: then show unto each of these
parties each of these ranks, and ask him if his Card be in it which he
thought: for infallibly that which the first party thought upon will be in
the first rank, and at the bottom; the Card of the second person will be in
the second rank: the Card of the third thought upon will be in the third
rank, and the fourth man's Card will be in the fourth rank; and so of others:
if there be more persons use the same method. This may be practiced by other
things, ranking them by certain numbers: allotted to pieces of money, or such
like things.

PROBLEM. LIX. How to make an instrument to help hearing, as Gallileus made to
help the sight.
Think not that the Mathematickes (which has furnished us with such admirable
helps for seeing) is wanting for that of hearing: its well known that long
trunkes or pipes makes one hear well far off, and experience shows us that
in certain places of the Arcades in a hollow vault, that a man speaking but
softly at one corner thereof, may be audibly understood at the other end:
notwithstanding these which are between the parties cannot hear him speak at
all: And it is a general principle, that pipes do greatly help to strengthen
the activitie of natural causes: we see that fire contracted in a pipe, burns
4. or 5. foot high, which would scarce heat, being in the open air: the
rupture or violence of water issuing out of a fountain, shows us that water
being contracted into a pipe, causes a violence in its passage. The Glasses of
Gallileus makes us see how useful pipes or trunkes are to make the light and
species more visible, and proportionable to our eye. It is said that a Prince
of Italy has a fair hall, in which he can with facility hear distinctly the
discourses of these which walk in the adjacent gardens, which is by certain
vessels and pipes that answer from the garden to the hall. Vitruvius makes
mention also of such vessels and pipes, to strengthen the voice and action of
Comedians: and in these times amongst many noble personages, the new kind of
trunkes are used to help the hearing, being made of silver, copper, or other
resounding material; in funnell-wise putting the widest end to him which
speaks, to the end to contract the voice, that so by the pipe applied to the
ear it may be more uniforme and less in danger to dissipate the voice, and so
consequently more fortified.

PROBLEM. LX. Of a fine lamp which goes not out, though one carry it in ones
pocket: or being rouled upon the ground will still burn.
IT must be observed that the vessel in which the oil is put into, have two
pinnes on the sides of it one against another, being included within a circle:
this circle ought to have two other pinnes, to enter into another circle of
brass, or other sollid matter: lastly this second circle has two pinnes which
may hang within some box to contain the whole lamp, in such manner, that
there be 6 pinnes in different position: Now by the aid of these pegges or
pinnes, the lamp that is in the middle will be always well situated
according to his Center of gravity, though it diagram be turned any way:
though if you endeavor to turn it upside down, it will lie level: which is
pleasant and admirable to behold to these which know not the cause: And it is
facill from this to make a place to rest quiet in, though there be great
agitation in the outward parts.

PROBLEM. LXI. Any one having thought a Card amongst many Cards, how
artificially to discover it out.
TAke any number of Cards as 10, 12, etc. and open some 4 or 5 to the parties
sight, and bid him think one of them, but let him note whether it be the
first, second, third, etc. then with promptness learn what number of Cards
you had in your hands, and take the other part of the Cards, and place the^ on
the top of these you hold in your hand; and having done so, ask him whether
his Card were the first, second, etc. then before knowing the number of Cards
that were at the bottom, account backwards until you come to it: so shall you
easily take out the Card that he thought upon.

PROBLEM. LXII. Three women A. B. C. carried apples to a market to sell, A. had
20, B. 30, and C. 40; they sold as many for a penny, the one as the other: and
brought home one as much money as another, how could this be.
THe answer to the Problem is easy, as suppose at the beginning of the
market: A. sold her apples at a diagram penny an apple: and sold but 2. which
was 2 pence, and so she had 18 left: but B. sold 17. which was 17 pence, and
so had 13. left: C. sold 32 which was 32 pence, and so had 8 apples left: then
A. said she would not sell her apples so cheap, but would sell them for 3
pence the ^^eece, which she did: and so her apples came ^o 54 pence, and B.
having left but 13 apples sold them at the same rate which came to 39 ^ence:
and lastly C. had but 8 apples, which at the same rate came to 24 pence: these
sums of money which each others before received come to 56 pence, and so much
each one received; and so consequently brought home one as much as another.

PROBLEM. LXIII. Of the properties of some numbers.
FIrst, any two numbers is just the sum of an number that have equal
distance from the half of that number: the one augmenting, and the other
diminishing, as 7 and 7, of 8 and 6, of 9 and 5, of 10 and 4, of 11 and 3, of
12 and ^, of 13 and 1: as the one is more than the half the other is less.

Secondly, it is difficult to find two numbers whose sum and product is
alike, (that is) if the numbers be multiplied one by another, and added
together, will be equal: which two numbers are 2 and 2, for to multiply 2 by 2
makes 4, and adding 2 unto 2 makes the same: this property is in no other two
whole numbers, ^ut in broken numbers there are infinite, whose sum and
product will be equal one to another. As Clavius shows upon the 36 Pro. of
the 9th book of Euclide.

Thirdly, the numbers 5 and 6 are called circular numbers, because the circle
turns to the point from whence it begins: so these numbers multiplied by
themselves, do end always in 5 and 6, as 5 times 5 makes 25, that again by 5
makes 125; so 6 times 6 makes 36, and that by 6 makes 216, etc.

Fourthly, the number 6, is the first which Arithmeticians call a perfect
number, that is, whose parts are equal unto it, so the 6 part of it is 1, the
third part is 2, the half is 3, which are all his parts: now 1, 2, and 3, is
equal to 6. It is wonderful to conceive that there is so few of them, and how
rare these numbers are, so of perfect men: for betwixt 1 and 1000000000000
numbers there is but ten, that is; 6, 28, 486. 8128. 120816. 2096128. 33550336.
536854528.8589869056, and 137438691328: with this admirable property, that
alternately they end all in 6 and 8, and the twentieth perfect number is
151115727451553768931328.

Fifthly, the number 9 amongst other privileges carries with it an excellent
property, for take what number you will, either in gross or in part: the nines
of the whole or in its parts rejected, and taken simply will be the same, as 27
it makes 3 times 9, so whether the nines be rejected of 27, or of the sum of
2 and 7, it is all one: so if the nines were taken away of 240. it is all one,
if the nines were taken away of 2, 4, and 0; for there would remain 6 in
either: and so of others.

Sixthly, 11 being multiplied by 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9, will end and begin with
like numbers; ^0 11 multiplied by 5 makes 55: if multiplied by 8, it makes 88,
etc.

Seventhly, the numbers 220 and 284 being unequal, notwithstanding the parts
of the one number does always equallise the other number: so the alliquot
parts of 220 are 110, 54, 44, 22, 20, 11, 10, 5, 4, 2, 1, which together makes
284: the alliquot parts of 284 are 142, 71, 4, 2, 1, which together makes 220,
a thing rare and admirable, and difficult to find in other numbers.

Eighthly, the numbers 3, 4, 5, (found out by Pythagoras) have an excellent
property in making of rectangle Triangles: upon which the ^47 Pro: of the first
book of Euclide, was grounded, that the square of the Hypotenusae in any such
Triangle, is diagram equal to the square of the other two sides: that is 5,
the Hypotenusae multiplied in 5 makes 25, and 4 multiplied in 4 makes 16, and 3
multiplied in 3, makes 9: but 9 and 16 is equal to 25: or if these numbers 3,
4, 5, be doubled, viz. 6, 8, 10: the square of 10 is equal to the square of 8
and 6, viz. 10 times 10 makes 100, and 8 times 8 makes 64, and 6 times 6 is 36;
which 36 and 64, put together makes 100 as before: and so may they be Tripled,
Quadrupled, etc.

The use of these numbers 3, 4, 5, are manifold, but it may be applied thus,
for the help of such which plot out gardens, houses, encampe horse or foot,
etc. Example, take 3 cords: one of 5 yards, another of 4 yards, and another of
3 yards; or the double, diagram triple, decuple, etc. or all in one line: and
make knots at the terms of these measures; so these three parts will make a
right angled Triangle, as A. B. C. and it is easy with this Triangular cord to
plot out a garden plot: a square building plot, or other long square. As
suppose there is a figure E. D. G. F. to be plotted: E. D. of 60 yardes broad,
and D. G. 100 yardes long. First measure out E. D. 60 yardes, and at E. and D.
place two pinnes or pegges; then at E. place the angle of your Triangular cord
B, and let the line of the Triangles A. B. be in the line E. D: which suppose
at A: make the cord A. B. fast in E. and A, then put the other two cords of the
Triangle until they mere, which will be in C, and place a pegge at C: take
afterward a long cord, and by the points E. and C, augment it unto F. 100
yards from E, and at F, place a pegge: then at F, apply your Triangular cord as
you did at E, and so may you draw the line F. G. as long as E. D, viz. 60
yards. Lastly it is easy to draw the line G. D, and so the rectanguled figure
or long square shall be plotted, whose breadth is 60 yards, and length 100 yards
as was required: and to examine this, measure E. G, then if F. D. be as long,
the figure is true: otherwise it is defective and may easily be amended.

If one be taken from any square number square of half of it being added to
the first square, will make a square number.

The square of half any even number. 1 number makes a square number, and the
even number taken from it leaves a square number.

If odd numbers be continually added from square numbers, and if cubicke
numbers be added successively from the unity, there will be likewise made
square numbers.

PROBLEM. LXV. Of an excellent lamp which serves or furnishes it self with
oil, and burns a long time.
I Speak not here of a common lamp which Cardanus writes upon in his book de
subtilitate, for that's a little vessel in collumne-wise, which is full of
oil, and because there is but one little hole at the bottom near the week
or match; the oil runs not, for fear that there be emptiness above: when
the match is kindled it begins to heat the lamp, and rarifying the oil it
issues by this occasion: and so sends his more airie parts above to avoid
vacuitie. diagram

But that which I here deliver is more ingenious, the principal piece of which
is a vessel as C. D: which has near the bottom a hole, and a funnell or
pipe C: and then a bigger funnell which passes through the middle of the
vessel, having an opening at D. near the E top, and another at the bottom as
at E, near the vessel under it, so that the pipe touch it not: the vessel
being thus made, fill it with oil, and opening the hole C. the oil running
out will stop the hole at E: or throwing in oil into the vessel underneath,
until E. be stopped; then the oil at C. will not run: because no air can
come into the pipe D. E. Now as the oil burns and consumes in the vessel
A. B. the hole at E, will begin to be open, then immediately will C. begin to
run to fill up A B: and E being stopped with the oil, the oil at C. cease
to run.

It is certain that such a lamp the Athenians ^ed, which lasted a whole year
without being touched: which was placed before the statue of Minerva, for they
might put a certain quantity of oil in the lamp C. D, and a match to burn
without being consumed: such as the naturallists write of, by which the lamp
will furnish it self and so continue in burning: and here may be noted that
the oil may be powered in at the top of the vessel at a little hole, and then
made fast again that the air get not in.

PROBLEM. LXV. Of the play at Keyles or nine Pinnes.
YOu will scarce believe that which one bowl and at one blow playing freely,
one may strike down all the Keyles at once: yet from Mathematical principles
it is easy to be demonstrated, that if the hand of him that plays was so
well assured by experience, as reason induces one thereto: one might at one
blow strike down all the Keyles, or at least 7 or 8, or such a number as one
pleases.

For they are but 9 in all disposed or placed in a perfect square, having three
every way. Let us suppose then that a good player beginning to play at 1
somewhat low, should so strike it, that it should diagram strike down the
Keyles 2 and 5, and these might in their violence strike down the Keyles 3, 6,
and 9: and the bowl being in motion may strike down the Keyle 4, and 7; which
4 Keyle may strike the Keyle 8: and so all the 9 Keyles may be stricken down
at once.

PROBLEM. LXVI. Of Spectacles of pleasure.
SImple Spectacles of blew, yeallow, red or green color, are proper to
recreate the sight, and will present the objects died in like color that the
Glasses are, only those of the green do somewhat degenerate; instead of
showing a lively color it will represent a pale dead color, and it is because
they are not dyed green enough, or receive not light enough for green: and
color these images that pass through these Glasses unto the bottom of the
eye.

EXAMINATION.
IT is certain that not only Glasses dyed green, but all other Glasses
colored, yeeldes the appearances of objects strong or weak in color
according to the quantity of the dye, more or less, as one being very yellow,
another a pale yellow; now all colors are not proper to Glasses to give
color, hence the defect is not that they want faculty to receive light, or
resist the penetration of the beams, for in the same Glasses those which are
most dyed, gives always the objects more high colored and obscure, and those
which are less dyed gives them more pale and clear: and this is daily made
manifest by the painting of Glass, which hinders more the penetration of the
light than dying does, where all the matter by fire is forced into the Glass,
leaving it in all parts transparant.

Spectacles of Crystal cut with diverse Angles dimond-wise does make a
marvelous multiplication of the appearances, for looking toward a house it
becomes as a Town, a Town becomes like a City, an armed man seems as a whole
company caused soly by the diversity of refractions, for as many plains as
there are on the outside of the Spectacle, so many times will the object be
multiplied in the appearance, because of diverse images cast into the eye.

These are pleasurable Spectacles for avaritious persons that love gold and
silver, for one piece will seem many, or one heap of money will seem as a
treasury: but all the mischief is, he will not have his end in the enjoying of
it, for indeavoring to take it, it will appear but a deceitful image, or
delusion of nothing. Here may you note that if the finger be directed by one
and the same ray or beam, which points to one and the same object, then at
the first you may touch that visible object without being deceived: otherwise
you may fail often in touching that which you see.

Again there are Spectacles made which do diminish the thing seen very much,
and and brings them to a fair perspective form, especially if one look upon
a fair garden plot, a greater walk, a stately building, or great court, the
industry of an exquisite Painter cannot come near to express the lively form
of it as this Glass will represent it; you will have pleasure to see it really
experimented, and the cause of this is, that the glasses of these Spectacles
are hollow and thinner in the middle, than at the edges by which the visuall
Angle is made lesser: you may observe a further secret in these Spectacles, for
in placing them upon a window one may see those that pass to and fro in the
streets, without being seen of any; for their property is to raise up the
objects that it looks upon.

Now I would not pass this Problem without saying something of Gallileus
admirable Glass, for the common simple perspective Glasses give to aged men,
but the eyes or sight of young men, but this of Gallileus gives a man an Eagles
eye, or an eye that pearceth the heavens: first it discovers the spottie and
shaddowed opacous bodies that are found about the Sun, which darkeneth and
diminishes the splendour of that beautiful and shinining Luminary: secondly,
it shows the new planets that accompany Saturn and Jupiter: thirdly, in Venus
is seen the new, full, and quartall increase; as in the Moon by her
separation from the Sun: fourthly, the artificial structure of this
instrument helps us to see an innumerable number of stars, which otherwise
are obscured by reason of the natural weakness of our sight, yea the stars
in via lactea are seen most apparently; where there seems no stars to be,
this instrument makes apparently to be seen, and further delivers them to the
eye in their true and lively color, as they are in the heavens: in which the
splendour of some is as the Sun in his most glorious beauty. This Glass has
also a most excellent use in observing the body of the Moon in time of
Eclipses, for it augments it manifold, and most manifestly shows the true
form of the cloudy substance in the Sun; and by it is seen when the shadow
of the earth begins to eclipse the Moon, and when totally she is
overshaddowed: besides the celestial uses which are made of this Glass, it
has another noble property; it far exceeds the ordinary perspective
Glasses, which are used to see things remote upon the earth, for as this Glass
reaches up to the heavens and excels them there in his performance, so on
the earth it claims preheminency: for the objects which are farthest remote,
and most obscure, are seen plainer than those which are near at hand,
scorning as it were all small and trivial services, as leaving them to an
inferior help: great use may be made of this Glass in discovering of
Ships, Armies, etc. Now the apparel or parts of this instrument or Glass,
is very mean or simple, which makes it the more admirable (seeing it performs
such great service) having but a unequal Glass thickest in the middle, to unite
and amasse the rays, and make the object the greater: to augmenting the
visuall Angle, as also a pipe or truncke to amasse the Species, and hinder the
greatness of the light which is about it: (to see well, the object must be well
enlightened, and the eye in obscurity;) then there is adjoined unto it a
Glass of a short fight to distinguish the rays, which the other would make
more confused if alone. As for the proportion of those Glasses to the Trunk
though there be certain rules to make them, yet it is often by hazard that
there is made an excellent one, there being so many difficulties in the action,
therefore many ought to be tried, seeing that exact proportion, in Geometrical
calculation cannot serve for diversity of sights in the observation.

PROBLEM LXVII. Of the Adamant or Magnes, and the needles touched therewith.
Who would believe if he saw not with his eyes, that a needle of steel being
once touched with the magnes, turns not once, not a year, but as long as the
world lasts; his end toward the North and South, yea though one remove it,
and turn it from his position, it will come again to his points of North and
South. Who would have ever thought that a brute stone black and ill formed,
touching a ring of iron, should hang it in the air: and that ring support a
second, that to support a third, and so unto 10, 12, or more, according to the
strength of the magnes; making as it were a chain without a line, without
souldering together, or without any other thing to support them only; but a
most occult and hidden virtue, yet most evident in this effect: which
penitrateth insencibly from the first to the second, from the second to the
third, etc.

Is it not a wonder to see that a needle touched once will draw other needles;
and so a nail, the point of a knife, or other pieces of iron. Is it not a
pleasure to see how the magnes will turn file dust, or move needles, or nails
being upon a Table, or upon a piece of paper; for as soon as the magnes
turns, or it moves over, it moves also: who is it that would not be ravished
as it were, to diagram see a hand of iron, write upon a planke, without seeing
the Magnes which causes that motion behind the planke, or to make an image of
iron to run up and down a Turrot: now infinite of such inventions is proper
to be extracted from the properties of the magnes.

What is there in the world that is more capable to cast a deeper astonishment
in our minds, than a great massy substance of iron to hang in the air in the
midest of a building without any thing in the world touching it, only but the
air? And histories assure us, that by the aid of a magnes or adamant, placed
at the roof of one of the Turkish Synagogues in Meca: the sepulcher of that
infamous Mahomet rests suspended in the air; and Pliny in his natural
history writes that the Architecter Dinocrates did begin to vault the Temple
of Arsinoe in Alexandria, with store of magnes to produce the like deceit, to
hang the sepulcher of that Goddess likewise in the air.

I should pass the bounds of my counterpoise, if I should divulge all the
secrets of this stone, and should expose my self to the laughter of the world:
if I should brag to show other the cause how this appears, than in its own
natural sympathy, for why is it that a magnes with one end will cast the iron
away, and attract it with the other; from whence comes it that all the magnes
is not proper to give a true touch to the needle, but only in the two Poles of
the stone: which is known by hanging the stone by a thread in the air until
it be quiet, or placed upon a piece of Cork in a dish of water, or upon some
^hinne board, for the Pole of the stone will then turn toward the Poles of
the world, and point out the North and South; and so show by which of these
ends the needle is to be touched.

From whence comes it that there is a variation in the needle, and points not
out truly the North and South of the world, but only in some place of the
earth.

How is it that the needle made with pegges and enclosed within two Glasses,
shows the height of the Pole, being elevated as many degrees as the Pole is
above the Horizon.

What Is the cause that fire and Garlic takes away the property of the magnes:
There are many great hidden mysteries in this stone, which have troubled the
heads of the most learned in all ages; and to this time the world remains
ignorant of declaring the true cause thereof.

Some says that by help of the Magnes persons which are absent may know each
others mind, as if one being here at London, and another at Prage in Germany:
if each of them had a needle touched with one magnes, then the virtue is such
that in the same time that the needle which is at Prage shall moove, this that
is at London shall also; provided that the parties have like secret notes or
alphabets, and the observation be at a set hour of the day or night; and when
the one party will declare unto the other, then let that party move the needle
to these letters which will declare the matter to the other, and the mooving of
the other parties needle shall open his intention.

The invention is subtle, but I doubt whether in the world there can be found
so great a stone, or such a Magnes which carries with it such virtue: neither
is it expedient, for treasons would be then too frequent and open.

EXAMINATION.
THe experimental difference of rejection, and attraction proceeds not from
the different nature of stones, but from the quality of the iron, and the
virtue of the stone consists only and especially in his Poles; which being
hanged in the air, turns one of his ends always naturally toward the South,
and the other toward the North: but if a rod of iron be touched with one of
the ends thereof, it has the like property in turning North and South, as the
magnes has: notwithstanding the end of the iron rod touched, has a contrary
position to that end of the stone that touched it; yet the same and will
attract it, and the other end reject it: and so contrarily this may easily be
experimented upon two needles touched with one or different stones, though they
have one and the same position; for as you come unto the^ apply one end of the
magnes near unto the^, the North of the one will abhor the North of the
other, but the North of the one will always approach to the South of the
other: and the same affection is in the stones themselves. For the finding of
the Poles of the magnes, it maybe done by holding a small needle between your
fingers softly, and so mooving it from part to part over the stone until it be
held perpendicular, for that shall be one of the Poles of the stone which you
may mark out; in like manner find out the other Pole: Now to find out which
of those Poles is North or South, place a needle being touched with one of the
Poles upon a smooth unequal body, (as the nail of ones finger or such like,)
and mark which way the end of the needle that was touched turns: if to the
South, then the point that touched it was the South Pole, etc. and it is most
certain and according to reason and experience: that if it be suspended in
aequilibrio in the air, or supported upon the water, it will turn contrary to
the needle that touches it; for then the Pole that was marked for the South
shall turn to the North, etc.

PROBLEM. LXVIII. Of the properties of Aeolipiles or bowls to blow the fire.
THese are concave vessels of brass or copper, or other material which may
endure the fire: having a small hole very narrow by which it is filled with
water, then placing it to the fire, before it be hot there is no effect seen;
but as soon as the heat does penitrate it, the water begins to rarifie and
issues forth with a hideous and mavelous force; it is pleasure to see how it
blows the fire with great noise.

Vitruvious in his diagram first book of Architecture, Cap. 8. approves from
these Ingines, that the wind is no other thing than a quantity of vapors and
exhalations agitated with the air by rarifaction and co^densation, and we may
draw a consequence from it, to show that a little water may engender a very
great quantity of vapors and air: for a Glass of water thrown into an
Aeolipile will keep blowing near a hole hour, sending forth his vapoures a
thousand times greater than it is extended.

Now touching the form of these vessels, they are not made of one like
fashion: some makes them like a bowl, some like a head painted representing
the wind, some makes them like a pear: as though one would put it to roast at
the fire, when one would have it to blow, for the tale of it is hollow, in
form of a funnell, having at the top a very little hole no greater than the
head of a pin.

Some do accustom to put within the Aeolipile a crooked funnell of many
foldings, to the end that the wind that impetuously rowles to and fro within,
may imitate the noise of thunder.

Others content themselves with a simple funnell placed right upward, somewhat
wider at the top than else where like a Cone, whose basis is the mouth of the
funnell: and there may be placed a bowl of iron or brass, which by the
vapoures that are cast out will cause it to leap up, and dance over the mouth
of the Aeolipile.

Lastly, some apply near to hole small wind-mills, or such like, which easily
turn by reason of the vapors; or by help of two or more bowed funnells, a
bowl may be made to turn: these Aelopililes are of excellent use for the
melting of mettalls and such like.

Now it is cunning and subtlety to fill one of these Aeolipiles with water at
so little a hole, and therefore requires the knowledge of a Philosopher to
find it out: and the way is thus.

Heat the Aeolipiles being empty, and the air which is within it will become
extremely rarefied; then being thus hot throw it into water, and the air will
begin to be condensed: by which means it will occupy less room, therefore
the water will immediately enter in at the hole to avoid vacuitie: thus you
have some practical speculation upon the Aeolipile.

PROBLEM. LXIX. Of the Thermometer: or an instrument to measure the degrees of
heat and cold in the air.
THis Instrument is like a Cylindricall pipe of Glass, which has a little
ball or bowl at the top: the small end of which is placed into a vessel of
water below, as by the figure may be seen.

Then put some colored liquor into the Cylindricall glass, as blew, red,
yealow, green, or such like: such as is not thick. This being done the use
may he thus.

First, I say that as the air enclosed in the Thermometer is rarifyed or
condensed, the water will evidently ascend or descend in the Cylinder: which
you may try easily by carrying the Themometer from a place that is hot unto a
place that is cold, or without removing of it; if you softly apply the palm of
the hand upon the balle of the Thermometer: the Glass being so thin, and the
air so capable of rarifaction, that at the very instant you may see the water
descend: and your hand being taken away, it will softly ascend to his former
place again. This is yet more sencible when one heates the ball at the top
with diagram his breath, as if one would say a word in his ear to make the
water to descend by command: and the reason of this motion is, that the air
heated in the Thermometer, does rarifie and dilate, requiring a greater place;
hence presses the water and causes it to descend: contrariwise when the air
cools and condenseth, it occupies less room; now nature abhorring vacuity,
the water naturally ascends. In the second place I say, that by this means
one may know the degrees of heat and cold; which are in the air each hour of
the day; for as much as the exterior air is either hot or cold, the air which
is enclosed in the Thermometer does likewise either rarifie or condense, and
therefore the water ascends or descends; so you shall see that the water in the
morning is mounted high, afterward by little and little it will descend toward
noone or midday; and toward evening it will again ascend: so in winter it
will mount so high, that all the Cylinder of the Thermometer will be full, but
in Summer, it will descend so low that scarce there will be perceaved in it any
water at all.

These that will determine this change by numbers and degrees, may draw a line
upon the Cylinder of the Thermometer; and divide it into 4 degrees, according
to the ancient Philosophers, or into 4 degrees according to the Physicians,
dividing each of these 8 into 8 others to have in all 64 divisions, and by this
way they may not only distinguish upon what degree the water ascends in the
morning, at midday, and at any other hour: but also one may know how much one
day is hotter or colder than another: by marking how many degrees the water
ascends or descends, one may compare the hottest and coldest days in a
whole year together with these of another year: again one may know how much
hotter one room is than another, by which also one might keep a chamber, a
furnis, a stove, etc. always in an equality of heat, by making the water of
the Thermometer rest always upon one and the same degree: in brief, one may
judge in some measure the burning of fevers, and near unto what extension the
air can be rarefied by the greatest heat.

Many make use of these glasses to judge of the weather, for it is observed
that if the water fall in 3 or 4 hours a degree or thereabout, that rain
insueth; and the water will stand at that stay, until the weather change:
mark the water at your going to bed, for if in the morning it has descended
rain follows, but if it be mounted higher, it argues faire-weather: so in
very cold weather, if it fall suddenly, it is snow or some sleekey weather
that will ensue.

PROBLEM. LXX. Of the proportion of human bodies of statues, of Colossus or
huge images, and of monstrous Giants.
PYthagoras had reason to say that man is the measure of all things.

First, because he is the most perfect amongst all bodily creatures, and
according to the Maxim of Philosophers, that which is most perfect, and the
first in rank, measures all the rest.

Secondly, because in effect the ordinary measure of a foot, the intch, the
cubit, the pace, have taken their names and greatness from human bodies.

Thirdly, because the simmetrie and concordancie of the parts is so admirable,
that all works which are well proportionable, as namely the building of
Temples, of Ships, of Pillars, and such like pieces of Architecture, are in
some measure fashioned and composed after his proportion. And we know that the
Arc of Noah built by the commandment of God, was in length 300 cubits, in
breadth 50 cubits, in height or depth 30 cubits, so that the length contains
the breadth 6 times, and 10 times the depth: now a man being measured you will
find him to have the same proportion in length, breadth, and depth.

Vilalpandus treating of the Temple of Solomon, that chiefetaine of works was
modulated all of good Architecture, and curiously to be observed in many pieces
to keep the same proportion as the body to his parts: so that by the
greatness of the work and proportionable symmetrie, some dare assure
themselves that by knowledge of one only part of that building, one might know
all the measures of that goodly structure.

Some Architects say that the foundation of houses, and basis of columns, are
as the foot; the top, and roof as the head; the rest as the body: those which
have been somewhat more curious, have noted that as in human bodies, the
parts are uniforme as the nose, the mouth, etc. these which are double are put
on one side or other, with a perfect equallitie in the same Architecture.

In like manner, some have been yet more curious than solid; comparing all the
ornaments of a Corinth to the parts of the face, as the brow, the eyes, the
nose, the mouth; the rounding of pillars, to the writhing of hair, the
chanells of columns, to the fouldings of women's robes, etc.

Now building being a work of the best Artist, there is much reason why man
ought to make his imitation from the chief work of nature; which is man.

Hence it is that Vitruvious in his third book, and all the best Architectures,
treats of the proportion of man; and amongst others Albert Dureus has made a
whole book of the measures of man's body, from the foot to the head; let them
read it who will, they may have a perfect knowledge thereof: but I will content
my self, and it may satisfy some with that which follows.

First, the length of a man well made, which commonly is called height, is
equal to the distance from one end of his finger to the other: when the arms
are extended as wide as they may be.

Secondly, if a man have his feet and hands extended or stretched in form of
S. Andrews Cross, placing one foot of a pair of Compasses upon his navill,
one may describe a circle which will pass by the ends of his hands and feet,
and drawing lines by the terms of the hands and feet, you have a square within
a circle.

Thirdly, the breadth of man, or the space which is from one side to another;
the breast, the head, and the neck, makes the 6 part of all the body taken in
length or height.

Fourthly, the length of the face is equal to the length of the hand, taken
from the small of the arm, unto the extremity of the longest finger.

Fifthly, the thickenesse of the body taken from the belly to the back; the one
or the other is the tenth part of the whole body, or as some will have, it the
ninth part, little less.

Sixthly, the height of the brow, the length of the nose, the space between the
nose and the chinne, the length of the ears, the greatness of the thumb, are
perfectly equal one to the other.

What would you say to make an admirable report of the other parts, if I should
reckon them in their least; but in that I desire to be excused, and will rather
extract some conclusion upon that which is delivered.

In the first place knowing the proportion of a man, it is easy to Painters,
image-makers, etc. perfectly to proportionate their work; and by the same is
made most evident, that which is related of the images and statues of Greece,
that upon a day diverse workmen having enterprised to make the face of a man,
being severed one from another in sundry places, all the parts being made and
put together, the face was found in a most lively and true proportion.

Secondly, it is a thing most clear that by the help of proportion, the body
of Hercules was measured by the knowledge of his foot only; a Lion by his
claw, the Giant by his thumb, and a Man by any part of his body. For so it
was that Pythagoras having measured the length of Hercules foot, by the steps
which was left upon the ground, found out all his height: and so it was that
Phydias having only the claw of a Lion, did figure and draw out all the beast
according to his true type or form; so the exquisite Painter Timantus, having
painted a Pigmey or Dwarf, which he measured with a fadome made with the intch
of a Giant; it was sufficient to know the greatness of that Giant.

To be short, we may by like method come easily to the knowledge of many fine
antiquities touching Statues, Colosses, and monstrous Giants, only supposing
one had found but one only part of them, as the head, the hand, the foot, or
some bone mentioned in ancient Histories.

Of Statues, of Colossus, or huge images.
VItruvius relates in his second book that the Architect Dinocrates was
desirous to put out to the world some notable thing, went to Alexander the
great, and proposed unto him a high and special piece of work which he had
projected: as to figure out the mount Athos in form of a great Statue, which
should hold in his right hand a Town capable to receive ten thousand men: and
in his left hand a vessel to receive all the water that flows from the
mountain, which with an ingine should cast into the Sea. This is a pretty
project, said Alexander, but because there was not field room thereabout to
nourish and retain the Citizens of that place, Alexander was wise not to
entertain the design.

Now let it be required of what greatness this Statue might have been, the
Town in his right hand, and the receiver of water in his left hand if it had
been made.

For the Statue, it could not be higher than the mountain it self, and the
mountain was about a mile in height plume or perpendicular; therefore the hand
of this Statue ought to be the 10th part of his height, which would be 500
foot, and so the breadth of his hand would be 250 foot; the length now
multiplied by the breadth, makes an hundred twenty five thousand square feet;
for the quantity of his hand to make the town in, to lodge the said 10
thousand men, allowing to each man near about 12 foot of square ground: now
judge the capacity of the other parts of this Colossus by that which is
already delivered.

Secondly, Pliny in his 34 book of his natural History, speaks of the
famous Colossus that was at Rhodes, between whose legs a Ship might pass
with his sails open or displayed, the Statue being of 70 cubits high: and
other Histories reports that the Sarazins having broken it, did load 900
Camells with the mettle of it, now what might be the greatness and weight of
this Statue.

For answer it is usually allowed for a Cammells burden 1200 pound weight,
therefore all the Colossus did weigh 1080000 pound weight, which is ten hundred
and forescore thousand pound weight.

Now according to the former rules, the head being the tenth part of the body,
this Statues head should be of 7 cubits, that is to say, 10 foot and a half;
and seeing that the nose, the brow, and the thumb, are the third part of the
face; his nose was 3 foot and a half long, and so much also was his thumb in
length: now the thickness being always the third part of the length, it
should seem that his thumb was a foot thick at the least.

Thirdly, the said Pliny in the same place reports that Nero did cause to come
out of France into Itally, a brave and bold Statue-maker called Zenodocus, to
erect him a Colossus of brass, which was made of 120 foot in height, which
Nero caused to be painted in the same height. Now would you know the
greatness of the members of this Colossus, the breadth would be 20 foot, his
face 12 foot, his thumb and his nose 4 foot, according to the proportion
before delivered.

Thus I have a fair field or subject to extend my self upon, but it is upon
another occasion that it was undertaken; let us speak therefore a word
touching the Giants, and then pass away to the matter.

Of monstrous Giants.
YOu will hardly believe all that which I say touching this, neither will I
believe all that which Authors say upon this subject: notwithstanding you nor I
cannot deny but that long ago there has been men of a most prodigious
greatness; for the holy writings witness this themselves in Deuteronomy. Chap. 3.
that there was a certain Giant called Ogge, of the Town of Rabath, who had a
bed of iron, the length thereof was 9 cubits, and in breadth 4 cubits.

So in the first of Kings Chap. 17. there is mention made of Goliath, whose
height was a palm and 6 cubits, that is more then 9 foot, he was armed from
the head to the foot, and his Curiat only with the iron of his lance, weighed
five thousand and six hundred sicles, which in our common weight, is more than
233 pound, of 12 ounces to the pound. Now it is certain that the rest of his
arms taking his Target, Helmet, Braselets, and other Armor together, did
weigh at the least 5 hundred pound, a thing prodigious; seeing that the
strongest man that now is, can hardly bear 200 pound, yet this Giant carries
this as a vesture without pain.

Solinus reports in his 5 Chap. of his History, that during the Grecians
war after a great overflowing of the rivers, there was found upon the sands
the carcass of a man, whose length was 33 cubits, (that is 49 foot and a
half) therefore according to the proportion delivered, his face should be 5
foot in length, a thing prodigious and monstrous.

Pliny in his 7. book and 16. Chap. says, that in the I Will of Crete or
Candie, a mountain being cleaven by an earthquake, there was a body standing
upright, which had 46 cubits of height: some believes that it was the body of
Orion or Othus, (but I think rather it was some Ghost or some delusion,) whose
hand should have been 7 foot, and his nose two foot and a half long. But that
which Plutarch in the life of Sertorius reports of is more strange, (...) says
that in Timgy a Morative Town; where it is thought that the Giant Antheus was
buried, Sertorius could not believe that which was reported of his prodigious
greatness, caused his sepulcher to be opened, and found that his body did
contain 60 cubits in length, then by proportion he should be 10 cubits or 15
foot in breadth; 9 foot for the length of his face, 3 foot for his thumb,
which is near the capacity of the Colossus at Rhodes.

But behold here a fine fable of Symphoris Campesius, in his book entitled
Hortus Gallicus, who says that in the Kingdom of Sicile, at the foot of a
mountain near Trepane, in opening the foundation of a house, they found a
Cave in which was laid a Giant, which held in stead of a staff a great post
like the mast of a Ship: and going to handle it, it mouldered all into ashes
except the bones which remained of an exceeding great measure, that in his head
there might be easily placed 5 quarters of corn, and by proportion it should
seem that his length was 200 cubits, or 300 foot: if he had said that he had
been 300 cubits in length, then he might have made us believe that Noah's Arc
was but great enough for his sepulcher.

Who can believe that any man ever had 20 cubits, or 30 foot in length for his
face, and a nose of 10 foot long? but it is very certain that there has been
men of very great stature, as the holy Scriptures before witnesses, and many
Authors worthy of belief relates: Josephus Acosta in his first book of the
Indian History, Chap. 19. a late writer, reports that at Peru was found the
bones of a Giant, which was 3 times greater than these of ours are, that is, 18
foot: for it is usually attributed to the tallest ordinary man in these our
times but 6 foot of length; and Histories are full of the description of other
Giants of 9, 10, and 12 foot of height, and it has been seen in our times
some which have had such heights as these.

PROBLEM. LXXI. Of the game at the Palm, at Trappe, at Bowls, Paile-maile and
others.
THe Mathematickes often finds place in sundry Games to aid and assist the
Gamesters, though not unknown unto them: hence by Mathematical principles,
the games at Tennis may be assisted; for all the moving in it is by right lines
and reflections. From whence comes it, that from the appearances of flat or
unequal Glasses, the production and reflection of the species are explained, is
it not by right lines? in the same proportion one might sufficiently deliver
the motion of a balle or bowl by Geometrical lines and Angles.

But the exercise, experience, and dexterity of the player seems more in this
action than any any other precepts: notwithstanding I will deliver here some
maxims, which being reduced to practice, and joined to experience, will give a
great advantage diagram to those which would make use of them in such gamings.

And the first maxim is thus: When a Bowl touches another Bowl, or when a
trapsticke strikes the Balle, the moving of the Balle is made in a right line,
which is drawn from the Center of the Bowl by the point of contingencie.

Secondly, in all kind of such motion; when a Balle or Bowl rebounds, be it
either against wood, a wall, upon a Drum, a pavement, or upon a Racket; the
incident Angle is always equal to the Angle of reflection.

Now following these maxims it is easy to conclude, first in what part of the
wood or wall, one may make the Bowl or Balle go to reflect or rebound, to
such a place as one would: Secondly, how one may cast a Bowl upon another, in
such sort that the first or the second shall go and meet with the third,
keeping the reflection or Angle of incidence equal. Thirdly, how one may touch
a Bowl to send it to what part one pleases: such and many other practices may
be done. At the exercises at Keyles there must be taken heed that the motion,
slack or diminishes by little and little, and may be noted that the Maxims
of reflections cannot be exactly observed by local motion, as in the beams of
light and of other quallities, whereof it is necessary to supply it by industry
or by strength, otherwise one may be frustrated in that respect.

PROBLEM. LXXII. Of the Game of square forms.
NVmbers have an admirable secrecy, diversely applied, as before in part is
showed, and here I will say some thing by way of transmutation of numbers.

It is reported that at a certain passage of a square form, there were 4
gates opposite one to another, that is, one in the middle of each side, and
that there was appointed 9 men to defend each front thereof, some at the gates,
and the other at each corner or Angle, so that each Angle served to assist two
faces of the square if need required: Now this square passage being thus
manned to have each side 9, it happened that 4 Soldiers coming by, desired of
the Governor of the passage, that they might be entertained into service, who
told them he could not admit of more then 9, upon each side of the square:
then one of the Soldiers being versed in the Art of numbers, said that if he
would take them into pay, they would easily place themselves amongst the rest,
and yet keep still the order diagram ^f 9, for each face of ^^e square to
defend the Angles and Gates, (...) which the Governors agreed, and these
Soldiers being there some few weeks li^ed not their service, ^ut endeavored
to remove themselves, and so labored with some of the rest; that each of these
four Soldiers took away his Cumrade with him, and so departed: yet left to
defend each side of the passage, and how may this be.

Its answered thus, in the first form the men were as the figure A, then each
of these 4 Soldiers placed themselves at each Gate, and removing one man from
each Angle to each Gate, then would they be also 9 in each side according to
the figure B. Lastly, these 4 Soldiers at the Gates take away each one his
Cum^rade, and placing two of these men which are at each Gate to each Angle,
there will be still 9 for each side of the square, according to the figure C.
In like manner if there were 12 men, how might they be placed about a square
that the first side shall have 3 every way, then disordered, so that they might
be 4 every way; and lastly being transported might make 5 every way, and this
is according to the figures, F. G. H.

PROBLEM. LXXIII. How to make the string of a Viole sencibly shake, without any
one touching it.
THis is a miracle in music, yet easy to be experimented; take a Viole or
other Instrument, and choose two strings, so that there be one between them;
make these two strings agree in one and the same tune: then move the Viole bow
upon the greater string, and you shall see a wonder: for in the same time that
that shakes which you play upon, the other will likewise sencibly shake without
any one touching it; and it is more admirable that the string which is between
them will not shake at all: and if you put the first string to another tune or
note, and loosing the pin of the string, or stopping it with your finger in any
fret, the other string will not shake: and the same will happen if you take two
Violes, and strike upon a string of the one, the string of the other will
sencibly shake.

Now it may be demanded how comes this shaking, is it in the ^^^ult sympathy,
or is it in the strings being wound up to like notes o^ tunes, that so ea^y the
other may receive the impression of the (...), which is agitated or moved by
the shaking or the trembling of the other: and whence is it that the Viole bow
moved upon the first string, does instantly in the same time move the third
string and not the second; if the cause be not either in the first or second: I
leave to others to discant on.

EXAMINATION.
IN this Examination we have something else to imagine, than the bare sympathy
of the Cords one to another: for first there ought to be considered the
different effect that it produces by extension upon one and the same Cord in
capacity: then what might be produced upon different Cords of length and
bigness to make them accord in a n^ison or octavo, or some consort
intermediate: this being naturally examined, it will be facill to lay open a
way to the knowledge of the true and immediate cause of this noble and
admirable Phenomeny. Now this will sencibly appear when the Cords are of
equal length and greatness, and set to an unison; but when the Cords differ
from their equality, it will be less sencible: hence in one and the same
Instrument, Cords at a unison shall excite or shake more than that which is at
an octavo, and more than those which are of an intermediate proportional
consort: as for the other consorts they are not exempted, though the effect be
not so sencible, yet more in one than in another: and the experiment will seem
more admirable in taking two Lutes, Violes etc. and in seting them to one tune:
for then in touching the Cord of the one, it will give a sencible motion to the
Cord of the other: and not only so but also a harmony.

PROBLEM. LXXIIII. Of a vessel which contains three several kinds of
liquor, all put in at one bung-hole, and drawn out at one tappe severally
without mixture.
THe vessel is thus made, it must be divided into three sells for to contain
the three liquors, which admit to be Sack, Clarret, and Whitewine: Now in the
bung-hole there is an Ingine with three pipes, each extending to his proper
sell, into which there is put a broach or funnell piersed in three places, in
such sort that placing one of the holes right against the pipe which answers
unto him, the other two pipes are stopped; then when it is full, turn the
funnell, and then the former hole will be stopped and another open, to cast in
other wine without mixing it with the other.

Now to draw out also without mixture, at the bottom of the vessel there must
be placed a pipe or broach which may have three pipes, and a cock piersed with
three holes so artificially done, that turning the cock, the hole which
answers to such of the pipes that is placed at the bottom, may issue forth
such wine as belongs to that pipe, and turning the Cock to another pipe, the
former hole will be stopped: and so there will issue diagram forth another
kind of wine without any mixtures; but the Cock may be so ordered that there
may come out by it two wines together, or all three kinds at once: but it
seems best when that in one vessel and at one Cock, a man may draw several
kinds of wine, and which he pleases to drink.

PROBLEM. LXXV. Of Burning-glasses.
IN this ensuing discourse I will show the invention of Prometheus how to
steal fire from Heaven, and bring it down to the Earth; this is done by a
little round Glass, or made of steel, by which one may light a Candle and
make it flame, kindle Fire-brans to make them burn, melt Lead, Tin, Gould,
and Silver, in little time: with as great ease as though it had been put into
a Cruzet over a great fire.

Have you not read of Archimedes of Syracuses, who when he could not come to
the Ships of Marcellus, which asseiged that place, to hinder and impeach their
aproach, he flung huge stones by his Ingines to sink them into the Sea and
transformed himself into Jupiter; thundering down from the highest Towers of
the Town, his thunderbolts of lightning into the Ships, causing a terrible
diagram burning, in despite of Neptune and his watery region: Zonaras
witnesses that Proclus a brave Mathematician, burned in the same manner the
Ships of Vitalian, which was come to asseige Constantinople; and daily
experience may let you see great effects of burning, for a Bowl of Crystal
polished, or a Glass thicker in the middle than at the edges, will burn
exceedingly; nay a bottle full of water exposed to the Sun will burn when
the Sun shines hot, and children use with a Glass to burn Flies which are
against the walls, and their fellows clothes.

But this is nothing to the burning of those Glasses which are hollow, namely
these which are of steel well polished, according to a parabolicall or ovall
section: A sphaericall Glass, or that which is according to the segment of a
Sphaere, burns very effectually about the fourth part of the Diamitor;
notwithstanding the Parabolie and Eclipticke sections have a great effect: by
which Glasses there is also diverse figures represented forth to the eye.

The cause of this burning is the uniting of the beams of the Sun, which
heates mightily in the point of concourse or inflammation, which is either by
transmission or reflection: Now it is pleasant to behold when one breaths in
the point of concourse, or throws small dust there, or sprinkles vapors of
hot water in that place; by which the pyramidall point, or point of
inflammation is known. Now some Authors promises to make Glasses which shall
burn a great distance off, but yet not seen vulgarly produced, of which if
they were made, the Parabolie makes the greatest effect, and is generally held
to be the invention of Archimedes or Proclus.

Maginus in the 5. Chap. of his Treatise of sphericall Glasses, shows how one
may serve himself with a concave Glass, to light fire in the shadow, or
near such a place where the Sun shines not, which is by help of a flat
Glass, by which may be made a percussion of the beams of the Sun into the
concave Glass, adding unto it that it serves to good use to put fire to a
Mine, provided that the combustible matter be well applied before the concave
Glass; in which he says true: but because all the effect of the practice
depends upon the placing of the Glass and the Powder which he speaks not of:
I will deliver here a rule more general.

How one may place a Burning-glasse with his combustible matter in such sort,
that at a convenient hour of the day, the Sun shining, it shall take fire
and burn: Now it is certain that the point of inflammation or burning, is
changed as the Sun changes place, and no more nor less, then the shadow
turns about the style of a Dyall; therefore have regard to the Suns motion,
and his height and place: a Bowl of Crystal in the same place that the top
of the style is, and the Powder or other combustible matter under the meridian,
or hour of 12, 1, 2, 3, etc. or any other hour, and under the Suns arch for
that day: now the Sun coming to the hour of 12, to 1, 2, 3, etc. the Sun
casting his beams through the Crystal Bowl, will fire the material or
combustible thing, which meets in the point of burning: the like may be
observed of other Burning-glasses.

EXAMINATION.
IT is certain in the first part of this Problem that Conicall concave and
sphericall Glasses, of what matter soever, being placed to receive the beams
of the Sun will excite heat, and that heat is so much the greater, by how
much it is near the point of concurse or inflammation. But that Archimedes or
Proclus did fire or burn Ships with such Glasses, the ancient Histories are
silent, yea themselves say nothing; besides the great difficulty that does
oppose it in remoteness, and the matter that the effect is to work upon: Now
by a common Glass we fire things near at hand, from which it seems very
facill to such which are less read, to do it at a far greater distances,
and so by relation some deliver to the world by supposition that which never
was done in action: this we say the rather, not to take away the most excellent
and admirable effect whith are in Burning-glasses, but to show the variety of
antiquity, and truth of History: and as touching to burn at a great distance
as is said of some, it is absolutely impossible; and that the Parabolicall and
Ovall Glasses were of Archimedes and Proclus invention, is much uncertain: for
besides the construction of such Glasses, they are more difficult than the
obtuse concave ones are, and further, they cast not a great heat but near at
hand; for if it be cast far off, the effect is little, and the heat weak:
or otherwise such Glasses must be greatly extended to contract many beams to
amasse a sufficient quantity of beams in Parabolicall and Conicall Glasses,
the point of inflammation ought to concur in a point, which is very difficult
to be done in a due proportion: Moreover if the place be far remote as is
supposed before, such a Glass cannot be used but at a great inclination of the
Sun, by which the effect of burning is diminished, by reason of the
weakness of the Sunne-beames.

And here may be noted in the last part of this Problem, that by reason of
obstacles if one plain Glass be not sufficient; a second Glass may be
applied to help it: that so if by one simple reflection it cannot be done, yet
by a double reflection the Sunbeams may be cast into the said Caverne or Mine;
and though the reflected beams in this case be weak, yet upon a fit
cumbustible matter it will not fail to do the effect.

PROBLEM. LXXVI. Containing many pleasant Questions by way of Arithmeticke.
I Will not insert in this Problem that which is drawn from the Greek
Epigrams, but proposing the Question immediately will give the answer also,
without staying to show the manner how they are answered; in this I will not be
tied to the Greek terms, which I account not proper to this place, neither
to my purpose; let these read that will Diophanta Scheubelius upon Euclide and
others, and they may be satisfied.

Of the Ass and the Mule.
IT happened that the Mule and the Ass upon a day making a voyage, each of
them carried a Barrel full of wine: now the lasie Ass felt her self over
laden, complained and bowed under her burden; which the Mule seeing, said
unto her being angry, (for it was in the time when beasts spoke) thou great
Ass, wherefore complainest thou? if I had but only one measure of that which
thou carriest, I should be laden twice as much as thou art, and if I should
give a measure of my loading to thee, yet my burden would be as much as thine.

Now how many measures did each of them carry? Answer, the Mule did carry 7
measures, and the Ass 5 measures: for if the Mule had one of the measures of
the Asses loading, then the Mule would have 8 measures, which is double to 4:
and giving one to the Ass, each of them would have equal burdens: to wit, 6
measures a piece.

Of the number of Soldiers that fought before old Troy.
HOmer being asked by Hesiodus how many Grecian Soldiers came against Troy,
who answered him thus; the Grecians, said Homer, made 7 fires or had 7
Kitchins, and before every fire, or in every Kitchen there was 50 broaches
turning to roast a great quantity of flesh, and each broach had meat enough to
satisfy 900 men: now judge how many men there might be. Answer, 315000. that
is, three hundred and fifteen thousand men, which is clear by multiplying 7
by 50, and the product by 900 makes the said 315000.

Of the number of Crowns that two men had.
John and Peter had certain number of crowns, John said to Peter, if you give
me 10 of your crowns, I shall have three times as much as you have: but Peter
said to John if you give me 10 of your crowns I shall have 5 times as much as
you have: how much had each of them? Answer, John had 15 crowns and 5
sevenths of a crown, and Peter had 18 crowns, and 4 sevenths of a crown. For
if you add 10 of Peter's crowns to these of John's, then should John have 25
crowns and 5 sevenths of a crown, which is triple to that of Peter's, viz. 8,
and 4 seventhes: and John giving 10 to Peter, Peter should have then 28
crowns, and 4 seventhes of a crown, which is Quintupla, or 5 times as much as
John had left, viz. 5 crowns aad 5 seventhes.

In like manner two Gamesters playing together, A. and B: after play A. said to
B, give me 2 crowns of thy money, and I shall have twice as much as thou have:
and B. said to A. give me 2 crowns of thy money, and I shall have 4 times as
much as thou have: now how much had each? Answer, A. had 3 and 5 seventhes,
and B. had 4 and 6 seventhes.

About the hour of the day.
SOme one asked a Mathematician what a clock it was, who answered that the
rest of the day is four thirds of that which is past: now judge what a clock
it is. Answer, if the day were according to the Jews and ancient Romans,
which made it always to be 12. hours, it was then the 5. hour, and one
seventh of an hour, so there remained of the whole day 6 6/7 that is, 6
hours, and 6 seventhes of an hour. Now if you take the of 5 1/7 it is 12/7 or
1 and 5/7 which multiplied by 4 makes 6 and 6/7 which is the remainder of the
day as before: but if the day had been 24 hours, then the hour had been 10
of the clock, and two seventhes of an hour, which is found out by dividing
12, or 24 by 7/3.

There might have been added many curious propositions in this kind, but they
would be too difficult for the most part of people: therefore I have omitted
them.

Of Pythagoras Scholars.
PYthagoras being asked what number of Scholars he had, answered, that half
of them studied Mathematickes, the fourth part Physic, the seventh part
Rethoricke, and besides he had 3 women: now judge you says he, how many
Scholars I have. Answer, he had in all 28; the half of which is 14, the
quarter of which is 7, and the seventh part of which is 4: which 14, 7, and 4,
makes 25, and the other 3 to make up the 28, were the 3 women.

Of the number of Apples given amongst the Graces and the Muses.
THe three Graces carrying Apples upon a day, the one as many as the other,
meet with the 9 Muses, who asked of them some of their apples; so each of the
Graces gave to each of the Muses alike, and the distribution being made, they
found that the Graces and the Muses had one as many as the other: The question
is how many apples each Grace had, and how many they gave to each Muse. To
answer the question, join the number of Graces and Muses together which makes
12, and so many apples had each Grace: Now may you take the double, triple,
etc. of 12. that is 24, 36, etc. conditionally, that if each Grace had but 12,
then may there be allotted to each Muse but one only; if 24, then to each 2
apples; if 36, then to each Muse 3 apples; and so the distribution being made,
they have a like number, that is, one as many as the other.

Of the Testament or last Will of a dying Father.
A Dying Father left a thousand crowns amongst his two children; the one being
legittimate, and the other a Bastard, conditionally that the fifth part which
his legittimate Son should have, should exceed by 10, the fourth part of that
which the Bastard should have: what was each ones part? Answer, the
legittimate Son had 577 crowns, and 7/9 and the Bastard 422 crowns and 2/9:
now the fifth part of 577 and 7 ninthes is 115, and 5/9 and the fourth part of
422 and 2/9 is 105 and 5/9 which is less then 115 5/9 by 10, according to the
Will of the Testator.

Of the Cups of Craesus.
CRaesus gave to the Temple of the Gods six Cups of Gould, which weighed
together 600 Drammes, but each Cup was heavier one than another by one Dram:
how much did each of them therefore weigh? Answer, the first weighed 102
Drammes and a half; the second 101 Drammes and a half; the third 100 Drammes
and; the fourth 99 and a half; the fifth 98 and a half; and the sixth Cup
weighed 79 Drammes and a half: which together makes 600 Drammes as before.

Of Cupids Apples.
Cupid complained to his mother that the Muses had taken away his apples, Clio,
said he, took from me the fifth part, Euterpe the twelfth part, Thalia the
eight part, Melpomene the twentieth part, Erates the seventh part, Terpomene
the fourth part: Polyhymnia took away 30, Urania 120, and Calliope 300: so
there were left me but 5. Apples; how many had he in all at the first, I answer
3360.

There are an infinite of such like questions amongst the Greek Epigrammes:
but it would be unpleasant to express them all: I will only add one more,
and show a general rule for all the rest.

Of a Man's Age.
A Man was said to pass the half part of his life in childhood, the fourth
part in his youth, the third part in Manhood, and 18. years besides in old
age: what might his Age be? the answer is, 72. years: which and all others is
thus resolved: multiply.. and. together, that is, 6. by 4. makes 24. and that
again by 3. makes 72. then take the third part of 72. which is 24. the fourth
part of it, which is 18, and the sixth part of it which is 12. these added
together make 54. which taken from 72. rests 18. this divided by 18. (spoken in
the Question) gives 1, which multiplied by the sum of the parts, viz. 72.
makes 72. the Answer as before.

Of the Lion of Bronze placed upon a Fountain with his Epigramme.
OVt of my right eye if I let water pass, I can fill the Cisterne in 2. days:
if I let it pass out of the left eye, it will be filled in 3. days, if it
pass out of my feet the Cisterne will be 4. days a filling; but if I let
the water pass out of my mouth, I can fill the Cisterne then in 6. hours: in
what time should I fill it, if I power forth the water at all the passages at
once.

The Greeks (the greatest talkers in the world) variously apply this question
to diverse statues, and pipes of Fountains: and the solution is by the Rule of
3. by a general Rule, or by Algeber.

They have also in their Anthologie many other questions, but because they are
more proper to exercise, than to recreate the spirit, I pass them over as
before with silence.

PROBLEM. LXXVII. Diverse excellent and admirable experiments upon Glasses.
THere is nothing in the world so beautiful as light: and nothing more
recreative to the sight, than Glasses which reflect: therefore I will now
produce some experiments upon them, not that I will dive into their depth (that
were to lay open a misterious thing) but that which may delight and recreate
the spirits: Let us suppose therefore these principles, upon which is built the
demonstration of the apparances which is made in all sort of Glasses.

First, that the rays or beams, which reflecteth upon a Glass, makes the
Angle of Incident equal to the Angle of Reflection, by the first Theo. of the
Catoptick of Euc.

Secondly, that in all plain Glasses, the Images are seen in the
perpendicular line to the Glass as far within the Glass as it is without it.

Thirdly, in Concave, or Unequal Glasses, the Images are seen in the right line
which passes from the object and through the Center in the Glass Theo. 17.
and 18.

And here you are to understand that there is not meant only these which are
simple Glasses or Glasses of steel, but all other bodies, which may represent
the visible Image of things by reason of their reflection, as water, marble,
muttle, or such like. Now take a Glass in your hand and make experiment upon
that which follows.

Experiment upon flat and plain Glasses.
FIrst, a man cannot see any thing in these Glasses, if he be not directly and
in a perpendicular line before it, neither can be see an object in these
Glasses, if it be not in such a place, that makes the Angle of incidence equal
to the Angle of reflection: therefore when a Glass stands upright, that is,
perpendicular to the Horizon, you cannot see that which is above, ex- the
Glass be placed down flat: and to see that on the right hand, you must be on
the left hand, etc.

Secondly, an Image cannot be seen in a Glass, if it be not raised above the
surface of it; or place a Glass upon a wall, you shall see nothing which is
upon the plain of the wall; and place it upon a Table or Horizontall Plain,
you shall see nothing of that which is upon the Table.

Thirdly, in a plain Glass all that is seen appears or seems to sink
behind the Glass, as much as the Image is before the Glass: as before is
said.

Fourthly, as in water a Glass lying down flat, or Horizontall, Towers,
Trees, Men, or any height does appear, inversed or upside down; and a Glass
placed upright, the right hand of the Image seems to be the left, and the
left seems to be the right.

Fifthly, will you see in a Chamber that which ^ done in the street, without
being seen: then a Glass must be disposed, that the line upon which the
Images come on the Glass, make the Angle of incidence equal to that Angle of
reflection.

Sixthly, an height (as suppose D E.) may be measured by a plain Glass; as let
the Glass be G. placed down upon the ground, and let the eye be at C. so
far diagram removed from the Glass, that the eye at C. may see the top of
the Tree E: in the Angle or edge of the Glass at A, but in the line of
reflection C A; then measure the distance between your foot B, and the point
A: and also the distance between the Glass A, and the foot of the Tree D,
viz. A D. Now as often as A B. is found in A D, so often does the height of the
Tree E D. contain the distance from your eye to the foot, viz. C B: for the
Triangles A, B, C, and A, D, E, are like Triangles: therefore as B A. to A D,
so C B, to E D, or alternately as B A. to B C, so A D. to D E.

Seventhly, present a Candle upon a plain Glass, and look flauntingly upon
it, so that the Candle and the Glass be near in a right line, you shall see
3. 4 5. etc Images; from one and the same Candle.

Eighthly, take two plain Glasses, and hold them one against the other, you
shall alternately see them often times one within the other, yea within
themselves, again and again.

Ninthly, if you hold a plain Glass behind your head, and another before your
face, you may see the hinder part of your head, in that Glass which you hold
before your face.

Tenthly, you may have a fine experiment if you place two Glasses together,
that they make an acute angle, and so the lesser the angle is, the more
apparances you shall see, the one direct, the other inversed, the one
approaching, and the other retyring.

Eleventhly, it is wonder and astonishment to some, to see within a Glass an
Image without knowing from whence it came, and it may be done many ways: as
place a Glass higher than the eye of the behoulder, and right against it is
some Image; so it rests not upon the beho^der, but does cast the Image
upwards. Then place another object, so that it reflect, or cast the Image
downward to the eye of the spectator, without perceiving it being hid behind
something, for then the Glass will represent a quite contrary thing, either
than that which is before the Glass, or that which is about it.

Twelthly, if there be ingraved behind the backside of a Glass, or drawn any
Image upon it, it will appear before as an Image, without any appearance: or
portrature to be perceived.

EXAMINATION.
THis 12. Article of ingraving an Image behind the Glass, will be of no great
consequence, because the linaments will seem so obscure, but if there were
painted some Image, and then that covered according to the usual covering of
Glasses behind, and so made up like an ordinary looking Glass having an Image
in the middle, in this respect it would be sufficient pleasant: and that which
would admire the Ignorant, and able to exercise the most subtillest, and that
principally if the Glass be in an obscure place, and the light which is given
to it be somewhat far off.

PLace a Glass near the floare of a Chamber, Glass, so that these which are
below may not perceive it, and dispose a bright Image under the hole so that it
may cast his species upon the Glass, and it will cause admiration to those
which are below that know not the cause; The same may be done by placing the
Image in a Chamber adjoining, and so make it to be seen upon the side of the
wall.

In these Channel Images which show one side a deaths head, and another side a
fair face: and right before some other thing: it is a thing evident, that
setting a plain Glass sidewise to this Image you shall see in it a contrary
thing, then that which was presented before sidewise.

Lastly, it is a fine secret to present unto a plain Glass writing with such
industrey, that one may read it in the Glass, and yet out of the Glass there
is nothing to be known, which will thus happen, if the writing be writ
backward: But that which is more strange, to show a kind of writing to a plain
Glass, it shall appear another kind of writing both against sense and form,
as if there were presented to the Glass WELL. it would show it EG if it were
written thus MIV, and presented to the Glass, it would appear thus VIM; for
in the first, if the Glass ly flat then the things are inversed that are
perpendicular to the Glass, if the Glass and the object be upright, then that
on the right hand, is turned to the left, at in the latter.

And here I cease to speak further of these plain Glasses, either of the
Admirable multiplications, or appearances, which is made in a great number of
them; for to content the sight in this particular, one must have recourse to
the Cabinets of great Personages who enrich themselves with most beautiful
ones.

Experiments upon Gibbous, or unequal Sphaericall Glasses.
IF they be in the form of a Bowl, or part of a great Globe of Glass, there
is singular contentment to contemplate on them.

First, because they present the objects less and more gracious, and by how
more the Images are separated from the Glass, by so much the more they
deminish in Magnitude.

Secondly, they that show the Images playting, or foulding, which is very
pleasant, especially when the Glass is placed down, and behold in it some
Blanching, seeling, etc. The upper part of a Gallerie, the porch of a Hall,
etc. for they will be represented as a great vessel having more belly in the
middle then at the two ends, and Fosts, and Ioists of Timber will seem as
Circles.

Thirdly, that which ravisheth the spirits, by the eye, and which shames the
best perspective Painting that a Painter can make, is the beautiful
contraction of the Images, that appear within the sphericitie of these small
Glasses, for present the Glass to the lower end of a Gallarie, or at the
Corner of a great Court full of People; or toward a great street, Church,
fortification, an Army of men, to a whole City; all the fair Architecture,
and apparances will be seen contracted within the circuit of the Glass with
such variety of Colors, and distinctions in the lesser parts, that I know not
in the world what is more agreeable to the sight and pleasant to behold, in
which you will not have an exact proportion but it will be variable, according
to the distance of the Object from the Glass.

Experimenss upon hollow, or Concave Sphaericall Glasses.
I Have heretofore spoken how they may burn, being made of Glass, or Mettle,
it remains now that I deliver some pleasant uses of them, which they represent
unto our sight, and so much the more notable it will be, by how much the
greater the Glass is, and the Globe from whence it is extracted.

EXAMINATION.
IN this we may observe that a section of 2. 3. or 4. Inches in diamiter, may
be segments of spheres of 2. 3. or 4. foot, nay of so many fadome, for it is
certain that amongst these which comprehend a great portion of a lesser
sphere, and these which comprehend a little segment of a great sphere whether
they be equal or not in section, there will happen an evident difference in
one and the same experiment, in the number, situation, quantity, and figure of
the Images of one or many different objects.

MAginus, in a little Tractat that he had upon these Glasses, witnesses of
himself that he has caused many to be polished for sundry great Lords of
Italy, and Germany, which were segments of Globes of 2. 3. and 4. foot
diamiter; and I wish you had some such like to see the experiments of that
which follows; it is not difficult to have such made, or bought here in
Town, the contentment herein, would bear with the cost.

EXAMINATION.
TOuching Maginus he has nothing aided us to the knowledge of the truth by
his extract out of Vitelius, but left it: expecting it from others, rather than
to be plunged in the search of it himself, affecting rather the forging of the
matter, and composition of the Glasses, than Geometrically to establish their
effects.

FIrst therefore in Concave Glasses, the Images are seen sometimes upon the
surface of the Glasses, sometimes as though they were within it and behind it,
deeply sunk into it, sometimes they are seen before, and without the Glass,
sometimes between the object and the Glass; sometimes in the place of the
eye, sometimes farther from the Glass then the object is: which comes to pass
by reason of the diverse concourse of the beams, and change of the place of the
Images in the line of flection.

EXAMINATION.
THe relation of these apparances pass current amongst most men, but because
the curious may not receive prejudice in their experiments, some thing ought to
be said thereof to give it a more lively touch, in the true causes of these
apparances; in the first place it is impossible that the Image can be upon the
surface of the Glass, and it is a principal point to declare truly in which
place the Image is seen in the Glass: these that are more learned in Opticall
knowledge affirm the contrary, and nature it self gives it a certain place
according to its position; being always seen in the line of reflection, which
Alhazen, Vicellious, and others full of great knowledge, have confirmed by
their writings: but in their particular they were two much occupied by the
authority of the Ancients, who were not sufficiently circumspect in experience,
upon which the principles of this subject ought to be built, and searched not
fully, into the true cause of these apparances, seeing they leave unto
posterities many falcities in their writings, and these that followed them for
the most part fell into the like errors.

As for the Images to bide in the eye, it cannot be but is impertinent and
absurd; but it follows that, by how much nearer the object approaches to the
Glass, by so much the more the appearances seems to come to the eye: and if
the eye be without the point of concourse, and the object also; as long as the
object approaches thereto, the representation of the Image comes near the
eye, but passing the point of concourse it goes back agains: these appearances
thus approaching does not a little astonish these which are ignorant of the
cause: they are inversed, if the eye be without the point of concourse until
the object be within, but contrarily if the eye be between the point of
concourse and the Glass, then the Images are direct: and if the eye or the
object be in the point of concourse, the Glass will be enlightened, and the
Images confused; and if there were but a spark of fire in the said point of
concourse, all the Glass would seem a burning firebrand, and we dare say it
would occur without chance, and in the night be the most certain and
subtilest light that can be, if a Candle were placed there. And whosoever shall
enter into the search of the truth of new experiments in this subject, without
doubt he will confirm what we here speak of: and will find new lights with
a conveniable position to the Glass, he will have reflection of quantities, of
truth, and fine secrets in nature, yet not known, which he may easily
comprehend if he have but an indifferent sight, and may assure himself that
the Images cannot exceed the fight, nor trouble it; a thing too much absurd to
nature.

And it is an absolute verity in this science, that the eye being once placed
in the line of reflection of any object, and moved in the same line: the object
is seen in one and the same place immutable; or if the Image and the eye move
in their own lines, the representation in the Glass seems to invest it self
continually with a different figure.

NOw the Image coming thus to the eye, these which know not the secret draws
their sword when he sees an Image thus to issue out of the Glass, or a Pistol
which some one holds behind: and some Glasses will show a sword wholly drawn
out, separated from the Glass, as though it were in the air: and it is daily
exercised, that a man may touch the Image of his hand or his face out of the
Glass, which comes out the farther, by how much the Glass is great and the
Center remote.

EXAMINATION.
NOw that a Pistolle being presented to a Glass behind a man, and should come
out of the Glass and make him afraid, that stands before seeming to shoot at
him: this cannot be, for no object whatsoever presented to a concave Glass,
if it be not nearer to the Glass then the eye is, it comes not out to the
sight of the party; therefore he needs not fear that which is said to be
behind his back, and comes out of the Glass, for if it does come out, it
must then necessarily be before his face: so in a concave Glass, whose Center
is far remote; if a sword, stick, or such like be presented to the Glass,
it shall totally be seen to come forth of the Glass, and all the hand that
holds it. And here generally note, that if an Image be seen to issue out of
the Glass to come toward the face of any one that stands by, the object shall
be likewise seen to thrust toward that face in the Glass, and may easily be
known to all the standers by: so many persons standing before a Glass, if one
of the company take a sword and would make it issue forth toward any other
that stands there: let him choose his image in the glass, and carry the sword
right toward it, and the effect will follow. In like manner ones hand being
presented to the Glass; as it is thrust toward the Center, so the
representation of it comes toward it: and so the hands will seem to be
united, or to touch one another.

FRom which may be concluded, if such a Glass be placed at the seeling or
planching of a Hall, so that the face be Horizontall and look downward; one
may see under it as it were a man hanging by the feet; and if there were many
placed so, one could not enter into that place without great fear or scarcing:
for one should see many men in the air as if they were hanging by the feet.

EXAMINATION.
TOuching a Glass tied at a seeling or planching, that one may see a man hang
by the feet in the air, and so many Glasses, many men may be seen: without
caution this is very absurd, for if the Glass or Glasses be not so great that
the Center of the sphere upon which it was made, extend not near to the head
of him that is under it, it will not pleasantly appear; and though the Glass
should be of that capacity that the Center did extend so far, yet will not
the Images be seen to them which are from the Glass, but only to these
which are under it, or near unto it: and to them it will notably appear, and
it would be most admirable to have a Gallerie vated over with such Glasses,
which would wonderfully astonish any one that enters into it: for all the
things in the Gallery would be seen to hang in the air, and you could not
walk without incountering ayrie apparitions.

SEcondly, in flat or plain Glasses the Image is seen equal to his object,
and to represent a whole man, there ought to be a Glass as great as the Image
is: In unequal Glasses the Images are seen always less, in concave Glasses
they may be seen greater or lesser, but not truly proportionable, by reason
the diverse reflections which contracts or inlargeth the Species: when ^he eye
is between the Center and the surface of the Glass, the Image appears
sometimes ^very great and deformed, and those which have but the appearance of
the beginning of a beard on their chinne, may cheer up themselves to see they
have a great beard; these that seem to be fair will thrust away the Glass
with despite, because it will transform their beauty: these that put their
hand to the Glass will seem to have the hand of a Giant, and if one puts his
finger to the Glass it will be seen as a great Py^amide of flesh, inversed
against his finger.

Thirdly, it is a thing admirable that the eye being approached to the point of
concourse of the Glass, there will be seen nothing but an intermixture or
confusion: but retyring back a little from that point, (because the rays does
there meet,) he shall see his Image inversed, having his head below and his
feet above.

Fourthly, the diverse appearances caused by the motion of objects, either
retiring or approaching: whether they turn to the right hand or to the left
hand, whether the Glass be hung against a wall, or whether it be placed upon
a Pavement, as also what may be represented by the mutual aspect of concave
Glasses, with plain and unequal Glasses: but I will with silence pass them
over, only say some thing of two rare experiments more as follows.

The first is to represent by help of the Sun, such letters as one would upon
the front of a house: so that one may read them; Magin^^ does deliver the way
thus. Write the letters says he sufficiently big, but inversed upon the
surface of the Glass with some kind of color, or these letters may be
written with wax; (the easier to be taken out again:) for then placing the
Glass to the Sun, the letters which are written there will be reverberated,
or reflected upon the wall: hence it was perhaps that Pythagoras did promise
with this invention to write upon the Moon.

In the second place, how a man may sundry ways help himself with such a
Glass, with a lighted Torch or Candle, placed in the point of concourse or
inflammation, which is near the fourth part of the Diamiter: for by this
means the light of the Candle will be reverberated into the Glass, and will
be cast back again very far by parrallell lines, making so great a light
that one may clearly see that which is done far off, yea in the camp of an
Enemy: and those which shall see the Glass a far off, will think they see
a Silver Basin enlightened, or a fire more resplendant then the Torch. It is
this way that there are made certain Lanthornes which dazell the eyes of those
which comes against them; yet it serves singular well to enlighten those which
carry them, accommodating a Candle with a little hollow Glass, so that it may
sucessively be applied to the point of inflammation.

In like manner by this reflected light, one may read far off, provided that
the letters be indifferent great, as an Epitaph placed high, or in a place
obscure; or the letter of a friend which dares not approach without peril or
suspicion.

EXAMINATION.
THis will not be scarce sencible upon a wall remote from the Glass, and but
indifferently seen upon a wall which is near the Glass, and withal it must
be in obscurity or shadowed: or else it will not be seen. To cast light in the
night to a place remote, with a Candle placed in the point of concourse or
inflammation, is one of the most notablest properties which can be shown in a
concave Glass: for if in the point of inflammation of a parabolicall section,
a Candle be placed, the light will be reflected by parallel lines, as a
column or Cylinder; but in the sphericall section it is defective in part, the
beams being not united in one point, but somewhat scattering: notwithstanding
it casts a very great beautiful light.

LAstly, these which fear to hurt their sight by the approach of Lamps or
Candles, may by this artifice place at some corner of a Chamber, a Lamp with a
hollow Glass behind it, which will commodiously reflect the light upon a
Table, or to a place assigned: so that the Glass be somewhat raised to make
the light to streeke upon the Table with sharp Angles, as the Sun does when
it is but a little elevated above the Horizon: for this light shall exceed the
light of many Candles placed in the Room, and be more pleasant to the sight
of him that uses it.

Of other Glasses of pleasure.
FIrst, the Columnary and Pyramidall Glasses that are contained under right
lines, does represent the Images as plain Glasses do; and if they be bowing,
then they represent the Image, as the concave and unequal Glasses do.

Secondly, those Glasses which are plain, but have ascents of Angles in the
middle, will show one to have four eyes, two mouths, two noses, etc.

EXAMINATION.
THese experiments will be found different according to the diverse meeting of
the Glasses, which commonly are made scuing wise at the end, by which there
will be two diverse superficies i^ the Glass, making the exterior Angle
somewhat raised, at the interior only one superficies, which may be covered
according to ordinary Glasses to cause a reflection, and so it will be but one
Glass, which by refraction according to the different thickenesse of the
Glass, and different Angles of the scuing form, do differently present the
Images to the eye, as four eyes, two mouths, two noses; sometimes three eyes,
one mouth, and one nose, the one large and the other long, sometimes two eyes
only; with the mouth and the nose deformed, which the Glass (impenitrable)
will not show. And if there be an interior solid Angle, according to the
difference of it, (as if it be more sharp) there will be represented two
distinct double Images, that is, two entire visages, and as the Angle is open,
by so much the more the double Images will reunite and enter one within
another, which will present sometimes a whole visage extended at large, to have
four eyes, two noses, and two mouths; and by moving the Glass the Angle will
vanish, and so the two superficies will be turned into one, and the duplicitie
of Images will also vanish and appear but one only: and this is easily
experimented with two little Glass of steell, or such like so united, that
they make diverse Angles and inclinations.

THirdly, there are Glasses which make men seem pale, red, and colored in
diverse manners, which is caused by the dye of the Glass, or the diverse
refraction of the Species: and these which are made of Silver, Latin, Steel,
etc. does give the Images a diverse color also. In which one may see that the
appearances by some are made fair, younger or older than they are; and
contrarily others will make them foul and deformed: and give them a contrary
visage, for if a Glass be cut as it may be, or if many pieces of Glass be
placed together to make a conveniable reflection: there might be made of a Mole
(as it were) a mountain, of one Hair a Tree, a Fly to be as an Elephant: but
I should be too long if I should say all that which might be said upon the
property of Glasses. I will therefore conclude this discourse of the properties
of these Glasses with these four recreative Pr^blemes following.

PROBLEM: LXXVIII. 1. How to show to one that is suspicious, what is done in
another Chamber or Room: notwithstanding the interposition of the wall.
FOr the performance of this, there must be placed three Glasses in the two
Chambers, of which one of them shall be tied to the planching or seeling, that
it may be common to communicate the Species to each Glass by reflection, there
being left some hole at the top of the wall against the Glass to this end: the
two other Glasses must be placed against the two walls at right Angles, as the
figure here shows at B. and C.

Then the sight at E. by the line of incidence F E, shall fall upon the Glass
B A, and reflect upon the superficies of the Glass B C, in the point G; so
that if the diagram eye be at G, it should see E, and E, would reflect upon the
third Glass in the point H, and the eye that is at L, will see the Image that
is at E. in the point of the Catheti: which Image shall come to the eye of the
suspicious, viz. at L. by help of the third Glass, upon which is made the
second reflection, and so brings unto the eye the object, though a wall be
between it.

Corolaire. 1.
BY this invention of reflections the assiegents of a Town may be seen upon
the Rampart: notwithstanding the Parapet; which the asseiged may do by placing
a Glass in the hollow of the Ditch, and placing another upon the top of the
wall, so that the line of incidence coming to the bottom of the Ditch, make
an Angle equal to the Angle of reflection, then by this situation and
reflection, the Image of the asseigment will be seen to him that is upon the
Rampart.

Corolaire. 2.
BY which also may be inferred, that the same reflections may be seen in a
Regular Polygon, and placing as may Glasses as there are sides, counting two
for one; for then the object being set to one of the Glasses, and the eye in
the other, the Image will be seen easily.

Corolaire. 3.
FArther, notwithstanding the interposition of many Walls, Chambers, or
Cabinets, one may see that which passes through the most remotest of them, by
placing of many Glasses as there are openings in the walls, making them to
receive the incident Angles equal: that is, placing them in such sort by some
Geometrical assistant, that the incident points may meet in the middle of the
Glasses: but here all the defect will be, that the Images passing by so many
reflections, will be very weak and scarce observable.

PROBLEM. LXXIX. How with a Musket to strike a mark, not looking toward it,
as exact as one aimed at it.
AS let the eye be at O, and the mark C; place a plain Glass perpendicular
as A B: so the mark C shall he seen in Catheti C A, viz. in D, and the line
diagram of reflection is D: now let the Musket F E, upon a rest, be moved to
and fro until it be seen in the line O D, which admit to be H G: so giving
fire to the Musket, it shall undoubtedly strike the mark.

Corolaires. From which may be gathered, that one may exactly shoot out of a
Musket to a place which is not seen, being hindered by some obstacle, or other
interposition.
AS let the eye be at M, the mark C, and the wall which keeps it from being
seen, admit to be Q R: then diagram set up a plain Glass as A B, and let the
Musket be G H, placed upon his rest P O. Now because the mark C is seen at D,
move the Musket to and fro until it does agree with the line of reflection MB,
which suppose at L I, so shall it be truly placed, and giving fire to the
Musket, it shall not fail to strike the said mark at C.

PROBLEM. LXXX. How to make an Image to be seen hanging in the air, having
his head downward.
TAke two Glasses, and place them at right Angles one unto the other, as admit
A B, and C B, of which admit C B Horizontall, and let the eye be at H, and the
object or image to be D E; so D will be reflected diagram at F, so to N, so to
H, E: then at G, so to M and then to H; and by a double reflection ED will seem
in Q R, the highest point D in R, and the point E in Q inversed as was said,
taking D for the head, and E for the feet; so it will be a man inversed, which
will seem to be flying in the air: if the Image had wings unto it, and had
secretly some motion: and if the Glass were big enough to receive many
reflections, it would deceive the sight the more by admiring the changing of
colors that would be seen by that motion.

PROBLEM. LXXXI. How to make a company of representative Soldiers seem to be
a Regiment, or how few in number may be multiplied to seem to be many in
number.
TO make the experiment upon men, there must be prepared two great Glasses; but
in stead of it we will suppose two lesser, as G H. and F I, one placed right
against another perpendicular to the Horizon, diagram upon a plain level
Table: between which Glasses let there be ranged in Battalion-wife upon the
same Table an number of small men, according to the square G, H, I, F, or in
any other form or posture: then may you evidently see how the said battle will
be multiplied and seen far bigger in the appearance than it is in effect.

Corolaire.
BY this invention you may make a little Cabinet of four foot long, and two
foot large, (more or less) which being filled with Rocks or such like
things, or there being put into it Silver, Gould, stones of luster, Jewels,
etc. and the walls of the said Cabinet being all covered or hung with plain
Glass; these visibles will appear manifoldly increased, by reason of the
multiplicitie of reflections, and at the opening of the said Cabinet, having set
something which might hide them from being seen, those that look into it will
be astonished to see so few in number which before seemed to be so many.

PROBLEM. LXXXII. Of fine and pleasant Dyalls.
COuld you choose a more ridiculous one than the natural Dyall written amongst
the Greek Epigrams, upon which some sound Poet made verses; showing that a man
carries about him always a Dyall in his face by means of the nose and teeth:
and is not this a jolly Dyall, for he need not but open the mouth, the lines
shall be all the teeth, and the nose shall serve for the style.

Of a Dyall of herbs.
CAn you have a finer thing in a Garden, or in the middle of a Compartement,
than to see the lines and the number of hours represented with little bushie
herbs, as of Hyssope or such which is proper to be cut in the borders; and at
the top of the style to have a fan to show which way the wind blows: this
is very pleasant and useful.

Of the Dyall upon the fingers and the hand.
IS it not a commodity very agreeable, when one is in the field or in some
village without any other Dyall, to see only by the hand what of the clock it
is, which gives it very near; and may be practiced by the left hand in this
manner.

Take a straw or like thing of the length of the Index, or the second finger,
hold this straw very right between the thumb and the right finger, then
stretch forth the hand and turn your back and the palm of your hand toward
the Sun; so that the shadow of the muscle which is under the thumb touch
the line of life, which is between the middle of the two other great lines,
which is seen in the palm of the hand; this done, the end of the shadow will
show what of the clock it is: for at the end of the great finger it is 7 in
the morning or 5 in the evening; at the end of the Ring finger it is 8 in the
morning, or 4 in the evening; at the end of the little finger or first joint,
it is 9 in the morning, or 3 in the afternoon; 10 and 2 at the second joint,
11 and 1 at the third joint, and midday in the line following, which comes from
the end of the Index.

Of a Dyall which was about an Obeliske at Rome.
Was not this a pretty fetch upon a pavement, to choose an Obeliske for a
Dyall, having 106 foot in height, without removing the Basis of it? Pliny
assures us in his 26 book and 8 Chap. that the Emperor Augustus having
accommodated in the field of Mars an Obeliske of this height, he made about it
a pavement, and by diagram the industry of Manilius the Mathematitian, there
was enchaced marks of Copper upon the Pavement, and placed also an apple of
Gould upon the top of the said Obeliske, to know the hour and the course of
the Sun, with the increase and decrease of days by the same shadow: and in
the same manner do some by the shadow of their head or other style, make the
like experiments in Astronomy.

Of Dyalls with Glasses.
PTolomie writes, as Cardanus reports; that long ago there were Glasses which
served for Dyalls, and presented the face of the behoulder as many times as the
hour ought to be, twice if it were 2 of the clock; 9 if it were 9, etc. But
this was thought to be done by the help of water, and not by Glasses; which
did leake by little and little out of the vessel, discovering anon one Glass,
then anon two Glasses, then 3, 4, 5 Glasses, etc. to show so many faces as
there were hours, which was only by leaking of water.

Of a Dyall which has a Glass in the place of the Still.
What will you say of the invention of Mathematicians, which find out daily
so many fine and curious novelties? they have now a way to make Dyalls upon the
wainscore or seeling of a Chamber, and there where the Sun can never shine,
or the beams of the Sun cannot directly strike: and this is done in placing
of a little Glass in the place of the style which reflecteth the light, with
the same condition that the shadow of the style shows the hour: and it is
easy to make experiment upon a common Dyall, changing only the disposition of
the Dyall, and tying to the end of the style a piece of plain Glass. The
Almaines use it much, who by this way have no greater trouble, but to put their
noses out of their beds and see what a clock it is; which is reflected by a
little hole in the window upon the wall or seeling of the Chamber.

EXAMINATION.
IN this there is two experiments considerable, the first is with a very little
Glass placed so that it may be open to the beams of the Sun; the other has
respect to a spacious or great Glass placed to a very little hole, so that the
Sun may shine on it, for then the shadow which is cast upon the Dyall is
converted into beams of the Sun, and will reflect and be cast upon a plain
opposite: and in the other it is a hole in the window or such like, by which
may pass the beams of the Sun which represents the extremity of the
style, and the Glass represents the plain of the Dyall, upon which the
beams being cast in manner of shadows reflecteth upon a plain opposite: and
it is needful that in this second way the Glass may be spacious as before to
receive the delineaments of the Dyall.

Otherwise you may draw the lineaments of a Dyall upon any plain
looking-glass which reflecteth the Sunne-beames, for the applying a style or a
pearl at the extreamitie of it: and placed to the Sun, the reflection will be
answerable to the delineaments on the Glass: but here note that the Glass
ought to be great, and so the delineaments thereon.

But that which is most noble is to draw hour lines upon the outside of the
Glass of a window, and placing a style thereto upon the outside, the shadow
of the style will be seen within, and so you have the hour more certain
without any difficulty.

Of Dyalls with water.
SVch kind of Dyalls were made in ancient times, and also these of sand:
before they had skill to make Sun-dyalls or Dyalls with wheels; for they used
to fill a vessel with water, and having experience by trial that it would
run out all in a day, they did mark within the vessel the hours noted by
the running of the water; and some did set a piece of light board in the
vessel to swim upon the top of the water, carrying a little statue, which
with a small stick did point out the hour upon a column or wall, figured
with hour notes as the vessel was figured within.

Vitruvius writes of another manner of water-Dyall more difficult; diagram and
Baptiste a Porta amongst his natural secrets, delivers this invention
following. Take a vessel full of water like a Chaldron, and another vessel of
glass like unto a Bell, (with which some accustom to cover Melons:) and let
this vessel of glass be almost as great as the Chaldron, having a small hole
at the bottom, then when it is placed upon the water, it will sink by little
and little: by this one may mark the hours on the surface of the Glass to
serve another time. But if at the beginning one had drawn the water within the
same vessel of glass in sucking by the little hole, the water would not fall
out, but as fast as the air would succeed it; entering slowly at the little
hole: or contrarily the hours might be distinguished by diminution of water,
or by augmentation.

Now it seems a safer way that the water pass out by drop and drop, and drop
into a Cylindricall Glass by help of a Pipe: for having marked the exterior
part of the Cylinder in the hour notes, the water it self which falls within
it, will show what of the clock it is, far better than the running of sand;
for by this may you have the parts of the hours most accurate, which commonly
by sand is not had: and to which may be added the hours of other Countries
with greater ease. And here note that as soon as the water is out of one of
the Glasses you may turn it over into the same again out of the other, and so
let it run an new.

PROBLEM. LXXXIII. Of Cannons or great Artillery. Soldiers, and others would
willingly see this Problem, which contains three or four subtle questions:
The first is how to charge a Cannon without Powder.
THis may be done with air and water only, having thrown cold water into the
Cannon, which might be squirted forceably in by the closure of the mouth of the
Piece, that so by this pressure the air might more condence; then having a
round peeee of wood very just, and oyled well for the better to slide, and
thrust the Bullet when it shall be time: This piece of wood may be held fast
with some Pole, for fear it be not thrust out before his time: then let fire
be made about the Trunion or hinder part of the Piece to heat the air and
water, and then when one would shoot it, let the pole be quickly loosened: for
then the air searching a greater place, and having way now offered, will
thrust out the wood and the bullet very quick: the experimence which we have
in long trunkes shooting out pellats with air only, shows the verity of this
Problem.

2. In the second question it may be demanded, how much time does the Bullet of
Cannon spend in the air before it falls to the ground.
THe resolution of this Question depends upon the goodness of the Piece and
charge thereof, seeing in each there is great difference. It is reported that
Ticho Brahe, and the Landsgrave did make an experiment diagram upon a Cannon in
Germany, which being charged and shot off; the Bullet spent two minutes of time
in the air before it fell: and the distance was a German mile, which distance
proportionated to an hours time, makes 120. Italian miles.

3. In the third question it may be asked, how it comes to pass, that a Cannon
shooting upwards, the Bullet flies with more violence than being shot
point-blanke, or shooting downward.
IF we regard the effect of a Cannon when it is to batter a wall, the Question
is false, seeing it is most evident that the blows which fall perpendicular
upon a wall, are more violent than these which strikes byas-wise or glaunsingly.

But considering the strength of the blow only, the Question is most true, and
often experimented to be found true: a Piece mounted at the best of the Randon,
which is near half of the right, conveyes her Bullet with a far greater
violence than that which is shot at, Point blanke or mounted parallel to the
Horizon.

The common reason is, that shooting high, the fire carries the bowl a longer
time in the air, and the air moves more facill upwards, than downwards,
because that the ayrie circles that the motion of the bullet makes are soonest
broken. Howsoever this be the general tenet, it is curious to find out the
inequallity of moving of the air; whether the Bullet fly upward, downward, or
right forward, to produce a sencible difference of motion: and some think that
the Cannon being mounted, the Bullet pressing the Powder makes a greatar
resistance, and so causes all the Powder to be inflamed before the Bullet is
thrown out, which makes it to be more violent than otherwise it would be. When
the Cannon is otherwise disposed, the contrary arives, the fire leaves the
Bullet, and and the Bullet rouling from the Powder resists less: and it is
usually seen, that shooting out of a Musket charged only with Powder; to
shoot to a mark of Paper placed Point blanke, that there are seen many small
holes in the paper, which cannot be other than the grains of Powder which did
not take fire: but this latter accident may happen from the overcharging of the
Piece, or the length of it, or windy, or dampenesse of the Powder.

From which some may think, that a Cannon pointed right to the Zenith, should
shoot with greater violence, than in any other mount or form whatsoever: and
by some it has been imagined, that a Bullet shot in this fashion has been
consumed, melt, and lost in the air, by reason of the violence of the blow,
and the activitie of the fire; and that sundry experiments has been made in
this nature, and the Bullet never found. But it is hard to believe this
assertion: it may rather be supposed that the Bullet falling far from the
Piece cannot be discerned where it falls: and so comes to be lost.

4. In the fourth place it may be asked, whether the discharge of a Cannon be
so much the greater, by how much it is longer.
IT seems at the first to be most true, that the longer the Piece is, the
more violent it shootes: and to speak generally, that which is direction by a
Trunk, Pipe, or other concavitie, is conveyed so much the more violent, or
better, by how much it is longer; either in respect of the sight, hearing,
water, fire, etc. and the reason seems to hold in Cannons, because in these
that are long, the fire is retained a longer time in the concavitie of the
Piece, and so throws out the Bullet with more violence; and experience lets us
see that taking Cannons of the same boar, but of diversity of length from 8
foot to 12; that the Cannon of 9 foot long has more force than that of 8
foot long, and 10 more than that of 9, and so unto 12 foot of length. Now the
usual Cannon carries 600 Paces, some more, some less; yea, some but 200 Paces
from the Piece, and may shoot into soft earth 15 or 17 foot, into sand or
earth which is loose, 22 or 24 foot; and in firm ground, about 10 or 12 foot,
etc.

It has been seen lately in Germany, where there was made Pieces from 8
foot long to 17 foot of like boar, that shooting out of any Piece which was
longer than 12 foot; the force was diminished, and the more in length the
Piece increases, the less his force was; therefore the length ought to be in
a mean measure; and it is often seen, the greater the Cannon is, by so much
the service is greater: but to have it too long or too short, is not
convenient, but a mean proportion of length to be taken; otherwise the flame
of the fire will be overpressed with air: which hinders the motion in respect
of substance, and distance of getting out, diagram

PROBLEM. LXXXIIII. Of prodigious progression and multiplication, of Creatures,
Plants, Fruits, Numbers, Gold, Silver, etc. when they are always augmented by
certain proportion.
HEre we shall show things no less admirable, as recreative, and yet so
certain and easy to be demonstrated, that there needs not but Multiplication
only, to try each particular: and first,

Of grains of Mustard Seed.
FIrst, therefore it is certain that the increase of one grain of
Mustard Seed for 20 years space, cannot be contained within the visible
world, nay if it were a hundred times greater than it is: and holding nothing
besides from the Center of the earth even unto the firmament, but only small
grains of Mustard Seed. Now because this seems but words, it must be proved
by Art; as may be done in this wise, as suppose one Mustard Seed sown to
bring forth a tree or branch, in each extendure of which might be a thousand
grains: but we will suppose only a thousand in the whole tree, and let us
proceed to 20 years, every seed to bring forth yearly a thousand grains; now
multiplying always by a thousand, in less then 17 years you shall have so
many grains which will surpass the sands, which are able to fill the whole
firmament: for following the supposition of Archimedes, and the most probable
opinion of the greatness of the firmament which Tico Brahe has left us; the
number of grains of sand will be sufficiently expressed with 49 Ciphers, but
the number of grains of Mustard Seed at the end of 17 years will have 52
Ciphers: and moreover grains of Mustard Seed, are far greater than these of
the sands: it is therefore evident that at the seventeenth year, all the
grains of Mustard Seed, which shall successively spring from one grain only,
cannot be contained within the limits of the whole firmament; what should it be
then, if it should be multiplied again by a thousand for the 18 year: and
that again by a thousand for every years increase until you came to the 20
year? its a thing as clear as the day, that such a heap of Mustard Seed would
be a hundred thousand times greater than the earth: and being only but the
increase of one grain in 20 years.

Of Pigges.
SEcondly, is it not a strange proposition, to say that the great Turk with
all his Revenues, is not able to maintain for one years time, all the Pigges
that a Sow may pigge with all her race, that is, the increase with the increase
unto 12 years: this seems impossible, yet it s most true; for let us suppose
and put the case that a Sow bring forth but 6, two males, and 4 females, and
that each female shall bring forth as many every year, during the space of 12
years, at the end of the time there will be found above 33 millions of Pigges:
now allowing a crown for the maintenance of each Pigge for a year, (which is
as little as may be, being but near a half of a farthing allowance for each
day;) there must be at the least so many crowns to maintain them, one a
year, viz. 33 millions, which exceedes the Turks revenue by much.

Of grains of Corn.
THirdly, it will make one astonished to think that a grain of Corn, with
his increase successively for the space of 12 years will produce in grains
244140625000000000000, which is able to load almost all the creatures in the
world.

To open which, let it be supposed that the first year one grain being sowed
brings forth 50, (but sometimes there is seen 70, sometimes 100 fold) which
grains sown the next year, every one to produce 50, and so consequently the
whole and increase to be sown every year, until 12 years be expired, there
will be of increase the aforesaid prodigious sum of grains, viz.
244140625000000000000, which will make a cubicall heap of 6258522 grains
every way, which is more than a cubicall body of 31 miles every way: for
allowing 40 grains in length to each foot, the Cube would be 156463 foot
every way: from which it is evident that if there were two hundred thousand
Cities as great as London, allowing to each 3 miles square every way, and 100
foot in height, there would not be sufficient room to contain the aforesaid
quantity of Corn: and suppose a bushel of Corn were equal unto two Cubicke
feet, which might contain twenty hundred thousand grains, then would there
be 122070462500000 bushells, and allowing 30 bushells to a Tun, it would be
able to load 8138030833 vessels, which is more than eight thousand one
hundred and thirty eigh millions, ship loadings of 500 Tun to each ship:
a quantity so great that the Sea is scarce able to bear, or the universal
world able to find vessels to carry it: And if this Corn should be valued
at half a crown the bushel, it would amount unto 15258807812500 pounds
sterling, which I think exceedes all the Treasures of all the Princes, and of
other particular men in the whole world: and is not this good husbandry to sow
one grain of Corn, and to continue it in sowing, the increase only for 12
years to have so great a profit.

Of the increase of Sheep.
FOurthly, those that have great flocks of Sheep may be quickly rich if they
would preserve their Sheep without killing or selling of them: so that every
Sheep produce one each year, for at the end of 16 years, 100 Sheep will
multiply and increase unto 61689^00, which is above 60 millions, and 16 hundred
thousand Sheep: now supposing them worth but a crown a piece, it would amount
unto 15422400 pounds sterling, which is above 15 millions, and four hundred
and twenty thousand pounds, a fair increase of one Sheep: and a large portion
for a Child if it should be allotted.

Of the increase of Cod-fish, Carpes, etc.
Fifthly, if there be any creatures in the world that does abound with increase
or fertility, it may be rightly attributed to fish; for they in their kinds
produce such a great multitude of eggs, and brings forth so many little ones,
that if a great part were not destroyed continually, within a little while they
would fill all the Sea, Ponds, and Rivers in the world; and it is easy to show
how it would come so to pass, only by supposing them to increase without
taking or destroying them for the space of 10 or 12 years: having regard to
the soliditie of the waters which are allotted for to lodge and contain these
creatures, as their bounds and place of rest to live in.

Of the increase and multiplication of men.
Sixthly, there are some that cannot conceive how it can be that from eight
persons (which was saved after the deluge or Noah's flood) should spring such a
world of people to begin a Monarchy under Nimrod, being but 200 years after
the flood, and that amongst them should be raised an army of two hundred
thousand fighting Men: But it is easily proved if we take but one of the
Children of Noah, and suppose that a new generation of people begun at every 30
years, and that it be continued to the seventh generation which is 200 years;
for then of one only family there would be produced one hundred and eleven
thousand souls, three hundred and five to begin the world: though in that time
men lived longer, and were more capable of multiplication and increase: which
number springing only from a simple production of one yearly, would be far
greater, if one man should have many wives, which in ancient times they had:
from which it is also that the Children of Israel, who came into Egypt but
only 70 souls, yet after 210 years captivity, they came forth with their
hosts; that there was told six hundred thousand fighting men, besides old
people, women and children; and he that shall separate but one of the families
of Joseph, it would be sufficient to make up that number: how much more should
it be then if we should adjoyne many families together?

Of the increase of numbers.
SEventhly, what sum of money shall the City of London be worth, if it
should be sold, and the money be paid in a year after this manner: the first
week to pay a pin, the second week 2 pinnes, the third week 4 pinnes, the
fourth week 8 pinnes, the fifth week 16 pinnes: and so doubling until the 52
weeks, or the year be expired.

Here one would think that the value of the pinnes would amount but to a small
matter, in comparison of the Treasures, or riches of the whole City: yet it is
most probable that the number of pinnes would amount unto the sum of
4519599628681215, and if we should allow unto a quarter a hundred thousand
pinnes, the whole would contain nintie eight millions, four hundred thousand
Tun: which is able to load 45930 Ships of a thousand Tun a piece: and if
we should allow a thousand pinnes for a penny, the sum of money would amount
unto above eighteen thousand, eight hundred and thirty millions of pounds
sterling, an high price to sell a City at: yet certain, according to that
first proposed. So if 40 Towns were sold upon condition to give for the first
a penny, for the second 2 pence, for the third 4 pence, etc. by doubling all
the rest unto the last, it would amount unto this number of pence,
1099511627775, which in pounds is 4581298444, that is four thousand five
hundred and fourscore millions of pounds and more.

Of a man that gathered up Apples, Stones, or such like upon a condition.
Eighthly, admit there were an hundred Apples, Stones, or such like things that
were placed in a straight line or right form, a pace one from another, and a
basket being placed a pace from the first: how many paces would there be made
to put all these Stones into the basket, by fetching one by one: this would
require near half a day to do it, for there would be made ten thousand and
a hundred paces before he should gather them all up.

Of Changes in Bells, in musical Instruments, transmutation of places, in
numbers, letters, men or such like.
NInthly, is it not an admirable thing to consider how the skill of numbers
does easily furnish us with the knowledge of mysterious and hidden things,
which simply looked into by others that are not versed in Arithmeticke, do
present unto them a world of confusion and difficulty.

As in the first place, it is often debated amongst our common Ringers, what
number of Changes there might be made in 5, 6, 7, 8, or more Bells: who spend
much time to answer their own doubts, entering often into a Labyrinth in the
search thereof: or if there were 10 voices, how many several notes might there
be? These are propositions of such facillitie, that a child which can but
multiply one number by another, may easily resolve it, which is but only to
multiply every number from the unity successively in each others product, unto
the term assigned: so the 6. number that is against 6. in the Table, is 720,
and so many Changes may be made upon 6 Bells, upon 5 there are 120, etc.

In like manner against 10 in the Table is 3628800, that is, three millions,
six hundred twenty eight thousand, eight hundred and fourscore: which shows
that 10 voices may have so many consorts, each man keeping his own note, but
only altering his place; and so of stringed Instruments: and the Gamauth may
be varied according to which, answerable to the number against X, viz.
1124001075070399680000 notes, from which may be drawn this, or the like
proposition.

Suppose that 7 Scholars were taken out of a free School to be sent to an
University, there to be entertained in some College at commons for a certain
sum of money, so that each of them have two meals daily, and no longer to
continue there, that sitting all together upon one bench or form at every
meal, there might be a diverse transmutation of place, of account in some one
of them, in comparison of another, and never the whole company to be twice
alike in situation: how long may the Steward entertain them? (who being not
skilled in this fetch may answer unadvisedly.) It is most certain that there
will be five thousand and forty several positions or changings diagram in the
seatings, which makes 7 years time not wanting 20 days:

Hence from this mutabilitie of transmutation, it is no marvel that by 24
letters there arises and is made such variety of languages in the world, and
such infinite number of words in each language; seeing the diversity of
syllables produces that effect; and also by the interchangeing and placing of
letters amongst the vowels, and amongst themselves makes these syllables: which
alphabet of 24 letters may be varied so many times, vi.
620448593438860623360000 which is six hundred twenty thousand, four hundred
forty eight millions, five hundred ninety three thousand, four hundred thirty
eight millions of millions, and more.

Now allowing that a man may read or speak one hundred thousand words in an
hour, which is twice more words than there are contained in the Psalms of
David, (a task too great for any man to do in so short a time) and if there
were four thousand six hundred and fifty thousand millions of men, they could
not speak these words; (according to the hourly proportion aforesaid in
threescore and ten thousand years; which variation and transmutation of
letters, if they should be written in books, allowing to each leaf 28000
words, (which is as many as possibly could be inserted,) and to each book a
reame or 20 quire of the largest and thinnest printing paper; so that each book
being about 15 inches long, 12 broad, and 6 thick: the books that would be
made of the transmutation of the 24 letters aforesaid, would be at least
38778037089928788: and if a Library of a mile square every way, of 50 foot
high, were made to contain 250 Galleries of 20 foot broad a piece, it would
contain four hundred millions of the said books: so there must be to
contain the rest no less than 96945092 such Libraries; and if the books were
extended over the surface of the Globe of the earth, it would a decuple
covering unto it: a thing seeming most incredible that 24 letters in their
transmutation should produce such a prodigious number; yet most certain and
infallible in computation.

Of a Servant hired upon certain conditions.
A Servant said unto his master, that he would dwell with him all his life
time, if he would but only lend him land to sow one grain of Corn with all
his increase for 8 years time; how think you of this bargain: for if he had
but a quarter of an intch of ground for each grain, and each grain to bring
forth yearly of increase 40 grains; the whole sum would amount unto, at the
term aforesaid, 6553600000000 grains: and seeing that three thousand and six
hundred millions of intches do but make one mile square in the superficies, it
shall be able to receive fourteen thousand and four hundred millions of
grains, which is 14400000000: thus dividing the aforesaid 6553600000000, the
Quotient will be 455, and so many square miles of land must there be to sow
the increase of one grain of Corn for 8 years, which makes at the least
four hundred and twenty thousand Acres of land, which rated but at five
shillings the Acre per Annum, amounts unto one hundred thousand pound; which is
twelve thousand and five hundred pound a year, to be continued for 8 years;
a pretty pay for Master Servants 8 years service.

PROBLEM. LXXXV. Of Fountains, Hydriatiques, Machinecke, and other experiments
upon water, or other liquor.
1. First how to make water at the foot of a mountain to ascend to the top of
it, and so to descend on the other side.
TO do this there must be a Pipe of lead, which may come from the Fountain
A, to the top of the Mountain B; and so to descend on the other side a little
lower than the Fountain, as at C: then make a hole in the Pipe at the top of
the diagram Mountain, as at B, and stop the end of the Pipe at A and C; and
fill this Pipe at B with water: and close it very carefully again at B, that
no air get in: then unstop the end at A, and at C; then will the water
perpetually run up the hill, and descend on the other side, which is an
invention of great consequence to furnish Villages that want water.

2. Secondly, how to know what wine or other liquor there is in a vessel
without opening the bung-hole, and without making any other hole, than that by
which it runs out at the top.
IN this Problem there is nothing but to take a bowed pipe of Glass, and put
it into the faucets hole, and stopping it close about: for then you shall see
the wine or liquor to ascend in this Pipe, until it be just even with the
liquor in the vessel; by which a man may fill the vessel, or put more into
it: and so if need were, one may empty one vessel into another without opening
the bung-hole.

3. Thirdly, how is it that it is said that a vessel holds more water being
placed at the foot of a Mountain, than standing upon the top of it.
THis is a thing most certain, because that water and all other liquor
disposes it self spherically about the Center of the earth; and by how much
the vessel is nearer the Center, by so much the more the surface of the water
makes a lesser sphere, and therefore every part more gibbous or swelling, than
the like part in a greater sphere: and therefore when the same vessel is
farther from the Center of the earth, the surface of the water makes a greater
sphere, and therefore less gibbous, or swelling over the vessel: from whence
it is evident that a vessel near the Center of the earth holds more water
than that which is farther remote from it; and so consequently a vessel placed
at the bottom of the Mountain holds more water, than being placed on the top
of the Mountain: First, therefore one may conclude, that one and the same
vessel will always diagram hold more: by how much it is nearer the center of
the earth. Secondly, if a vessel be very near the Center of the earth, there
will be more water above the brims of it, than there is within the vessel.
Thirdly, a vessel full of water coming to the Center will spherically
increase, and by little and little leave the vessel; and passing the Center,
the vessel will be all emptied. Fourthly, one cannot carry a Paile of water
from a low place to a higher, but it will more and more run out and over,
because that in ascending it lies more level, but descending it swelles and
becomes more gibbous.

4. Fourthly, to conduct water from the top of one Mountain, to the top of
another.
AS admit on the top of a Mountain there is a spring, and at the top of the
other Mountain there are inhabitants which wants water: now to make a bridge
from one Mountain to another, were difficult and too great a charge; by way of
Pipes it is easy and of no great price: for if at the spring on the top of
the Mountain be placed a Pipe, to descend into the valley, and ascend to the
other Mountain, the water will run naturally, and continually, provided that
the spring be somewhat higher than the passage of the water at the inhabitants.

5. Fifthly, of a fine Fountain which spouts water very high, and with great
violence by turning of a Cock.
LEt there be a vessel as A B, made close in all his parts, in the middle of
which let C D be a Pipe open at D near the bottom, and then with a Squirt
squirt in the water at C, stopped above by the cock or faucet C, with as great
violence as diagram possible you can; and turn the Cock immediately. Now
there being an indifferent quantity of water and air in the vessel, the
water keeps it self in the bottom, and the air which was greatly pressed,
seeks for more place, that turning the cock the water issues forth at the
Pipe, and flies very high; and that especially if the vessel be a little
heated: some make use of this for an Ewer to wash hands withal, and therefore
putting a moveable Pipe above C, such as the figure shows: which the water
will cause to turn very quick, pleasurable to behold.

6. Sixthly, of Archimedes screw, which makes water ascend by descending.
THis is nothing else but a Cylinder, about the which is a Pipe in form of a
screw, and when one turns it, the water descends always in respect of the
Pipe: for it passes from one part which is higher to that which is lower, and
at the end of the engine the water is found higher than it was at the spring.
This great enginer admirable in all Mathematical Arts invented this Instrument
to wash King Hieroies great vessels, diagram as some Authors says, also to
water the fields of Egypt, as Diodorus witnesses: and Carda^^^ reports that
a Citizen of Milan having made the like engine, thinking himself to be the
first inventer, conceived such exceeding joy, that he became foll. 2.

Again a thing may ascend by descending, if a spirall line be made having
many circulations or revolutions; the last being always lesser than the first,
yet higher than the Plain supposed: it is most certain that then putting a
ball into it, and turning the spirall line so, that the first circulation may
be perpendicular, or touch always the supposed Plain: the ball shall in
descending continually ascend, until at last it come to the highest part of
the spirall line, and so fall out. And here especially may be noted, that a
moving body as water, or a Bullet, or such like, will never ascend if the
helicall revolution of the screw be not inclining to the Horizon: so that
according to this inclination the ball or liquor, may descend always by a
continual motion and revolution. And this experiment may be more useful,
naturally made with a thread of iron; or latin turned or bowed helically about
a Cylinder, with some distinction of distances between the Helices; for then
having drawn out the Cylinder, or having hung or tied some weight at it in
such sort, that the water may easily drop if one lift up the said thread: these
helices or revolutions, notwithstanding will remain inclining to the Horizon,
and then turning it about forward, the said weight will ascend, but backward it
will descend. Now if the revolutions be alike, and of equallitie amongst
themselves; and the whirling or turning motion be quick, the sight will be so
deceived, that producing the action it will seem to the ignorant no less than
a miracle.

7. Seventhly, of another fine Fountain of pleasure.
THis is an engine that has two wheels with cogges, or teeth as A B, which
are placed within an Ovall C D, in such sort, that the teeth of the one, may
enter into the notches of the other; but so just that neither air nor water
may enter into the Ovall coffer, either by the middle or by the sides, for the
wheel must join so near to the sides of the coffer, that there be no
vacuitie: to this there is an axeltree with a handle to each diagram wheel, so
that they may be turned, and A being turned, that turns the other wheel that
is opposite: by which motion the air that is in E, and the water that is
carried by the hollow of the wheels of each side, by continual motion, is
constrained to mount and fly out by the funnell F: now to make the water run
what way one would have it, there may be applied upon the top of the Pipe F,
two other moveable Pipes inserted one within another; as the figure shows.
But here note that there may accrue some inconveniency in this machanicke,
seeing that by quick turning the cogges or teeth of the wheels running one
against another, may near break them, and so give way to the air to enter
in, which being violently enclosed will escape to occupy the place of the
water, whose weight makes it so quick: howsoever, if this Machine be curiously
made as an able workman may easily do, it is a most sovereign engine, to
cast water high and far off for to quench fires. And to have it to rain to a
place assigned, accommodate a socket having a Pipe at the middle, which may
point toward the place being set at the top thereof, and so having great
discretion in turning the Axis of the wheel, it may work exceeding well, and
continue long.

8. Eighthly, of a fine watering pot for gardens.
THis may be made in form of a Bottle according to the last figure or such
like, having at the bottom many small holes, and at the neck of it another
hole somewhat greater than these at the bottom, which hole at the top you
must unstop when you would fill this watering pot, for then it is nothing but
putting the lower end into a paile of water, for so it will fill it self by
degrees: and being full, put your thumb on the hole at the neck to stop it,
for then may you carry it from place to place, and it will not sensibly run
out, yet something will if it were so close stopped, and all in time contrary
to to the ancient tenet in Philosophy, that air will not penetrate.

9. Ninthly, how easily to take wine out of a vessel at the bung-hole, without
piercing of a hole in the vessel.
IN this there is no need but to have a Cane or Pipe of Glass or such like,
one of the ends of which may be closed up almost, leaving some small hole at
the end; for then if that end be set into the vessel at the bung-hole, the
whole Cane or Pipe will be diagram filled by little and little, and once being
still, stop the other and which is without* and then pull out the Cane or
Pipe, so will it be full of wine; then opening a little the top above, you
may fill a Glass or other Pot with it, for as the wine issues out, the air
comes into the Cane or Pipe to supply vacuity.

10. Tenthly, how to measure irregular bodies by help of water.
SOme throw in the body or magnitude into a vessel, and keep that which
flows out over, saying it is always equal to the thing cast into the water:
but it is more neater this way to power into a vessel such a quantity of
water, which may be thought sufficient to cover the body or magnitude, and make
a mark how high the water is in the vessel, then power out all this water
into another vessel, and let the body or magnitude be placed into the first
vessel; then power in water from the second vessel, until it ascend unto the
former mark made in the first vessel; so the water which remains in the
second vessel, is equal to the body or magnitude put into the water: but here
note that this is not exact or free from error, yet nearer the truth than any
Geometrician can otherwise possibly measure, and these bodies that are not so
full of powers are more truly measured this way, than others are.

11. To find the weight of water.
SEeing that 574/1000 part of an ounce weight, makes a cubicall inch of water:
and every pound weight Haverdepoise makes 27 cubicall intches, and 9/10 fere,
and that 7 Gallons and a half wine measure makes a foot cubicall, it is easy
by inversion, that knowing the quantity of a vessel in Gallons, to find his
content in cubicall feet or weight: and that late famous Geometrician Master
Brigs found a cubicall foot of water to weigh near 62 pound weight
Haverdepoize. But the late learned Simon Stevin found a cubicall foot of water
to weight 65 pound, which difference may arise from the inequallitie of water;
for some waters are more ponderous than others, and some difference may be from
the weight of a pound, and the measure of a foot: thus the weight and
quantity of a solid foot settled, it is easy for Arithmetitians to give the
contents of vessels or bodies which contain liquids.

12. To find the charge that a vessel may carry, as Ships, Boats, or such
like.
THis is generally conceived, that a vessel may carry as much weight as that
water weighs, which is equal unto the vessel in bigness, in abating only
the weight of the vessel: we see that a barrel of wine or water cast into the
water, will not sink to the bottom but swim easily, and if a Ship had not
iron and other ponderosities in it, it might swim full of water without
sinking: in the same manner if the vessel were laden with lead, so much
should the water weigh: hence it is that Mariners calls Ships of 50 thousand
Tons, because they may contain one or two thousand Tun, and so
consequently carry as much.

13. How comes it that a Ship having safely sailed in the vaste Ocean, and
being come into the Port or harbor, without any tempest will sink down right.
THe cause of this is that a vessel may carry more upon some kind of water
than upon other; now the water of the Sea is thicker and heavier than that of
Rivers, Wells, or Fountains; therefore the loading of a vessel which is
accounted sufficient in the Sea, becomes too great in the harbor or sweet
water. Now some think that it is the depth of the water that makes vessels
more easy to swim, but it is an abuse; for if the loading of a Ship be no
heavier than the water that would occupy that place, the Ship should as easily
swim upon that water, as if it did swim upon a thousand fathom deep of water;
and if the water be no thicker than a leaf of paper, and weighs but an ounce
under a heavy body, it will support it, as well as if the water under it
weighed ten thousand pound weight: hence it is if there be a vessel capable of
a little more than a thousand pound weight of water, you may put into this
vessel a piece of wood, which shall weigh a thousand pound weight; (but
lighter in his kind than the like of magnitude of water:) for then pouring in
but a quarte of water or a very little quantity of water, the wood will swim
on the top of it, (provided that the wood touch not the sides of the vessel:)
which is a fine experiment, and seems admirable in the performance.

14. How a gross body of mettle may swim upon the water.
THis is done by extending the mettle into a thin Plate, to make it hollow in
form of a vessel; so that the greatness of the vessel which the air with
it contains, be equal to the magnitude of the water, which weighes as much
as it; for all bodies may swim without sinking, if they occupy the place of
water equal in weight unto them, as if it weighed 12 pound, it must have the
place of 12 pound of water: hence it is that we see floating upon the water
great vessels of Copper or Brass, when they are hollow in form of a
Chaldron. And how can it be otherwise conceived of Islands in the Sea that
swim and floate? is it not that they are hollow and some part like unto a
Boat, or that their earth is very light and spongeous, or having many
concavities in the body of it, or much wood within it.

And it would be a pretty proposition to show how much every kind of mettle
should be enlarged, to make it swim upon the water: which does depend upon
the proportions that is between the weight of the water and each mettle. Now
the proportion that is between mettles and water of equal magnitude,
according to some Authors is as follows.

A magnitude of 10 pound weight of water will require for the like magnitude of
Gould. 187 Lead. 116 Silver. 104 Copper. 91 Iron. 81 Tin. 75

From which is inferred, that to make a piece of Copper of 10 pound weight to
swim, it must be so made hollow, that it may hold 9 times that weight of
water and somewhat more, that is to say, 91 pound: seeing that Copper and water
of like magnitudes in their ponderosities, are as before, as 10 to 91.

15. How to weigh the lightness of the air.
PLace a Balance of wood turned upside down into the water, that so it may
swim, then let water be enclosed within some body, as within a Bladder or such
like; and suppose that such a quantity of air should weigh one pound, place
it under one of the Balances, and place under the other as much weight of
lightness as may counter-ballance and keep the other Balance that it rise
not out of the water: by which you shall see how much the lightness is.

But without any Balance do this; take a Cubicall hollow vessel, or that
which is Cylindricall, which may swim on the water, and as it sinketh by
placing of weights upon it, mark how much; for then if you would examine the
weight of any body, you have nothing to do but to put it into this vessel,
and mark how deep it sinkes; for so many pound it weighes as the weights put
in does make it so to sink.

diagram

16. Being given a body, to mark it about, and show how much of it will sink
in the water, or swim above the water.
THis is done by knowing the weight of the body which is given, and the
quantity of water, which weighes as much as that body; for then certainly it
will sink so deep, until it occupies the place of that quantity of water.

17. To find how much several mettle or other bodies do weigh less in the
water than in the air.
TAke a Balance and weigh (as for example) 9 pound of Gould, Silver, Lead, or
Stone in the air, so it hang in aequilibrio; then coming to the water, take
the same quantity of Gould, Silver, Lead, or Stone, and let it softly down
into it, and you shall see that you shall need a less counterpoise in the
other Balance to counter-ballance it: wherefore all solids or bodies weigh
less in the water than in the air, and so much the less it will be, by how
much the water is gross and thick, because the weight finds a greater
resistance, and therefore the water supports more than air: and further,
because the water by the ponderositie is displeased, and so strives to be there
again, pressing to it, by reason of the other waters that are about it,
according to the proportion of his weight. Archimedes demonstrateth, that all
bodies weigh less in the water (or in like liquor) by how much they occupy
place: and if the water weigh a pound weight, the magnitude in the water shall
weigh a pound less than in the air.

Now by knowing the proportion of water and mettles, it is found that Gould
loses in the water the 19 part of his weight: Copper the 9 part, Quickesilver
the 15 part, Lead the 12 part, Silver the 10 part, Iron the 8 part, Tin the 7
part and a little more: wherefore in material and absolute weight, Gould in
respect of the water that it occupies weighs 18, and times heavier than the
like quantity of water, that is, as 18 to the Quickesilver 15 times: Lead 11
and, Silver 10 and, Copper 9 and 1/^0, Iron 8 and, and Tin 8 and. Contrarily
in respect of greatness, if the water be as heavy as the Gould, then is the
water almost 19 times greater than the magnitude of the Gould, and so may you
judge of the rest.

18. How is it that a balance having like weight in each scale, and hanging in
aequilibrio in the air: being placed in another place, (without removing any
weight) it shall cease to hang in aequilibrio sencibly: yea by a great
difference of weight.
THis is easy to be resolved by considering different mettles, which though
they weigh equal in the air, yet in the water there will be an apparent
difference; as suppose so that in the scale of each Balance be placed 18 pound
weight of several mettles, the one Gould and the other Copper, which being in
aequilibrio in the air, placed in the water, will not hang so, because that
the Gould loses near the 18 part of his weight, which is about 1 pound, and
the Copper loses but his 9 part, which is 2 pound: wherefore the Gold in the
water weighs but 17 pound, and the Copper 16 pound, which is a difference
most sencible to confirm that point.

19. To show what waters are heavier one than another, and how much.
Physicians have an especial respect unto this, judging that water which is
lightest is most healthful and medicinal for the body; and Seamen know that
the heaviest waters do bear most, and it is known which water is heaviest
thus. Take a piece of wax and fasten lead unto it, or some such like thing
that it may but precisely swim, for then it is equal to the like magnitude
of water; then put it into another vessel which has contrary water, and if it
sink, then is that water lighter than the other: but if it sink not so deep,
then it argues the water to be heavier or more grosser than the first water;
or one may take a piece of wood, and mark the quantity of sinking of it into
several waters, by which you may judge which is lightest or heaviest, for in
that which it sinkes most, that is infallibly the lightest; and so contrarily.

20. How to make a Pound of water weigh as much as 10, 20, 30, or a hundred
pound of Lead; nay as much as a thousand, or ten thousand pound weight.
THis proposition seems very impossible, yet water enclosed in a vessel,
being constrained to dilate it self, does weigh so much as though there were
in the concavitie of it a sollid body of water.

There are many ways to experiment this proposition, but to verify it, it may
be sufficient to produce two excellent ones only: which had they not been
really acted, little credit might have been given unto it.

The first way is thus: Take a Magnitude which takes up as much place as a
hundred or a thousand pound of water, and suppose that it were tied to some
thing that it may hang in the air; then make a Balance that one of the scales
may inviron it, yet so that it touch not the sides of it: but leave space
enough for one pound of water: then having placed 100 pound weight in the other
scale, throw in the water about the Magnitude, so that one pound of water shall
weigh down the hundred pound in the other Balance.

The second way is yet more admirable: take a common Balance that is capable
to receive 10 or 20 pound of water, diagram then put into it a magnitude which
may take up the place of 9 or 19 pound of water, which must be hung at some
Iron or beam which is placed in a wall; so that it hang quiet: (now it is not
material whether the magnitude be hollow or massy) so that it touch not the
Balance in which it is put: for then having put the lead or weight into the
other Balance, power in a pound of water into the Balance where the magnitude
is, and you shall see that this one pound of water shall counterpoise the 10 or
20 pound of lead which is set in the other Balance.

PROBLEM. LXXXVI. Of sundry Questions of Arithmeticke, and first of the number
of sands.
IT may be said incontinent, that to undertake this were impossible, either to
number the sands of Libya, or the sands of the Sea; and it was this that the
Poets sung, and that which the vulgar believes; nay, that which long ago
certain Philosophers to Gelon King of Sicily reported, that the grains of
sand were innumerable: But I answer with Archimedes, that not only one may
number these which are at the border and about the Sea; but these which are
able to fill the whole world: if there were nothing else but sand, and the
grains of sands admitted to be so small, that 10 may make but one grain of
Poppy: for at the end of the account there need not to express them, but this
number 30840979456, and 35 Ciphers at the end of it. Clavius and Archimedes
makes it somewhat more; because they make a greater firmament than Ticho Brahe
does; and if they augment the Universe, it is easy for us to augment the
number, and declare assuredly how many grains of sand there is requisite to
fill another world, in comparison that our visible world were but as one grain
of sand, an atome or a point; for there is nothing to do but to multiply the
number by it self, which will amount to ninety places, whereof twenty are
these, 95143798134910955936, and 70 Ciphers at the end of it: which amounts to
a most prodigious number, and is easily supputated: for supposing that a grain
of Poppy does contain 10 grains of sand, there is nothing but to compare that
little bowl of a grain of Poppy, with a bowl of an inch or of a foot, and
that to be compared with that of the earth, and then that of the earth with
that of the firmament; and so of the rest.

2. Diverse mettles being melted together in one body, to find the mixture of
them.
THis was a notable invention of Archimedes, related by Vtrivious in his
Architecture, where he reports that the Gould-smith which King Hiero employed
for the making of the Goulden Crown, which was to be dedicated to the gods,
had stolen part of it and mixed Silver in the place of it: the King suspicious
of the work proposed it to Archimedes, if by Art he could discover without
breaking of the Crown, if there had been made mixture of any other mettle
with the Gould. The way which he found out was by bathing himself, for as he
entered into the vessel of water, (in which he bathed himself) so the water
ascended or flew out over it, and as he pulled out his body the water
descended: from which he gathered that if a Bowl of pure Gould, Silver, or
other mettle were cast into a vessel of water, the water proportionally
according to the thing cast in would ascend; and so by way of Arithmeticke the
question lay open to be resolved: who being so intensively taken with the
invention, leapes out of the Bath all naked, crying as a man transported, I
have found, I have found, and so discovered it.

Now some say that he took two Masses, the one of pure Gould, and the other of
pure Silver, each equal to the weight of the Crown, and therefore unequal in
magnitude or greatness; and then knowing the several quantities of water
which was answerable to the Crown, and the several Masses, he subtly
collected, that if the Crown occupied more place within the water than the
Mass of Gould did: it appeared that there was Silver or other mettle melt with
it. Now by the rule of position, suppose that each of the three Masses weighed
18 pound a piece, and that the Mass of Gould did occupy the place of one
pound of water, that of Silver a pound and a half, and the Crown one pound
and a quarter only: then thus he might operate: the Mass of Silver which
weighed 18 pounds, cast into the water, did cast out half a pound of water
more than the Mass of Gould, which weighed 18 pound; and the Crown which
weighed also 18 pound, being put into a vessel full of water, threw out more
water than the Mass of Gold by a quarter of a pound, (because of mixed mettle
which was in it:) therefore by the rule of proportion, if half a pound of
water (the excess) be answerable to 18 pound of Silver, one quarter of a pound
of excess shall be answerable to 9 pound of Silver, and so much was mixed in
the Crown.

Some judge the way to be more facill by weighing the Crown first in the
air, then in the water; in the air it weighed 18 pound, and if it were pure
Gould, in the water it would weigh but 17 pound; if it were Copper it would
weigh but 16 pound; but because we will suppose that Gould and Copper is mixed
together, it will weigh less then 17 pound, yet more than 16 pound, and that
according to the proportion mixed: let it then be supposed that it weighed in
the water 16 pound and 3 quarters, then might one say by proportion, if the
difference of one pound of loss, (which is between 16 and 17) be answerable
to 18 pound, to what shall one quarter of difference be answerable to, which is
between 17 and 16, and it will be 4 pound and a half; and so much Copper was
mixed with the Gould.

Many men have delivered sundry ways to resolve this proposition since
Archimedes invention, and it were tedious to relate the diversities.

Baptista Benedictus amongst his Arithmeticall Theoremes, delivers his way
thus: if a Mass of Gold, of equal bigness to the Crown did weigh 20 pound,
and another of Silver at a capacity or bigness at pleasure, as suppose did
weigh 12 pound, the Crown or the mixed body would weigh more than the Silver,
and lesser than the Gould; suppose it weighed 16 pound which is 4 pound less
than the Gould by 8 pound, then may one say, if 8 pound of difference come from
12 pound of Silver, from whence comes 4 pound which will be 6 pound, and so
much Silver was mixed in it, etc.

3. Three men bought a quantity of wine, each paid alike, and each was to have
alike; it happened at the last partition that there was 21 Barrells, of which 7
were full, 7 half full, and 7 empty, how must they share the wine and
vessels, that each have as many vessels one as another, and as much wine one
as another.
THis may be answered two ways as follows, and these numbers 2, 2, 3; or 3,
3, 1, may serve for direction, and signifies that the first person ought to
have 3 Barrells full, and as many empty ones, and one which is half full; so
he shall have 7 vessels and 3 Barrels, and a half of liquor: and one of the
other shall in like manner have as much, so there will remain for the third
man 1 Barrel full, 5 which are half full, and 1 empty, and so every one shall
have alike both in vessels and wine. And generally to answer such questions,
divide the number of vessels by the number of persons, and if the Quotient be
not an entire number, the question is impossible; but when it is an entire
number, there must be made as many parts as there are 3 persons, seeing that
each part is less than the half of the said Quotient: as dividing 21 by 3
there comes 7 for the Quotient, which may be parted in these three parts, 2, 2,
3, or 3, 3, 1, each of which being less than half of 7.

4. There is a Ladder which stands upright against a wall of 10 foot high; the
foot of it is pulled out 6 foot from the wall upon the pavement: how much has
the top of the Ladder descended.
THe answer is, 2 foot; for by Pythagoras rule the square of D B, the
Hypotenusae is equal to the square of diagram D A 6, and A B 10. Now if D A
be 6 foot, and A B 10 foot, the squares are 36 and 100, which 36 taken from
100 rests 64, whose Roote-quadrat is 8; so the foot of the Ladder being now at
D, the top will be at C, 2 foot lower than it was when it was at B.

PROBLEM. LXXXVII. Witty suits or debates between Caius and Sempronius, upon
the form of figures; which Geometricians call Isoperimeter, or equal in
circuit or compass.
Marvel not at it if I make the Mathematickes take place at the Bar, and if
I set forth here Bartoleus, who witnesses of himself, that being then an
ancient Doctor in the Law, he himself took upon him to learn the elements
and principles of Geometry, by which he might set forth certain Laws touching
the divisions of Fields, Waters, Islands, and other incident places: now diagram
this shall be to show in passing by, that these sciences are profitable and
behovefull for Judges, Counselors, or such, to explain many things which
falls out in Laws, to avoid ambiguities, contentions, and suits often.

1. Incident.
Caius had a field which was directly square, having 24 measures in Circuit,
that was 6 on each side: Sempronius desiring to fit himself, prayed Caius to
change with him for a field which should be equivalent unto his; and the
bargain being concluded, he gave him for counterchange a piece of ground which
had just as much in circuit as his had; but it was not square, yet Quadrangular
and Rectangled having 9 measures in length for each of the two longest sides,
and 3 in breadth for each shorter side: Now Caius which was not the most
subtillest nor wisest in the world excepted his bargain at the first, but
afterward having conferred with a Land measurer and Mathematitian, found that
he was overreached in his bargain, and that his field contained 36 square
measures, and the other field ha^^ but 27 measures, (a thing easy to be known
by multiplying the length by the breadth:) Sempronius contested with him in
suite of Law, and argued that figures which have equal Perimeter or circuit,
are equal amongst themselves: my field, says he, has equal circuit with
yours, therefore it is equal unto it in quantity. Now this was sufficient to
delude a Judge which was ignorant in Geometrical proportions, but a
Mathematician will easily declare the deceit, being assured that figures which
are Isoperimeter, or equal in circuit, have not always equal capacity or
quantity: seeing that with the same circuit, there may be infinite figures
made which shall be more and more capable, by how much they have more Angles,
equal sides, and approach nearer unto a circle, (which is the most capablest
figure of all,) because that all his parts are extended one from another, and
from the middle or Center as much as may be: so we see by an infallible rule of
experience, that a square is more capable of quantity than a Triangle of the
same circuit, and a Pentagone more than a square, and so of others, so that
they be regular figures that have their sides equal, otherwise there might be
that a regular Triangle, having 24 measures in circuit might have more
capacity than a rectangled Parallelogram which had also 24 measures of
circuit, as if it were 11 in length and 1 in breadth, the cercuit is still 24;
yet the quantity is but 11: and if it had 6 every way, it gives the same
Perimeter, viz. 24. but a quantity of 36 as before.

2. Incident.
SEmpronius having borrowed of Caius a sack of Corn, which was 6 foot high
and 2 foot broad, and when there was question made to repay it, Sempronius
gave Caius back two sackes full of Corn, which had each of them 6 foot high
and 1 foot broad: who believed that if the sackes were full he was repaid, and
it seems to have an appearance of truth barely looked on. But it is most
evident in demonstration, that the two sackes of Corn paid by Sempronius to
Caius, is but half of that one sack which he lent him: for a Cylinder or
sack having one foot of diameter, and 6 foot of length, is but the 4 part of
another Cylinder, whose length is 6 foot, and his diameter is 2 foot: therefore
two of the lesser Cylinders or sackes is but half of the greater; and so Caius
was deceived in half his Corn.

3. Incident.
SOme one from a common Fountain of a City has a Pipe of water of an inch
diameter; to have it more commodious, he has leave to take as much more water,
whereupon he gives order that a Pipe be made of two inches diameter. Now you
will say presently that it is reason to be so big, to have just twice as
much water as he had before: but if the Magistrate of the City diagram
understood Geometrical proportions, he would soon cause it to be amended,
and show that he has not only taken twice as much water as he had before,
but four times as much; for a Circular hole which is two inches diameter is
four times greater than that of one inch; and therefore will cast out four
times as much water as that of one inch, and so the deceit is double also in
this.

Moreover if there were a heap of Corn of 20 foot every way, which was
borrowed to be paid next year: the party having his Corn in heaps of 12
foot every way, and of 10 foot every way, proffers him 4 heaps of the
greater, or 7 heaps of the lesser, for his own heap of 20 every way, which
was lent: here it seems that the proffer is fair, nay with advantage, yet the
loss would be near 1000 foot. Infinite of such causes do arise from
Geometrical figures, which are able to deceive a Judge or Magistrate, which is
not somewhat seen in Mathematical Documents.

PROBLEM. LXXXVIII. Containing sundry Questions in matter of Cosmography.
FIrst, it may be demanded, where is the middle of the world; I speak not here
Mathematically, but as the vulgar people who ask where is the middle of the
world: in this sense to speak absolutely there is no point which may be said
to be the middle of the surface; for the middle of a Globe is every where:
notwithstanding the Holy Scriptures speaks respectively, and makes mention of
the middle of the earth, and the interpreters apply it to the City of
Jerusalem placed in the middle of Palestina, and the habitable world; that in
effect taking a map of the world, and placing one foot of the Compasses upon
Jerusalem, and extending the other foot to the extremity of Europe, Asia, and
Africa; you shall see that the City of Jerusalem is as a Center to that Circle.

2. Secondly, how much is the depth of the earth, the height of the heavens,
and the compass of the world.
FFom the surface of the earth unto the Center according to ancient traditions,
is 3436 miles, so the whole thickenesse is 6872 miles, of which the whole
compass or circuit of the earth is 21600 miles.

From the Center of the earth to the Moon there is near 56 Semidiameters of
the earth, which is about 192416 miles: unto the Sun there is 1142
Semidiameters of the earth, that is in miles 3924912; from the starry firmament
to the Center of the earth there is 14000 Semidiameters, that is, 48184000
miles, according to the opinion and observation of that learned Ticho Brahe.

From these measures one may collect by Arithmeticall supputations, many
pleasant propositions in this manner.

First, if you imagine there were a hole through the earth, and that a millstone
should be let fall down into this hole, and to move a mile in each minute of
time, it would be more than two days and a half before it would come to the
Center, and being there it would hang in the air.

Secondly, if a man should go every day 20 miles, it would be three years
wanting but a fortnight, before he could go once about the earth; and if a
Bird should fly round about it in two days, then must the motion be 450 miles
in an hour.

Thirdly, the Moon runs a greater compass each hour, than if in the same
time she should run twice the Circumference of the whole earth.

Fourthly, admit it be supposed that one should go 20 miles in ascending
upwards the heavens every day, he should be above 15 years before he could
attain to the Orb of the Moon.

Fifthly, the Sun makes a greater way in one day than the Moon does in 20
days, because that the Orb of the Suns circumference is at the least 20
times greater than the Orb of the Moon.

Sixthly, if a millstone should descend from the place of the Sun a thousand
miles every hour, (which is above 15 miles in a minute, far beyond the
proportion of motion) it would be above 163 days before it would fall down to
the earth.

Seventhly, the Sun in his proper sphere moves more than seven thousand five
hundred and seventy miles in one minute of time: now there is no Bullet of a
Cannon, Arrow, Thunderbolt, or tempest of wind that moves with such
quickenesse.

Eighthly, it is of a far higher nature to consider the exceeding and
unmovable quickness of the starry firmament, for a star being in the
Equator, (which is just between the Poles of the world) makes 12598666 miles
in one hour, which is two hundred, nine thousand nine hundred and ninety four
miles in one minute of time: and if a Horseman should ride every day 40 miles,
he could not ride such a compass in a thousand years as the starry firmament
moves in one hour, which is more than if one should move about the earth a
thousand times in one hour, and quicker than possible thought can be imagined:
and if a star should fly in the air about the earth with such a prodigious
quickenesse, it would burn and consume all the world here below. Behold
therefore how time passes and death hastes on: this made Copernicus, not
unadvisedly to attribute this motion of Primum mobile to the earth, and not to
the starry firmament: for it is beyond human sense to apprehend or conceive
the rapture and violence of that motion being quicker than thought; and the
word of God testifies that the Lord made all things in number, measure,
weight, and time.

PROBLEM. LXXXXII. To find the Bissextile year, the Dominicall letter, and
the letters of the month.
LEt 123, or 124, or 125, or 26, or 27, (which is the remainder of 1500, or
1600) be divided by 4, which is the number of the Leape-yeare, and that which
remains of the division shows the Leap year; as if one remain, it shows
that it is the first year since the Bissextile or Leap year: if two, it is
the second year, etc. and if nothing remain, then it is the Bissextile or
Leap year, and the Quotient shows you how many Bissextiles or Leap years
there are contained in so many years.

To find the Circle of the Sun by the fingers.
LEt 123, 24, 25, 26, or 27, be divided by 28, (which is the Circle of the
Sun, or whole revolution of the Dominicall letters) and that which remains
is the number of joints, which is to be accounted upon the fingers by Filius
esto Dei, coelum bonus accipe gratis: and where the number ends, that finger it
shows the year which is present, and the words of the verse shows the
Dominicall letter.

Example.
DIvide 123 by 28 for the year, (and so of other years) and the Quotient is
4, and there remains 11, for which you must account 11 words; Filius esto
Dei, etc. upon the joints beginning from the first joint of the Index, and you
shall have the answer.

For the present to know the Dominicall letter for each month, account from
January unto the month required, including January; and if there be 8, 9, 7,
or 5, you must begin upon the end of the finger from the thumb and account,
Adam degebat, etc. as many words as there are months, for then one shall have
the letter which begins the month; then to know what day of the month it is,
see how many times 7 is comprehended in the number of days, and take the rest:
suppose 4. account upon the first finger within and without by the joints unto
the number of 4, which ends at the end of the finger: from whence it may be
inferred that the day required was Wednesday, Sunday being attributed to the
first joint of the first finger or Index: and so you have the present year,
the Dominicall letter, the letter which begins the Month, and all the days of
the Month.

PROBLEM. LXXXXIII. To find the New and Full Moon in each Month.
Add to the Epact for the year, the Month from March; then subtract that
surplus from 30, and the rest is the day of the Month that it will be New
Moon, and adding unto it 14, you shall have that Full Moon.

Note.
THat the Epact is made always by adding 11 unto 30, and if it pass 30,
subtract 30, and add 11 to the remainder: and so ad infinitum: as if the Epact
were 12, add 11 to it makes 23 for the Epact next year, to which add 11
makes 34, subtract 30, rests 41 the Epact for the year after, and 15 for the
year following that, and for the next, and 7 for the next, etc.

PROBLEM. LXXXXIIII. To find the Latitude of a Country.
THese that dwell between the North Pole and the Tropicke of Cancer, have
their spring and summer between the 10. of March, and the 1^. of September:
and therefore in any day between that time, get the suns distance by
isntrumental observation from the zeni^h at noone, and add the declination of
the sun for that day to it: so the Aggragate, or such is the Latitude, or
Poles height of that Country. Now the declination of the sun for any day is
found out by Tables calculated to that end: or Mechanically by the Globe, or by
Instrument it may be indifferently had: and here note that if the day be
between the 13. of September and the 10. of March, then the suns
declination, for that day must be taken out of the distance of the sun from
the zenith at noone: so shall you have the Latitude, as before.

PROBLEM. LXXXXV. Of the Climats of countries, and to find in what Climate any
country is under.
Climats as they are taken Geographically signify nothing else but when the
length of the longest day of any place, is half an hour longer, or shorter
than it is in another place (and so of the shortest day) and this account to
begin from the Equinoctial Circle, seeing all Countries under it have the
shortest and longest day that can be but 12. hours; But all other Countries
that are from the Equinoctial Circle either toward the North or South of it
unto the Poles themselves, are said to be in some one Climate or other, from
the Equinoctial to either of the poles Circles, (which are in the Latitude of
66. gr. 30. m.) between each of which poler Circles and the Equinoctial
Circle there is accounted 24 Climats, which differ one from another by half an
hours time: then from each Poler Circle, to each Pole there are reckoned 6.
other Climats which differ one from another by a months time: so the whole
earth is divided into 60. Climats, 30 being allotted to the Northern
Hemispheare, and 30. to the Southern Hemispheare. And here note that though
these Climats which are between the Equinoctial and the poller Circles are
equal one unto the other in respect of time, to wit, by half an hour, yet
the Latitude, breadth, or internal, contained between Climate and Climite, is
not equal: and by how much any Climate is farther from the Equinoctial than
another Climate, by so much the lesser is the internal between that Climate
and the next: so these that are nearest the Equinoctial are largest; and these
which are farthest off most contracted and to find what Climate any Country is
under: subtract the length of an Equinoctial day to wit, 12, hours from the
length of the longest day of that Country; the remainder being doubled shows
the Climate: So at London the longest day is near 16. hours and a half; 12.
taken from it there remains 4. hours and a half which doubled makes 9. half
hours, that is, 9. Climats; so London is in the 9. Climate.

PROBLEM. LXXXXVI. Of Longitude and Latitude of the Earth and of the Stars.
LOngitude of a Country, or place, is an arcke of the Equator contained
between the Meridian of the Azoros, and the Meridian of the place; and the
greatest Longitude that can be is 360 degrees.

Note.
That the first Meridian may be taken at pleasure upon the Terrestrial Globe
or Map, for that some of the ancient Astonomers would have it at Hercules
Pillars, which is at the straights at Gibralter: Ptolomy placed it at the
Canary Island, but now in these lattter times it is held to be near the
Azores. But why it was first placed by Ptolomy at the Canary Islands, was
because that in his time these Islands were the farthest western parts of the
world that was then discovered: And why it retains his place now at Saint
Michels near the Azores, is that because of many accurate observations made of
late by many expert Navigators and Mathematicians, they have found the Needle
there to have no variation, but to point North and South: that, is to each Pole
of the world: and why the Longitude from thence is accounted Eastwards, is from
the motion of the Sun Eastward; or that Ptolomy and others did hold it more
convenient to begin from the western part of the world and so account the
Longitude Eastward from Country to Country that was then known; till they
came to the Eastern part of Asia, rather than to make a beginning upon that
which was unknown: and having made up their account of reckoning the Longitude
from the Western part to the Eastern part of the world known, they supposed
the rest to be all sea; which since their deaths has been found almost to be
another habitable world.

To find the Longitude of a Country.
IF it be upon the Globe, bring the Country to the Brazen Meridian, and
whatsoever degree that Meridian cuts in the Equinoctial, that degree is the
Longitude of that Place: if it be in a Map, then mark what Meridian passes
over it; so have you the Longitude thereof: if no Meridian pass over it, then
take a pair of Compasses, and measure the distance between the Place and the
next Meridian, and apply it to the divided parallel or Equator; so have you
the Longitude required.

Of the Latitude of Countries.
LAtitude of a Country is the distance of a Country from the Equinoctial, or
it is an Arc of the Meridian contained between the Zenith of the place and
the Equator; which is twofold, viz. either North Latitude or South Latitude,
either of which extends from the Equinoctial to either Pole; so the greatest
Latitude that can be is but 90. degrees: If any Northern Country have the
Articke Circle vertical, which is in the Latitude of 66. gr. 30. m. the sun
will touch the Horizon in the North part thereof, and the longest day will be
there then 24. hours: if the Country have less Latitude than 66. degrees 30.
m. the sun will rise and set; but if it have more Latitude than 66. gr. 30,
m. it will be visible for many days: and if the Country be under the Pole,
the sun will make a Circular motion above the Earth and be visible for a
half year: so under the Pole there will be but one day, and one night in the
whole year.

diagram

To find the Latitude of Countries.
IF it be upon a Globe, diagram bring the place to the Brazen Meridian, and the
number of degrees which it meets therewith, is the Latitude of the place. Or
with a pair of Compasses take the distance between the Country and the
Equinoctial; which applied unto the Equinoctial will show the Latitude of
that Country; which is equal to the Poles height; if it be upon a Map. Then
mark what parallel passes over the Country and where it crosses the
Meridian, that shall be the Latitude: but if no parallel passes over it, then
take the distance between the place and the next parallel, which applied to
the divided Meridian from that parallel will show the Latitude of that place.

To find the distance of Places.
IF it be upon a Globe: then with a pair of Compasses take the distance
between the two places, and apply it to the divided Meridian or Equator, and
the number of degrees shall show the distance; each degree being 60. miles. If
it be in a Map (according to Wrights projection) take the distance with a
pair of Compasses between the two places, and apply this distance to the
divided Meridian on the Map right against the two places; so as many degrees
as is contained between the feet of the Compasses, so much is the distance
between the two places. If the distance of two places be required in a
particular Map then with the Compasses take the distance between the two
places, and apply it to the scale of Miles, so have you the distance: if the
scale be too short, take the scale between the Compasses, and apply that to
the two Places as often as you can, so have you the distance required.

Of the Longitude, Latitude, Declination, and distance of the Stars.
THe Declination of a star is the nearest distance of a star from the
Equator; the Latitude of a star is the nearest distance of a star from the
Eclipticke: the Longitude of a star is an Arc of the Eclipticke contained
between the beginning of Aries, and the Circle of the stars Latitude, which
is a Circle drawn from the Pole of the Ecliptic unto the star, and so to
the Eclipticke. The distance between two stars in heaven is taken by a
Cross staff or other Instrument, and upon a Globe it is done by taking
between the feet of the Compasses the two stars, and applying it to the
Equator, so have you the distance between those two stars.

How it is that two Horses or other creatures being foled or brought forth into
the world at one and the same time, that after certain days travel the one
lived longer than the other, notwithstanding they dyed together in one and the
same moment also.
THis is easy to be answered: let one of them travel toward the West and the
other toward the East: then that which goes toward the West follows the
Sun: shall have the day somewhat longer than if there had been no travel
made: and that which goes East by going against the Sun, shall have the day
shorter: and so respect of travel though they dye at one and the self same
hour and moment of time, the one shall be older than the other.

From which consideration may be inferred that a Christian, a Jew, and a
Zarazen, may have their Sabbaths all upon one and the same day, though
notwithstanding the Zarazen houlds his Sabath upon the Friday, the Jew upon the
Saturday, and the Christian upon the Sunday: For being all three resident in
one place, if the Zarazen and the Christian begin their travel upon the
Saturday, the Christian going West: and the Zarazen Eastwards, shall compass
the Globe of the earth, the Christian at the conclusion shall gain a day and
the Zarazen shall lose a day, and so meet with the Jew every one upon his own
Sabbath.

Certain fine Observations.
Under the Equinoctial the Needle hangs in Horizon, and being under the Pole
it is thought it will hang vertical.

In these Countries which are without the Tropicall Circles, the Sun comes
East and West every day for a half year; but being under the Equinoctial the
Sun is never East, nor West but twice in the year, to wit, the 10. of March
and the 13. of September.

If a ship be in the Latitude of 23. gr. 30. m. Tropickes vertical: then at
what time the Suns Altitude is equal to his distance from any of the
Equinoctial points, then the Sun is due East or West.

If a ship be between the Equinoctial and Tropicks, the Sun will come
twice to one point of the Compass in the forenoone, that is, in one and the
same position.

Under the Equinoctial near Guinea there is winds all the year, 6. months a
Northerly wind, and 6. months a Southerly wind, and the flux of the Sea is
accordingly.

If two ships under the Equinoctial be 100. leagues asunder, and should sail
Northerly until they were come under the Articke Circle, they should then be
but 50. leagues asunder.

Articke Circle vertical: when the Sun is in the Tropicke of Cancer: the
Sun sets not but touches the western part of the Horizon.

Suns height at noone be found equal to the Suns Declination for that day,
then the Equinoctial is vertical: or a ship making such an observation, the
Equinoctial is in the Zenith or direct over them: by which Navigators know
when they cross the line, in their travels to the Indies, or other parts.

Sun being in the Equinoctial, the extremity of the still in any Sun dyall
upon a plain; makes a right line, otherwise it is Elipticall, Hyperbolicall,
etc.

shadow of a man, or other thing upon a Horizontall plain is equal unto it in
length, then is the Sun in the middle point between the Horizon and the
Zenith, that is, 45. degrees high.

PROBLEM LXXXXVII. To make a Triangle that shall have three right Angles.
OPen the Compasses at pleasure: and upon A, describe an Arc B C. then at the
same opening, place one of the feet in B, and describe the Arc A C. diagram
Lastly, place one of the feet of the Compasses in C. and describe the Arc A B.
so shall you have the sphericall Aequilaterall Triangle A B C. right angled at
A, at B, and at C. that is, each angle comprehended 90. degrees: which can
never be in any plain Triangle, whether it be Equilaterall, Isocelle, scaleve,
Orthogonall, or Opigonall.

PROBLEM. LXXXXVIII. To divide a line in as many equal parts as one will,
without compasses, or without seeing of it.
THis Proposition has a fallacy in it, and cannot be practiced but upon a
Maincordion: for the Mathematical line which proceeds from the flux of a
point, cannot be divided in that wise: One may have therefore an Instrument
which is called Maincordion, because there is but one cord: and if you desire
to divide your line into 3. parts, run your finger upon the frets until you
sound a third in music: if you would have the fourth part of the line, then
find the fourth sound, a fifth, etc. so shall you have the answer.

PROBLEM. LXXXXVIIII. To draw a line which shall incline to another line, yet
never meet: against the Axiom of Parallels.
THis is done by help of a Conoyde line, produced by a right line upon one and
the same plain, held in great account amongst the Ancients, and it is drawn
after this manner.

Draw a right line infinitely, and upon some end of it, as at I, draw diagram a
perpendicular line IA. augment it to H. then from A. draw lines at pleasure to
intersect the line I. M. in each of which lines from the right line, I. M.
transfer I H. viz. K B. L C. O D. P E. Q F. M G. then from those points draw
the line H. B. C. D. E. F. G. which will not meet with the line I M. and yet
incline nearer and nearer unto it.

PROBLEM. C. To observe the variation of the compasses, or needle in any places.
FIrst describe a Circle upon a plain, so that the Sun may shine on it both
before noone and afternoon: in the center of which Circle place a Gnomon or
wire prependicular as A B. and an hour before noone mark the extremity of
the shadow of A B. which suppose it be at C. describe a Circle at that
semidiameter C D F. then after noone mark when the top of the shadow of A B.
touches the Circle, which admit in D; devide the distance C D, into two equal
parts which suppose at E. draw the line E A F. which is the Meridian line, or
line of North and South: now diagram if the Arc of the Circle C D. be divided
into degrees: place a Needle G H, upon a plain set up in the Center, and mark
how many degrees the point of the Needle G, is from E. so much does the Needle
vary from the North in that place.

PROBLEM. CI. How to find at any time which way the wind is in ones Chamber,
without going abroad.
VVon the Planching or floor of a Chamber, Parlor, or Hall, that you intend to
have this devise, let there come down from the top of the house a hollow post,
in which place an Iron rod that it ascend above the house 10, or 6. foot with
a vane or diagram a scouchen at it to show the winds without: and at the lower
end of this rod of Iron, place a Dart which may by the mooving of the vane with
the wind without, turn this Dart which is within: a-about which upon the
plaster must be described a Circle divided into the 32. points of the Mariners
Compass pointed and distinguished to that end: then may it be marked by
placing a Compass by it; for having noted the North point, the East, etc. it
is easy to note all the rest of the points: and so at any time coming into
this Room, you have nothing to do but to look up to the Dart, which will
point you out what way the wind blows at that instant.

PROBLEM. CII. How to draw a parallel sphericall line with great ease.
FIrst draw an obscure line G F. in the middle of it make two points A B,
(which serves for Centers) then place one foot of the Compasses in B, and
extend the other foot to A, and describe the semicircle A C: then place one
foot of the Compasses in A, and extend the other foot to C, and describe the
semicircle C D. Now place the Compasses in B, and extend the other foot unto
D, and describe the semicircle D E, and so ad infinitum, diagram which being
done neatly, that there be no right line seen nor where the Compasses were
placed, will seem very strange how possibly it could be drawn with such
exactnes, to such which are ignorant of that way.

PROBLEM. CIII. To measure an inaccessible distance: as the breadth of a River
with the help of ones hat only.
THe way of this is easy, for having ones hat upon his head, come near to the
bank of the River, and houlding your head upright (which may be by puttting a
small stick to some one of your buttons to prop up the chin) pluck down the
brim or edge of your hat until you may but see the other side of the water;
then turn about the body in the same posture that it was before, toward some
plain, and mark where the sight by the brimme of the hat glaunceth on the
ground; for the distance from that place to your standing, is the breadth of the
River required.

PROBLEM. CIIII. How to measure a height with two strawes or two small sticks.
TAke two strawes or two sticks which are one as long as another, and place
them at right Angles one to the other, as A B. and A C. then houlding A B.
parallel to the ground, place the end A. to the eye at A. and looking to the
other top B C. at C. by going backward or forward until you may diagram see
the top of the Tower or Tree, which suppose at E. So the distance from your
standing to the Tower or Tree, is equal to the height thereof above the level
of the eye: to which if you add your own height you have the whole height.

Otherwise.
TAke an ordinary diagram square which Carpenters or other workmen use, as H K
L. and placing H. to the eye so that H K. be level, go back or come nearer
until that by it you may see the top M. for then the distance from you to the
height is equal to the height.

PROBLEM. CV. How to make statues, letters, bowls, or other things which are
placed in the side of a high building, to be seen below of an equal bigness.
LEt B C. be a Pillar 27. yards high, and let it be required that three yards
above the level of the eye A, viz. at B. be placed a Globe and 9 yards above
B. be placed another, and 22. yards above that be placed another Globe: how
much shall the Diamiter diagram of these Globes be, that at the eye, at A, they
may all appear to be of one and the same Magnitude: It is thus done, first
draw a line as A K. and upon K. erect a prependicular K X. divide this line
into 27. parts, and according to A K. describe an Arc K Y. then from K. in the
perpendicular K X, account 3. parts. viz. at L, which shall represent the
former three yardes, and draw the line L A: from L, in the said perpendicular
reckon the diamiter of the lesser Globe of what Magnitude it is intended to be:
suppose S L. and draw the line S A. cutting the Arc V K. in N. then from K. in
the perpendicular account 9. yards, which admit at T. draw T A. cutting Y K. in
O. transfer the Arc M N. from A to P. and draw A P. which will cut the
perpendicular in V. so a line drawn from the middle of V F. unto the visuall
lines A T, and A V, shall be the diamiter of the next Globe: Lastly, account
from K. in the perpendicular X K. 22 parts, and draw the line W A. cutting Y K,
in Q. then take the Arc M N, and transfer it from Q, to R. and draw A R.
which will cut the perpendicular in X. so the line which passes by the middle
of X W. perpendicular to the visuall line A W, and A X. be the Diamiter of the
third Globe, to wit 5, 6. which measures transferred in the Pillar B C. which
shows the true Magnitude of the Globes 1, 2, 3. from this an Architecter does
proportion his Images, and the foulding of the Robes which are most deformed at
the eye below in the making, yet most perfect when it is set in his true height
above the eye.

PROBLEM. CVI. How to disguise or disfigure an Image, as a head, an arm, a
whole body, etc. so that it has no proportion, the ears to become long: the
nose as that of a swan, the mouth as a coaches entrance, etc. yet the eye
placed at a certain point will be seen in a direct and exact proportion.
I Will not strive to set a Geometrical figure here for fear it may seem too
difficult to understand, but I will endeavor by discourse how Mechanically
with a Candle you may perceive it sencible: first there must be made a figure
upon Paper such as you please, according to his just proportion, and paint it
as a Picture (which painters know well enough to do) afterward put a Candle
upon the Table, and interpose this figure obliquely, between the said Candle
and the Books of Paper, where you desire to have the figure disguised in such
sort that the height pass athwart the hole of the Picture: then will it carry
all the form of the Picture upon the Paper, but with deformity; follow these
tracts and marks out the light with a Coals black head or Ink: and you have
your desire.

To find now the point where the eye must see it in his natural form: it is
accustomed according to the order of Perspective, to place this point in the
line drawn in height, equal to the largeness of the narrowest side of the
deformed square, and it is by this way that it is performed.

PROBLEM. CVII. How a Canon after that it has shot, may be covered from the
battery of the enemy.
LEt the mouth of a Canon be I. the Canon M. his charge N O. the wheel L. the
axle^ tree P B. upon which the Canon is placed, at which end toward B, is
placed a pillar A E. supported with props D C. E, F, G. about which the
Axeltree diagram turns: now the Cannon being to shoot, it retires to H. which
cannot be directly because of the Axeltree, but it make a segme^t of a Circle,
and hides himself behind the wall Q R, and so preserves it self from the
Enemies battery, by which means one may avoid many inconveniences which might
arise: and moreover one man may more easily replace it again for another shot
by help of poles tied to the wall, or other helps which may multiply the
strength.

PROBLEM. CVIII. How to make a Lever by which one man may alone place a Cannon
upon his carriage, or raise what other weight he would.
FIrst place two thick boards upright, as the figure shows, pierced with
holes, alike opposite one unto another as C D, and E F: and let L, and M, be
the two bars of Iron which passes through the holes G H, and F, K; the two
supports, or diagram props, A B. the Cannon, O P, the Lever R S, the two
notches in the Lever, and Q, the hook where the burden or Cannon is tied to.
The rest of the operation is facill, that the youngest scholars or learners
cannot fail to perform it: to teach Minerva were in vain, and it were to
Mathematicians injury in the succeeding Ages.

PROBLEM. CIX. How to make a Clock with one only wheel.
MAke the body diagram of an ordinary Dyall, and divide the hour in the Circle
into 12. parts: make a great wheel in height above the Axeltree, to the which
you shall place the cord of your counterpoise, so that it may descend, that in
12 hours of time your Index or Needle may make one revolution, which may be
known by a watch which you may have by you: then put a balence which may stop
the course of the wheel, and give it a regular motion, and you shall see an
effect as just from this as from a Clock with many wheels.

PROBLEM. CX. How by help of two wheels to make a Child to draw up alone a
hogshead of water at a time: and being drawn up shall cast out it self into
another vessel as one would have it.
LEt R be the Pit from whence water is to be drawn; P, the hook to throw out
the water when it is brought up (this hook must be moveable) let A B, be the
Axis of the wheel S F, which wheel has diverse forkes of Iron made at G,
equally fastened at the wheel; let I, be a Card, which is drawn by K, to make
the wheel S, to turn, which wheel S, bears proportion to the wheel T, as 8
to 2: let N be a Chain of Iron to which is tied the vessel O: and the other
which is in the Pit: E F is a piece of wood which has a mortes in 1, and 2, by
which the Cord I, passes, tied at the wall, as K H. and the other piece of
Timber of the little wheel as M, mortised in likewise for the chain to pass
through: diagram draw the Cord I, by K, and the wheel will turn, and so
consequently the wheel T, which will cause the vessel O, to raise: which
being empty, draw the Cord again by Y, and the other vessel which is in the
pit will come out by the same reason. This is an invention which will save
labor if practiced; but here is to be noted that the pit must be large enough,
to the end that it contain two great vessels to pass up and down one by
another.

PROBLEM. CXI. To make a Ladder of Cords which may be carried in ones pocket:
by which one may easily mount up a Wall, or Tree alone.
TAke two Pullies A, and D, unto that of A, let there be fastened a Crampe of
Iron as B; and at D, let there be fastened a staff of a foot and a half long
as F, then the Pully A: place a hand of Iron, as E, to which tie a Cord of an
half inch thick (which may be of silk because it is for the pocket:) then
strive to make fast the Pully A, by the help of the Crampe of Iron B, to the
place that you intend to scale; and the staff F, being tied at diagram the
Fully D, put it between your legs as though you would sit upon it: then
houlding the Cord C, in your hand, you may guide your self to the place
required: which may be made more facill by the multiplying of Pullies. This
secret is most excellent in War, and for lovers, its supportablenesse avoyds
suspicion.

PROBLEM. CXII. How to make a Pumpe whose strength is marvelous by reason of
the great weight of water that it is able to bring up at once, and so by
continuance.
LEt (...), be the height of the Case about two or three foot high, and
broader according to discretion: the rest of the Case or concavity let be O:
let the sucker of the Pumpe which is made, be just for the Case or Pumpes head
(...), and may be made of wood or brass of 4. inches thick, having a hole at
E, which descending raises up the diagram cover P, by which issues forth the
water and ascending or raising up it shuts it or makes it close: R S, is the
handle of the sucker tied to the handle T X, which works in the post V Z. Let
A, B, C, D, be a piece of Brass, G the piece which enters into the hole to F,
to keep out the Air. H, I, K, L, the piece tied at the funnell or pipe: in
which plays the Iron rod or axis G, so that it pass through the other piece
MN, which is tied with the end of the pipe of Brass.

Note, that the lower end of the Cisterne ought to be rested upon a Grediron
or Iron Grate, which may be tied in the pit; by which mean lifting up and
putting down the handle, you may draw ten times more water than otherwise you
could.

PROBLEM. CXIII. How by means of a Cisterne, to make water of a Pit
continually to ascend without strength, or the assistance of any other Pumpe.
LEt I L, be the Pit where one would cause water to ascend continually to each
office of a house or the places which are separated from it: let there be made
a receiver as A, well closed up with lead or other matter that air enter not
in, to which fasten a pipe of lead as at E, which may have vent at pleasure:
then let there be made a Cisterne as B, which may be communicative to A,
diagram by help of the pipe G, from which Cisterne B, may issue the water of
pipe D, which may descend to H, which is a little below the level of the water
of the pit as much as is G H: to the end of which shall be soudred close a
Cock which shall cast out the water by K H. Now to make use of it, let B be
filled full of water, and when you would have it run turn the Cock, for then
the water in B, will descend by K: and for fear that there should be vacuity,
nature which abhors it, will labor to furnish and supply that emptiness out
of the spring F, and that the Pit dry not, the Pipe ought to be small of an
indifferent capacity according to the greatness or smalnesse of the spring.

PROBLEM. CXIIII. How out of a fountain to cast the water very high: different
from a Problem formerly delivered.
LEt the fountain be B D, of a round form (seeing it is the most capable and
most perfect figure) place into it two pipes conjoined as E A, and H C, so that
no Air may enter in at the place of joining: let each of the Pipes have a
Cock G, and L: diagram the Cock at G, being closed, open that at I, and so
with a squirt force the water through the hole at H, then close the Cock at A,
and draw out the squirt, and open the Cock at G: the Air being before
rarefied will extend his dimensions and force the water with such violence,
that it will amount above the height of one or two Pikes: and so much the more
by how much the Machine is great: this violence will last but a little while if
the Pipe have too great an opening, for as the Air approaches to his natural
place, so the force will diminish.

PROBLEM CXV. How to empty the water of a Cisterne by a Pipe which shall have
a motion of it self.
LEt A B, be the vessel; C D E, the Pipe: H G, a little vessel under the
greater, in which one end of the Pipe is, viz. C, and let the other end of the
Pipe E, pass through the bottom of the vessel at F, then as diagram the
vessel fills so will the Pipe, and when the vessel shall be full as far
as P O, the Pipe will begin to run at E, of his own accord, and never cease
until the vessel be wholly empty.

PROBLEM. CXVI. How to squirt or spout out a great height, so that one pot of
water shall last a long time.
LEt there be prepared two vessels of Brass, lead, or of other matter of
equal substance, as are the two vessels A B, and B D, and let them be joined
together by the two Pillars M N, and E F: then let there be a pipe H G. which
may pass through the cover of the vessel C D, and pass through A B, into G,
making a little bunch or rising in the cover of the vessel A B, so that the
pipe touch it not at the bottom: then let there be sodered fast another Pipe I
L, which may be separated from the bottom of the vessel, and may have his
bunchie swelling as the former without touching the bottom: as is represented
in L, and passing through the bottom of A B, may be continued unto I, that is
to say, to make an opening diagram to the cover of the vessel A B, and let it
have a little mouth as a Trumpet: to that end to receive the water. Then there
must further be added a very small Pipe which may pass through the bottom of
the vessel A B, as let it be O F, and let there be a bunch, or swelling over
it as at P, so that it touch not also the bottom: let there be further made to
this lesser vessel an edge in form of a Basen to receive the water, which
being done power water into the Pipe I L, until the vessel C D, be full: then
turn the whole machine upside down that the vessel C D, may be uppermost,
and A B, undermost: so by help of the Pipe G H, the water of the vessel C D,
will run into the vessel A B, to have passage by the Pipe P O. This motion
is pleasant at a feast in filling the said vessel with wine, which will spout
it out as though it were from a boiling fountain, in the form of a thread very
pleasant to behold.

PROBLEM. CXVII. How to practice excellently the reanimation of simples, in
case the plants may not be transported to be replanted by reason of distance of
places.
TAke what simple you please, burn it and take the ashes of it, and let it be
calcinated two hours between two Creusets well luted, and extract the salt:
that is, to put water into it in moving of it; then let it settle, and do it
two or three times, afterward evaporate it, that is, let the water be boiled
in some vessel, until it be all consumed: then there will remain a salt at
the bottom, which you shall afterward sow in good Ground well prepared: such
as the Theater of husbandry shows, and you shall have your desire.

PROBLEM. CXVIII. How to make an infalliable perpetual motion.
Mix 5. or 6. ounces of with his equal weight of, grind it together with 10.
or 12. ounces of sublimate dissolved in a celler upon a Marble the space of 4.
days, and it will become like Oil Olive, which destill with fire of chafe or
driving fire, and it will sublime dry substance, then put water upon the earth
(in form of Lie) which will be at the bottom of the Limbecke, and dissolve
that which you; can filter it, then distill it, and there will be produced
very subtle Antomes, which put into a bottle close stopped, and keep it dry,
and you shall have your desire, with astonishment to all the world, and
especially to these which have traveled herein without fruit.

PROBLEM. CXIX. Of the admirable invention of making the Philosophers Tree,
which one may see with his eye to grow by little and little.
TAke two ounces of Aquafortis and dissolve in it half an ounce of fine silver
refined in a Cappell: then take an ounce of Aquafortis and two drams of Quick
silver: which put in it, and mix these two dissolved things together; then
cast it into a Viole of half a pound of water, which may be well stopped; for
then every day you may see it grow both in the Tree and in the branch. This
liquid serves to black hair which is red, or white, without fading until
they fall: but here is to be noted that great care ought to be had in
anointing the hair, for fear of touching the flesh: for this composition is
very Corrosive or searching, that as soon as it touches the flesh it raises
blisters, and bladders very painful.

PROBLEM. CXX. How to make the representation of the great world.
DRaw salt niter out of salt Earth which is found along the Rivers side, and at
the foot of Mountains, where especially are Minerals of Gould and silver:
mix that Niter well cleansed with, then calcinate it hermetically; then put it
in a Limbecke and let the receiver be of Glass, well luted and always in
which let there be placed leaves of Gould at the bottom, then put diagram fire
under the Limbecke until vapors arise which will cleve unto the Gould;
augment your fire until there ascend no more, then take away your receiver and
close it hermetically, and make a Lamp fire under it until you may see
presented in it that which nature affords us: as Flowers, Trees, Fruits,
Fountains, Sun, Moon, Stars, etc. Behold here the form of the Limbecke,
and the receiver: A represents the Limbecke, B stands for the receiver.

PROBLEM CXXI. How to make a Cone, or a Pyramidall body move upon a Table
without springs or other Artificial means: so that it shall move by the edge
of the Table without falling.
THis proposition is not so thornie and subtle as it seems to be, for putting
under a Cone of paper a Beetle or such like creature, you shall have pleasure
diagram with astonishment and admiration to these which are ignorant in the
cause: for this animal will strive always to free herself from the captivity
in which she is in by the imprisonment of the Cone: for coming near the edge
of the Table she will return to the other side for fear of falling.

PROBLEM. CXXII. To cleave an Anvill with the blow of a Pistol.
THis is proper to a warrier, and to perform it, let the Anvill be heated red
hot as one can possible, in such sort that all the solidity of the body be
softened by the fire: then charge the Pistol with a bullet of silver, and so
have you infallibly the experiment.

PROBLEM. CXXIII. How to roast a Capon carried in a Budget at a Saddle bow, in
the space of riding 5. or 6. miles.
HAving made it ready and larded it, stuff it with Butter; then heat a piece
of steel which may be formed round according to the length of the Capon, and
big enough to fill the Belly of it, and then stop it with Butter; then wrap it
up well and enclose it in a Box in the Budget, and you shall have your desire:
it is said that Count Mansfield served himself with no others, but such as
were made ready in this kind, for that it loses none of its substance, and it
is dressed very equally.

PROBLEM. CXXIIII. How to make a Candle burn and continue three times as long
as otherwise it would.
Unto the end of a Candle half burned stick a farthing less or more, to make
it hang perpendicular in a vessel of water, so that it swim above the water;
then light it, and it will sustain it self and diagram floate in this manner;
and being placed into a fountain, pond, or lake that runs slowly, where many
people assemble, it will cause an extreme fear to these which come therein in
the night, knowing not what it is.

PROBLEM. CXXV. How out of a quantity of wine to extract that which is most
windy, and evil, that it hurt not a sick Person.
TAke two viols in diagram such sort that they be of like greatness both in
the belly and the neck; fill one of them of wine, and the other of water: let
the mouth of that which has the water be placed into the mouth of that which
has the wine, so the water shall be uppermost: now because the water is
heavier than the wine, it will descend into the other violl, and the wine which
is highest will ascend above to supply the place of the water, and so there
will be a mutual interchange of liquids: and by this penitration the wine will
lose her vapors.

PROBLEM. CXXVI. How to make two Marmouzets one of which shall light a Candle,
and the other put it out.
VVon the side of a wall make the figure of a Marmouzet or other animal or
form, and right against it on the other wall make another; in the mouth of
each put a pipe or quill so Artificially that it be not perceived: in one of
which place salt peeter very fine, and dry and puluerised: and at the end set a
little match of Paper: in the other place sulphur beaten small: then houlding a
Candle lighted in your hand, say to one of these Images by way of command,
blow out the Condle: then lighting the Paper with the Candle, the salt peeter
will blow out the Candle immediately: and going to the other Image (before the
match of the Candle be out) touch the sulphur with it and say, light the
Candle, and it will immediately be lighted, which will cause an admiration to
these which see the action: if it be done with a secret dexterity.

PROBLEM. CXXVII. How to keep wine fresh as if it were in a celler though it
were in the heat of Summer, and without Ice or snow, yea though it were
carried at a saddles bow, and exposed to the Sun all the day.
SEt your wine in a violl of Glass; and place it in a Box made of wood,
leather, or such like: about which violl place salt peeter, and it will
preserve it and keep it very fresh: this experiment is not a little commodious
for these which are not near fresh waters, and whose dwellings are much
exposed to the Sun.

PROBLEM. CXXVIII. To make a Cement which indureth or lasts as marble, which
resists air and water without ever disjoyning or uncemiting
TAke a quantity of strong and gluing Mortar well beaten, mix with this as
much new s^eaked Lime, and upon it cast Oil of Olive, or Linseede Oil, and it
will become hard as Marble being applied in time.

PROBLEM. CXXIX. How to melt mettle very quick, yea in a shell upon little
fire.
MAke a bed upon a bed of mettle with powder of Sulphur, of Salt peeter, and
sawdust alike; then put fire to the said powder with a burning Charcole, and
you shall see that the mettle will dissolve incontinent and be in a Mass.
This secret is most excellent and has been practiced by the reverend father
Mercenne of the order of the Minims.

PROBLEM. CXXX. How to make Iron or Steel exceeding hard.
QVench your Blade or other Instrument seven times in the blood of a male Hog,
mixed with Goose grease, and at each time dry it at the fire before you wet it:
and it will become exceeding hard, and not brittle, which is not ordinary
according to other temperings and quenchings of Iron: an experiment of small
cost, often proved, and of great consequence for Armorie in warlike
negotiations.

PROBLEM. CXXXI. To preserve fire as long as you will, imitating the
inextinguable fire of Vostales.
AFter that you have extracted the burning spirit of the salt of, by the
degrees of fire, as is required according to the Art of Chimistrie, the fire
being kindled of it self, break the Limbecke, and the Irons which are found
at the bottom will flame and appear as burning Coals as soon as they feel
the air; which if you promtly enclose in a violl of Glass, and that you stop it
exactly with some good lute: or to be more assured it may be closed up with
Hermes wax for fear that the Air get not in. Then will it keep more than a
thousand years (as a man may say) yea at the bottom of the Sea; and opening
it at the end of the time, as soon as it feels the Air it takes fire with
which you may light a Match. This secret merits to be travailed ofter and put
in practice, for that it is not common, and full of astonishment, seeing that
all kind of fire lasts but as long as his matter lasts, and that there is
no matter to be found that will so long endure.

Artificial fire-VVorkes: Or the manner of making of Rockets and Balls of
fire, as well for the Water, as for the Air; with the composition of Stars,
Golden-raine, Serpents, Lances, Wheels of fire, and such like, pleasant and
Recreative.
Of the composition for Rockets.
IN the making of Rockets, the cheifest thing to be regarded is the composition
that they ought to be filled with, for as much as that which is proper to
Rockets which are of a less sort is very improper to those which are of a more
greater form; for the fire being lighted in a great concave, which is filled
with a quick composition, burns with great violence; contrarily, a weak
conposition being placed into a small concave, makes no effect: therefore we
shall here deliver in the first place rules and directions, which may serve for
the true composition, or matter with which you may charge any Rocket, from
Rockets which are charged but with one ounce of Powder unto great Rockets which
requires for their charge 10. pound of Powder, as follows

For Rockets of one ounce.
Unto each pound of good musket Powder small beaten, put two ounces of small
Cole dust, and with this composition charge the Rocket.

For Rockets of 2, or 3. ounces.
Unto every four ounces and a half of powder dust, add an ounce of
Salt-peeter, or to every 4. ounces of powder dust, add an ounce of Coledust.

For Rockets of 4. ounces.
Unto every pound of Powder dust add 4. ounces of Salt peeter and one ounce of
Coledust: but to have it more slow, unto every 10. ounces of good dust powder
add 3. ounces of Salt-peeter, and 3. ounces of Coledust.

For Rockets of 5. or 6. ounces.
Unto every pound of Powder dust, add 3. ounces and a half of Salt peeter,
and 2. ounces and a half of Cole dust, as also an ounce of Sulpher and an
ounce of fyle dust.

For Rockets of 7, or 8. ounces.
Unto every pound of Powder dust add 4. ounces of Salt peeter and 3. ounces of
Sulpher.

Of Rockets of 10, or 12, ounces.
Unto the precedent composition add half an ounce of Sulpher, and it will be
sufficient.

For Rockets of 14, or 15, ounces.
Unto every pound of Powder dust add 4. ounces of Salt peeter, of Cole dust 2
ounces, of Sulpher and filedust of each 1 ounces.

For Rockets of 1, pound.
Unto every pound of Powder dust add 3 ounces of Cole dust, and one ounce of
Sulphur.

Of Rockets of 2, pound.
Unto every pound of Powder dust add 9 ounces of Salt peeter, of Cole dust 2
ounces, filedust 1 ounces, and of Sulphur of ounces.

For Rockets of 3, pound.
Unto every pound of Salt peeter add 6 ounces of Cole dust, and of Sulpher 4,
ounces.

For Rockets of 4, 5, 6. or 7, pound.
Unto every pound of Salt peeter add 5. ounces of Cole dust and 2 ounces of
Sulphur.

For Rockets of 8 9 or 10, pound.
Unto every pound of Salt peeter, add 5 ounces of Cole dust, and of Sulphur 2
ounces.

Here note that in all great Rockets, there is no Powder put, because of the
greatness of the fire which is lighted at once, which causes too great a
violence, therefore ought to be filled with a more weaker composition.

Of the making of Rockets and other Fireworkes.
FOr the making of Rockets of sundry kinds, diverse molds are to be made, with
their Rolling pins, Breathes, Chargers, etc. as may be seen here in the
figure. And having rolled a Case of paper upon the Rolling pin for your mould,
fill it with the composition belonging to that mould as before is delivered:
now may you load it on the top, with Serpents, Reports, Stars, or Golden
Rain: the Serpents are made about the bigness of ones little finger, by
rolling a little paper upon a small stick, and then tying one end of it and
filling it with the mixed composition somewhat close, and then tying the other
end. The reports are made in their paper Cases as the Serpents, but the Paper
somewhat thicker to give the greater report. These are filled with diagram
grain Powder or half Powder and half composition, and tying both ends close,
they are finished. The best kind of stars are made with this mixture
following; unto every 4. ounces of Salt peeter, add 2. ounces of Sulphur, and
to it put 1. ounce of Powder dust, and of this composition make your stars,
by putting a little of it within a small quantity of diagram towe; and then
tying it up in the form of a ball as great as an Hasell Nut or a little
Wallenut, through which there must be drawn a little Primer to make it take
fire. Touching the making of the Golden Rain that is nothing but filling of
Quilles with the composition of your Rockets somewhat hard: Now if the head of
a Rocket be loaded with a thousand of those Quilles its a goodly sight to see
how pleasantly they spread themselves in the Air and come down like streams
of Gold much like the falling down of Snow being agitated by some turbulent
wind.

Of recreative fires.
PHilostrates says, that if wine in a Platter be placed upon a receiver of
burning Coals, to exhale the spirit of it, and be enclosed within a Cupboard or
such like place, so that the Air may not go in, nor out, and so being shut up
for 30. years: he that shall open it, having a wax Candle lighted, and shall
put it into the Cupboard; there will appear unto him the figure of many clear
stars.

Aquavitae have Camphere dissolved in it; and be evaporated in a close Chamber,
where there is but a Charcole fire, the first that enters into the Chamber with
a Candle lighted, will be extremely astonished, for all the Chamber will seem
to be full of fire very subtle, but it will be of little continuance.

Candles which are deceitful are made of half Powder, covered over with
Tallow; and the other half is made of clean Tallow, or Wax, with an ordinary
week; this Candle being lighted and the upper half consumed, the Powder will
take fire, not without great noise and astonishment to those which are ignorant
of the cause.

Serpents placed secretly under a Candlestick that is indifferent big, which
may have a hole pass through the socket of it to the Candle, through which a
piece of primer may be placed, and setting a small Candle in the socket to
burn according to a time limited: which Candlestick may be set on a side
Table without suspicion to any; then when the Candle is burned, that it fires
the primer, that immediately will fire all the Serpents, which overthrowing the
Candlestick will fly here and there, intermixing themselves, sometimes in the
Air, sometimes in the Planching, one amongst another, like the crawling of
Serpents, continuing for a pretty while in this posture, and in extinguishing
every one will give his report like a Pistol; This will not a little astonish
some, thinking the house will be fired, though the whole powder together makes
not an ounce, and has no strength to do such an effect.

How to make fire run up and down, forward and backward.
TAke small Rockets, and place the tail of one to the head of the other, upon
a Cord according to your fancy, as admit the Cord to be A B C D E F G. give
fire to the Rocket at A, which will fly to B, which will come back again to
A, and fire another at C, that will fly at D, which will fire another there,
and fly to E, and that to F: and so from F, to G; and at G, may be placed a pot
of fire, viz. G H: which fired will make good sport, because the Serpents which
are in it will variously intermix themselves in the Air, and upon the ground,
and every one will extinguish with a report: and here may you note that upon
the Rockets may be placed fiery Dragons Combatants, or such like to meet one
another, having diagram lights placed in the Concavity of their bodies, which
will give great grace to the action.

How to make Wheels of fire.
TAke a Hoope, and place two laths acrosse one the other; upon the crossing of
which make a hole, so that it may be placed upon a pin to turn easily, as the
figure Q. shows: upon the sides of which hoope or round Circle place your
Rockets, to which you may place Lances of fire between each Rocket: et this
wheel be placed upon a standard as here is represented, and place a piece of
Primer from one Lance to another, then give fire at G, which willfire F, that
E, that will fire D, diagram that C, and that will fire the Rocket at A: then
immediately the wheel will begin to move and represent unto the spectators a
Circle of changeable fire, and if pots of fire be tied to it, you will have
fine sport in the turning of the wheel and casting out of the Serpents.

Of Night Combatants.
CLubbes, Targuets, Faulchons, and Mases charged with several fires, do make
your nights Combatants, or are used to make place amongst a throng of people.
The Clubbes at the ends are made like a round Panier with small sticks, filled
with little Rockets in a spirall form, glued and so placed that they fire but
one after another; the Masses are of diverse fashions, some made oblong at the
end, some made of a spirall form, but all made hollow to put in several
composition, and are boared in diverse places, which are for sundry Rockets, and
Lances of weak composition to be fired at pleasure: The Faulchons are made of
wood in a bowing form like the figure A, having their backs large to receive
many Rockets, the head of one near the neck of another, glued and fastened
well together, so that one being spent another may be fired: The Targets
diagram are made of wooden thin boards, which are chaneled in spirall lines
to contain primer to fire the Rockets one after another, which is all covered
with thin covering of wood, or Pastboard, boared with holes spirally also;
which Rockets must be glued and made fast to the place of the Chanells: Now if
two men the one having a Targuet in his hand, and the other a Falchon, or Mass
of fire shall begin to fight, it will appear very pleasant to the Spectators:
for by the motion of fighting, the place will seem to be full of streams of
fire: and there may be adjoined to each Targuet a Sun or a burning Comet with
Lances of fire, which will make them more beautiful and resplendent in that
action.

Of standing Fires.
SVch as are used for recreation, are Collossus, Statues, Arches, Pyramedies,
Charyots, diagram Chaires of triumph and such like, which may be accommodated
with Rockets of fire, and beautified with sundry other artificial fires, as
pots of fire for the Air which may cast forth several figures, Scutchious,
Rockets of diverse sorts, Stars, Crowns, Leaters, and such like; the borders
of which may be armed with sundry Lances of fire, of small flying Rockets with
reports, flames, of small birds of Cypres, Lanternes of fire, Candles of diverse
uses, and colors in burning: and whatsoever the fancy of an ingenious head
may allude unto.

Of Pots of fire for the Air, which are thrown out of one Case one after
another of a long continuance.
MAke a long Trunk as A G, and by the side A H, let there be a Channel which
may be fiered with slow primer or composition; then having charged the Trunk A
G, with the Pots of fire for the Air at I G E C, and made the Trunk A G, very
fast unto a Post as I K, give fire at the top as at A, which burning downwards
will give fire to C, and so throughout that Pot in the Air, which being spent,
in the mean time the fire will burn from B, to D, and so fire E, and throw it
out also into the Air, and so all the rest one after another will be thrown
out: and if the Pots of fire for the Air which are cast out, be filled with
diverse Fireworkes, they will be so diagram much the more pleasant to the
behoulders. These Trunkes of fire do greatly adorn a Fireworke, and may
conveniently be placed at each angle of the whole work.

Of Pots of fire for the ground.
MAny Pots of fire being fired together do give a fine representation, and
recreation to the spectators, and diagram cause a wonderful shout amongst the
common people which are standers by; for those Pots being filled with Balls of
fire and flying Serpents for the Air, they will so intermix one within
another, in flying here and there a little above the ground, and giving such a
volley of reports that the Air will rebound with their noise, and the whole
place be filled with sundry streams of pleasant fire; which serpents will
much occupy these about the place to defend themselves in their upper parts,
when they will no less be busied by the balls of fire, which seems to annoy
their feet.

Of Balls of fire.
THese are very various according to a man's fancy some of which are made with
very small Rockets, the head of one tied to the neck of another: the ball being
made may be covered over with pitch except the hole to give fire to it; this
Ball will make fine sport amongst the standers by, which will take all a fire,
and roll sometimes this way, sometimes that way, between the legs of those
that are standers by, if they take not heed, for the motion will be very
irregular, and diagram in the motion will cast forth several fires with
reports. In the second kind there may be a channel of Iron placed in diverse
places in spirall manner, against which may be placed as many small petards of
paper as possible may be, the Channel must be full of slow composition and may
be covered as the former, and made fit with his Rockets in the middle: this
Ball may be shot out of a mortar Piece or charged on the top of a Rocket: for
in its motion it will fly here and there, and give many reports in the Air:
because of the discharge of the petards.

Of fire upon the Water.
PLaces which are situated upon Rivers or great Ponds, are proper to make
Recreative fires on: and if it be required to make some of consequence, such
may conveniently be made upon two Boats, upon which may be built two Beasts,
Turrets, Pagents, Castles, or such like, to diagram receive or hold the
diversitity of Fire works that may be made within it, in which may play diverse
fires, Petards, etc. and cast out many simple Grenades, Balls of fire to burn
in the water serpents and other things, and often times these boats in their
incounters may hang one in another, that so the Combatants with the Targuets,
and Masses may fight; which will give great content to the eyes of those which
are lookers on, and in the conclusion fire one another, (for which end they
were made:) by which the dexterity of the one may be known in respect of the
other, and the triumph and victory of the fight gotten.

Of Balls of fire which moves upon the water.
THese may be made in form of a Ball stuffed with other little Balls, glued
round about and filled with composition for the water, which siered will
produce merveilous and admirable effects, for which there must be had little
Cannons of white Iron, as the ends of small funnells; these Iron Cannons may be
peirced in sundry places, to which holes, may be set small Balls full of
composition for the water, which small Balls must be peirced deep and large,
and covered with Pitch, except the hole: in which hole must diagram be first
placed a little quantity of grain Powder; and the rest of the hole filled up
with composition; and note further that these Iron Cannons, must be filled with
a slow composition; but such which is proper to burn in the water: then must
these Cannons with their small Balls be put so together that it may make a
Globe, and the holes in the Cannons be answerable to the hollow Balls, and all
covered over with Pitch and Tallow; afterward pierse this Ball against the
greatest Cannon (to which all the lesser should answer) unto the composition,
then fire it, and when it begins to blow, throw it into the water, so the fire
coming to the holes will fire the grain Powder, the which will cause the
Balls to separate and fly here and there, sometimes two at a time, sometimes
three, sometimes more, which will burn within the water with great
astonishment and content to those which see it.

Of Lances of fire.
STanding Lances of fire, are made commonly with hollow wood, to contain
sundry Petards, or Rockets, as the figure here shows, by which is easy to
invent others according to ones fancy. These Lances have wooden handles, that
so they may be fastened at some Post, so that they be not overthrown in the
flying out of the Rockets or Petards: there are lesser sorts of Lances whose
cases are of three or four fouldings of Paper of a foot long, and about the
bigness of ones finger, which are filled with a composition for Lances. But if
these Lances be filled with a composition, then (unto every 4. ounces of powder
add 2. ounces of Salt Peeter, and unto that add 1. ounce of Sulphur) diagram
it will make a brick fire red before it be half spent, if the Lance be fiered
and held to it: and if 20. such Lances were placed about a great Rocket and
shot to a house or ship, it would produce a mischievous effect.

How to shoot a Rocket Horizontall, or otherwise.
Unto the end of the Rocket place an Arrow which may not be too heavy, but in
stead of the feathers let that be of thin white tin plate, and diagram
place it upon a rest, as here you may see by the Figure, then give fire unto
it, and you may see how serviceable it may be. To the head of such Rockets may
be placed Petards, Balls of fire, Grenades, etc. and so may be applied to
warlike affairs.

How a Rocket burning in the water for a certain time, at last shall fly up in
the Air with an exceeding quickness.
TO do this take two Rockets the one equal to the other, and join them one
unto another in the middle at C. in such sort that the fire may easily pass
from one to another: it being thus done, tie the two Rockets at a stick in D,
and let it be so long and great that it may make the Rockets in the water hang,
or lie upright; then take a pack thread and tie it at G. and let it come
double about the stick D M. diagram at H. and at that point hang a Bullet of
some weight as K. for then giving fire at A. it will burn to B. by a small
serpent filled there and tied at the end, and covered so that the water injure
it not, which will fire the Rocket B D, and so mounting quick out of the water
by the loose tying at C. and the Bullet at the pack thread, will leave the
other Pocket in the water: and so ascend like a Rocket in the Air, to the
admiration of such as know not the secrecy.

Of the framing of the parts of a Fireworks together that the several works
may fire one after another.
CAuse a frame to be made as A B C D. of two footsquare every way, or
thereabouts (according to the quantity of your several works) then may you at
each angle have a great Lance of fire to stand, which may cast out Pots of fire
as they consume: upon the ledges, A B. B C. and C D. may be placed small
Lances of fire about the number of 30. or 60. some sidewise, and others
upright, between these Lances may be placed Pots of fire sloping outward, but
made very fast, and covered very close, that they chance not to fire before
they should; then upon the ledges R E. F G. H I. and A D. may be placed your
soucisons, and behind all the work may be set your Boxes of Rockets, in each of
which you may place 6, 9, 12. or 20. small Rockets: Now give fire at A. (by
help of a piece of primer going from one Lance to another) all the Lances will
instantly at once be lighted, and as soon as the Lance at A is consumed, it
will fire the Channel which is made in the ledge of the frame which runs
under the Pots of fire, and as the fire goes along burning, the Pots will be
cast forth, and so the rank of Pots upon the sides of the frame A B. B C. and
C D. being spent, the soucisons will begin to play being fiered also by a
Channel which runs under them, upon diagram the ledges A D, H I, F G, and R
E. then when the Soucisons are spent, upon the last ledge R E. there may be a
secret Channel in the ledge CD, which may fire the Box of Rockets at K, and
may fire all the rest one after another, which Boxes may be all charged with
several Fre-Workes: for the Rockets of the first Box may be laden with
serpents, the second with stars, the third with reports, he fourth with
Goulden rain, and the fifth with small flying Serpents; these mounting one
after another and flying too and fro will much inlighten the Air in their
ascending, but when these Rockets discharge themselves above, then will there
be a most pleasant representation, for these fires will dilate themselves in
diverse beautiful forms, some like the branching of Trees, others like
fountains of water gliding in the air, others like flashes of lightning,
others like the glittering of stars, giving great contentment, and delight to
those which behold them; But if the work be furnished also with Balons (which
is the chiefest in recreative Fire-workes) then shall you see ascending in the
Air but as it were only a quill of fire, but once the Balon taking fire, the
Air, will seem more than 100. foot square full of crawling, and flying
serpents, which will extinguish with a volley of more than 500. reports: and so
fill the Air and Firmament with their rebounding clamor.

The making of which with many other rare and excellent Fireworkes, and other
practices, not only for recreation, but also for service: you may find in a
book entitled Artificial Fire-workes, made by Mr. Malthas (a master of his
knowledge) and are to be sold by Rich. Hawkins at his shop in Chancery lane,
near Sarjants Inn.

Conclusion.
In this Book we have nothing omitted what was material in the original, but
have abundantly augmented it in sundry experiments: And though the examinations
are not so full, and manifold, yet (by way of brevitie) we have expressed fully
their substance, to avoid prolixitie, and so past by things reiterated.

FINIS.
Ad Authorem D. D. Henricum Van Etenium, Alumnum Academiae Ponta Mousson.
ARdua Walkeri sileant secreta profundi,
Desinat occultam carpere Porta viam.
Itala Cardani mirata est Lampada docti
Terra, Syracusium Graecia tota senem:
Orbi terrarum, Ptolemaei Clepsydratoti,
Rara dioptra Procli, mira fuere duo.
Anglia te foveat doctus Pont-Mousson alumnu^:
Quidquid naturae, qui legis, hortus habet.
Docta, coronet opus doctum, te sit tua docto
Digna, Syracusij, arca, corona, viri.
Arca Syracusijs utinam sit plumbea servis,
Aurea sed dominis, aurea tota suis.
A Table of the particurall heads of this Book, contracted according to the
several Arts specified in the Title page.
Experiments of Arithmeticke. PAge 1, 2, 3, 16, 19, 22, 28, 33, 39, 40, 44, 45,
51, 52, 53, 59, 60, 69, 71, 77, 83, 85, 86, 89, 90, 91, 124, 134, 135, 136,
137, 138, 139, 140, 178, 179, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 188, 208, 210, 213.
Experiments in Geometric. Page 12, 15, 24, 26, 27, 30, 35, 37, 41, 42, 47, 48,
49, 62, 65, 72, 79, 82, 113, 117, 118, 119, 214, 215, 217, 218, 234, 235, 236,
239, 240. Experiments in Cosmographie. Page 14, 43, 75, 106, 107, 219, 220,
225, 227, ^28, 229, 230, 232. Experiments in Horologographie. Page 137, 166,
167, 168, 169, 171, 234. Experiments in Astronomy. Page 220, 221, 222, 223,
224. Experiments in Navigation. Page 105, 233, 234, 237, 238. Experiments in
Music. Page 78, 87, 126. Experiments in Optics. Page 6, 66, 98, 99, 100,
102, 129, 131, 141, 142, 143, 144, 146, 149, 151, 152, 153, 155, 156, 157, 158,
160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165. Experiments in Artichicture. Page 16, 242, 243.
Experiments in Staticke. Page 27, 30, 32, 71, 199, 200, 201, 203, 204, 205,
207. Experiments in Machanicks: Page 56, 58, 68, 88, 95, 108, 110, 128, 173,
174, 176, 246, 248, 258, 259. Experiments in Chimestrie. Page 198, 255, 256,
257, 260, 262, 263, 264. Experiments in Waterworkes. Page 190, 191, 192, 193,
194, 196, 247, 249, 250, 252, 253. Experiments in Fireworkes. From page, 265.
to the end.
FINIS.

