THE Right Rule of a Religious Life: OR, The Glass of Godliness. Wherein
every man may behold his imperfections, how far he is out of the way of true
Godliness, and learn to reduce his wandering steps into the paths of true
Piety. In certain Lectures upon the first Chapter of the Epistle of S. JAMES.
THE FIRST PART.

By WILLIAM EST Preacher of Gods Word.

TIT. 38. These things I will thou should affirm, that they which have
believed in God might be careful to show forth good works; these things are
good and profitable unto men.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, and are to be sold by Richard Lea at his
Shop on the North entry of the Royal Exchange. 1616.

Reuerendo Admodum in Christo Patri ac colendo Domino Clarissimo vtique viro,
GVILLIELMO Episcopo Exoniensi, GVILLIELMVS ESTVS Salutem exoptat precaturque
perpetuam.
QVAM PRIMVM me operi accingere sum aggressus, vt hanc diuinissimi Apostoli
epistolam ad populum illustrarem; (Reuerendissime and Ornatissime Domine)
protinus tot egregijs pietatis documentis refertam, tot tamque varijs and
insignibus ad vitam Christian instituendam, promouendamque scatentem locis
perspexi, vt si quis pro rei dignitate expendere, and exact explicare velit,
vix vllum dicendi finem aliquando inueniet and vnde exordiri potissimum debeat,
plane nescius, haerebit statim vix vltra progredi valens.

Ovid. lib. 5. Fast.
Vt stat and incertus, qua sit sibi nescit cundum:
Cum videt ex omni part viator iter.
Veluti and in prato quodam varijs floribus ornato, florem omnium pulcherimum
fragrantissimumque reperire, and decerpere, non admodum promptum est, ob
pulchritudinis and fragrantiae aequalitatem, alio nimirum alias olfactum, and
aspectum ad se distrahente, atque adprimum cum decerpendum alliciente: Hoc illi
euenire certum est qui tot argumentorum foecunditate, locorum copia,
sententiarum grauitate abundauerit, quot Diuinus noster Apostolus suppeditare
locupletissime poterit sagaci and industrio rerum sacrarum porscrutatori. Si
itaque Phocion quidam (referente A. Gellio) ex Peripatetica disciplinae hand
ignobilis librum suum, si and Philostratus Dione m Sophistam inscripsit and
appellauit (...) velut omni genere virtutum expolitum; aequiore sane iure huius
Apostoli oracula diuino afflatu conscripta, cornu copiae appellari meruerunt.
Haec quidem cum animo mecum volutare caepi, (praesertim, expertus in hisce
exulceratissimis temporibus quam sit periculosum aliquid literis mandare,
idemque populo legendum proponere) mihi statim in mentem venit caeptis
desistere, ne tanto labori vel saltim inuidorum telis succumbere, and cedere
sim coactus. Quorum rabidos latratus, rictusque vere caninos, cum multi viri
doctissimi, omnique literarum genere excultissimi ti nuerint, opera, ac labores
suos perpetuo silentio cum magno Ecclesiae damno, sepelierunt, and obruerunt.
Sed quoniam neque ab imperita multitudine pendere, neque inuidorum voces
pertimescere debent, qui studia and curas ad Dei gloriam, and Ecclesiae
emolumentum retulerunt: tandem animum resumpsi and (vt ingenue fatear) vicit
pietatis amor, vicit Deus ipse, ardua quamuis sit via, non metuit virtus
inuicta laborem, vt olim cecinit poeta. Te autem (Reuerendissime vir, mihique
multis nominibus colendissime) ex omnibus selegi cui me and labores meos
consecrarem, tu enim es, and egregius bonarum literarum fautor, and acerimus
religionis propugnator. Itaque vt qui subdio solemn non ferunt, in moeniana
vmbracula se recipient: sic certe cum grauissimos aestus inuidiae
pertimescere^, in tui nominis praesidium me contuli, veritus non defuturos
Aristarchos seueriores, aduersus quos vix tutum inuenietur Herculis scutum, e
numero praesertim illorum, qui minime dijudicare possunt quid distant era
lupinis, vt dicit Flaccus. Non me clam est, quam sit hoc leuidense munusculum
magnitudinis tuae impar, verum fore confido temostrum laborem vt certissimum
meae erga te obseruantiae quoddam Mnemosynon approbaturum, nec non ingenij mei
(quod sentio quam sit exile) qualemcunque ac pene abortiuum foetum accepturum,
gratumque habiturum. Deum Optimum maximum summis deprecor votis, vt te patriae,
cathedrae huic, nobisque diu incolumem seruet.

Amplitudini tuae deditissimus, GVILLIELMVS EST.

To the Christian Reader.
IT is an usual Apology (Christian Reader) made for the diuulging of books:
That it was at the motion and urgent importunity of friends; complaining also
that the Print is pestered, and the Press oppressed already with an exceeding
multitude of Writers: which one rightly compares unto Guests bidden unto a
sumptuous feast, which, for fashion sake, will seem to dislike with the
excess and variety of dishes, as superfluous, and yet their appetite inuites
them to feed on every kind of meat. This excuse is no less triuiall then
frivolous; and the best Apology (in my judgment) that we can make is, the
iniquity of these times, wherein the arrogant Athiest, the loose Libertine, the
shallow conceited Schysmatick, the pestilent Papist, the carnal Professor,
etc. seem to breathe forth their infectious blasts, and proclaim defiance to
Gods glory, and true Christian piety: This indeed should rouse up, and awake,
the Tribe of Leuy, to gird their spiritual sword upon their thigh, to fight,
the good fight of the Lord, 1. Tim. 1.18
in season and out of season, against the monsters of this age, by Preaching,
Writing, by all means, to labor, Ornare Spartam quam nacti sunt, and strive
to cut off the head of this cursed Hydra, and reduce Syon to her perfect
beauty, that she may shine as a pure and vncorrupt Virgin to be presented
unto her Bridegroom Jesus Christ. 2. Cor. 11.2
This exceeding growth of satan's seed, which seems to be even ripe for Gods
revenging sickle, should stir up Gods Watchmen (considering the great charge
they sustain, and the strict account shall be required at their hands) to be
ever vigilant, to stand in the gappe, with the sword of the Word ready drawn,
least their Master coming in a day they think not, Luke 12.46 2. Tim. 2.3
and in an hour they are not aware of, finding them secure and careless,
shall give them their portion with the unbelievers: This should move us, I say,
to be Soldiers, not Sluggards, to stand ever in Palestra, non in Orchestra,
To fight the Lords Battle, as the good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, and not to
fit as idle spectators, taking delight to behold the inundation of iniquity.
And this indeed is a just and irrefragable Apology (never gainesaid of any that
is truly religious) in defense of my self and others, which in tender zeal
of Gods glory do enter the lists, and challenge the combat, to encounter with
the monstrous sins of this age, by Prayer and Preaching, Writing, and all
spiritual Artillery. The Lord give a powerful working to his blessed Word: If
there be any which being puffed up with a proud conceit of their own gifts
(as these exulcerate times are full of envious Critickes, which cannot look
with a right eye upon the doings of others, but with their Canine tooth must
needs be biting) shall not vouchsafe these my poor labors the reading, let
them know I have not labored for such, but to profit the unlearned, the
simple, and ignorant: Heb. 5.12. 1. Cor. 3.2. Mat 25.25 Luke 19.20.
Such as have need of milk and not of strong meat: not hiding my talent in
the earth, nor laying it up in a napkin with the unprofitable servant. These
first fruits of my labors upon this excellent part of Scripture, I have
entitled, The Glass of Godliness, because the Apostle, in this Epistle
chiefly, insisteth upon good works and a godly life, as the inseparable fruits
of a lively and justifying faith, wherein every one may see his blemishes, how
far exorbitant his steps are from the paths of piety, and endeavor by Gods
grace to reform the same. And whatsoever thou shall find defective, or
omitted, in this first Part, shall, by Gods assistance, be supplied when I come
forth with the rest. In the mean time, (Gentle Reader) I request thee
diligently to peruse, religiously to use, kindly to accept, and favorably to
interpret, this little Mite, which I offer to the Treasury of the Church, in
sincerity of heart, for the furtherance of a godly life. And so I conclude with
this of the wise son of Sirach: Chap. 33.15.16.
I am awaked up last of all, as one that gathers but after others in the
Vintage, Tanquam is qui spicas legit post messores.
in the blessing of the Lord I am increased, and have filled my wine press;
yet, like a Grape-gatherer, I have not labored for my self only, but for all
them that seek knowledge.

Thine in the Lord, WILLIAM EST.

De Speculo Pietatis, GVIL. EST.
SVnt duo quae coniucta diu consistere nolunt,
Natura a numer is dissiliente suis:
Cor and lingua hominis, quoru^ est concordia discors,
Et peruersa procax and simulata loqui.
Sunt duo quae disiuncta diu persistere nolunt,
Virtute ad numeros se reuocante suos.
Sancta Fides and Amor, quibus est sic mutua vita,
Vt nequeant (vno non moriente) mori:
Quatuor haec, pia men's, placida and s^pie^tia iu^gat:
Et verae Speculum Relligionis erit.
Gratia larga Dei sua munera non mutilabit,
Aut totum, aut plusquam tu petis, ille dabit.
Geo. Salteren.

De scopo vitae hominis Christiani Tetrastichon.
PRaefixus tibi quis scopus est? Reuerenter Jesus
Vt prompta semper lingua animoque colam:
Tum quemuis studeam verbis operaque iuvare,
Et cautam ne me, otia tarda premant.
Pietatis praeclara remuneratio. Hexastichon.
CApturo pisces hamata in littore seta,
Nafrauga forte hominiscalua prehe^sa fuit:
Qui caput auulsum membris miseratus, inermi
Prosubigens fecit vilia busta manu.
Pondus vbi infossi terra grave repperit auri,
Gratia sic justice nulla bonisque perit.
THE RIGHT RVLE OF A RELIGIOUS LIFE: OR, THE GLASS OF GODLINESS.
THE FIRST SERMON.
James a servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve Tribes
which are scattered abroad, salutation.

HE begins first with the Inscription or Title of the EPISTLE, wherein are
three things;

1 The name and office of the Author.

2 To whom he writes.

3 His Salutation.

For the first, there are two things to be considered; his name who he was, and
his office. His name he expresses that it was James. I find that among some
ancient Writers, there has been some controversy heereabout; some affirming,
that there were three of his name, and all viri Apostolici, Apostolical men,
and that it is uncertain to which this Epistle is to be ascribed: the first
they say was James the brother of John, and son of Zebedee, whom Herod killed
with the Sword. Acts 12.
The other they would have to be the son of Alphaeus, who had to his brethren
the Apostles, Simon and Jude. The third they think was one of the 72.
Disciples, and called, the Brother of the Lord; and to this opinion seems to
lean Eusebius, and cites for his proof Clemens Alexandrinus, and Hegisippus,
to which Epiphanius and Ambrose consents. But against these, we oppose the
universal consent of the whole Church, which proves, that there were only but
two of this name of the number of the Apostles and Disciples, Hier. contr.
Heluidium. Beda super 1. Act.
so does Saint Hierome and Beda. To this agrees (besides many other) the sixth
general Council of 227. Bishops, and other Greek Fathers assembled Anno Dom.
684. and the whole consent of the Greek and Latin Church. This James then was
son of Alphaeus a holy man, and Mary the daughter of Cleopha, cosin-germane
to the Virgin Mary, as Saint Hierome in many places affirms. He was called
James the Less, as the Greeks use the word in the Positive degree, not that
he was inferior in zeal or authority unto the rest of the Apostles, but
because he was less of body, and shorter of stature then the other James the
brother of John. He was also called James the Just, by reason of the most
excellent gifts of the Holy Ghost, and most singular virtues that shined forth
in him. Hegisippus
For as Hegisippus witnesses, who succeeded the Apostles, that he was holy
from his Mothers womb, after the manner of the Nazarites, he never drank wine
nor strong drink, the Rasor never came upon his head, he abstained from Oil
and Baths, he never wore a Woollen, but a Linen vesture called a Syndon, with
continual prayer his knees were grown so hard as a Camels skin: he was had
in such holy reputation among the people, that they pressed to touch the hem of
his vesture. He was called also the Brother of the Lord, Galat. 1.
not as some Greek Writers untruly suppose that he was the son of Joseph,
by his first wife, before he took the blessed Virgin, but because he was the
son of Mary Cleopha cousin germane to the Virgin Mary, and so CHRIST'S
kinsman, and therefore his Brother after the manner of the Hebrews, which call
them that are of their next blood, Brethren, as Abraham calls his nephew Lot,
Genes. 13.
Brother. and Laban calls Jacob, his Cousin, Brother. Genes. 29
Thus the Hebrews called them Brethren, that were of affinity and kindred, in
which respect James is called the Lords Brother, only because he was his
kinseman after the flesh. He was the first Bishop of Jerusalem, appointed by
the Lord himself, as Clemens writes, and constituted by the rest of the
Apostles. The Jews, Clemens.
for his admirable holiness of life, permitted him to come into the Sanctum
Sanctorum: he wore on his head, the Petalon, that is, Episcopi insigne, the
Bishops mark or attire, as Hegisippus and Clemens write; he governed the
Church with great praise for the space of thirty years, and was at last
martyred, being cast from a Pinnacle of the Temple, and afterward his brains
dashed out with a clubbe. This testimony (Brethren) should procure no little
authority with the hearers of this Epistle; and attention: for who is so
blockish and foolish which will not reverence so great an Apostle, an
Ambassador of the eternal Son of GOD, by the testimony of the Jews
themselves a most holy man, the first Pastor of the first Church, ordained by
Christ himself to preach his Gospel? Notwithstanding there have not wanted some
(such is the policy of Satan) which have gone about to discredit the
authority of this Epistle, as if it should not proceed from James the
Apostle, Tertul. libr. Praescript.
that (as I may say with Tertullian) Firmos fatigarent, infirmos caperent,
medios cum scrupulo dimitterent: That they might weaken the strong, ensnare the
weak, and the rest let go with suspense.

First (say they) he calls not himself an Apostle, Their first reason.
but a Servant of Jesus Christ. This reason is very frivolous: Saint John
calls himself neither the Servant nor Apostle of Christ, should we
therefore conclude, 1 Ioh. 1.
that John was neither the Apostle nor the Servant of Christ? Were not this
absurd? By the like reason we might infer, that Saint Jude was no Apostle,
because he terms himself the Servant of Christ, and brother to this James.
If a King in his Title should call himself the Servant of God, and omit the
name of his Kingdom, were he not therefore a King? Away with such frivolous
reasons.

Another as foolish a reason they have, Their other reason.
that this Style sauoureth not of the Haebraismus, or Hebrew phrase, as is
expected of so great an Apostle, and first Bishop of Jerusalem. To this I
answer, as Cicero did once; vappis, ac lippis and in tenui farragine
mendacibus: To the rabble of liars, dizzards, and pur-blinde persons it seems
so, but to such as are well acquainted with the Hebrew Idiome, it seems far
otherwise. Indeed, it was not expedient, that he being by Nation and Tongue
an Hebrew, and yet writing in Greek, should be tied to the tropes of the
Hebrew tongue: Again, Acts 2.
seeing he had received of the Holie-ghost, the gift of all Tongues, it was no
hard thing for him to abstain from the obscure Hebraismus, and to use the more
plain Greek phrase; and lastly, it is false, that he uses no Hebrew phrase:
for gignere verbo veritatis, Verse 18.
To beget with the word of Truth, is a plain Hebraismus, used for the true
doctrine, as filius perditionis, the son of perdition, for filio perdito.
Again, he calls the Gospel the Law of Liberty, Verse 25.
after the Hebrew phrase, for a perfect Law which brings true liberty to the
believers and followers thereof. Again, generare mortem, after the manner of
the Hebrew phrase, to bring certain and present destruction, and such like.

Epigrapha, The Servant of God. But why; omitting the name of Apostle or
Disciple, calls he himself The Servant of God? Surely (as the Learned do
answer to this question) when he might have termed himself an Apostle, an
Ambassador of the high God, the brother of our Lord, or any more lofty Title;
he chooses rather the title of a Servant, as well for that he is delighted with
humility, after the example of Christ, who made himself of no reputation,
Phil. 2.
taking on him the form of a Servant, and commanded all men to learn of him
humility: As also, Matthew. 11.
that he might reprove the arrogance and pride of the Scribes and Pharisees,
which arrogated to themselves proud and glorious titles; and that by this
moderation of mind, he might allure the hearts of men to love him. Cicero.
For as Cicero says, Modestia claram and stabilem comparat authoritatem:
Modesty procures an evident, famous, and sure authority to any matter. Greg.
7. mor.
Superbia odium generat, humilitas amorem: Pride begets hatred, humility
love. The use.
Here (Brethren) we are taught humility, to think humbly of our selves, and to
speak modestly, and wisely, that all pride be far off from our words and
writings. The Pharisees are condemned of our Savior, because They loved
greetings in the markets, Mat 23.6.
the highest rooms in the Synagogues, and to be called Rabbi. And are not many
nowadayes subject to the same reprehension, which being puffed up with conceit
of themselves, of their birth, riches or dignity, affect these glorious
Titles, and rage, stamp and chafe, if they be denied them. How far off were
the Saints of God from this humor? Saint Paul gloried in his infirmities,
stripes, imprisonments, and in the Cross of Christ, whereby the world is
crucified unto him, Galat. 6.14 Luke 1.38. Apoc. 19 10
and he unto the world: the blessed virgin calls her self, The Servant of
the Lord, and the glorious Angels, Our fellow Servants.

There be two kinds of Servants; Servants by condition and profession. Aug. 19.
Ciuit. dei c. 15
Servants by Condition, and Servants by Profession: by condition, as borne by
nature, caught in war, bought with money, and therefore Saint Augustine
deriueth the Latin word, a seruando, because they were reserved and kept
alive, being taken in war, when they might have been slain. Of this
servitude speaks the Apostle: Let as many Servants as are under the yoke,
count their Masters worthy of all honor: but of this kind our Apostle
speaks not here.

The Servant by Profession, 1 Timothy 6.1. Col. 3.22.
is every good Christian which makes profession sincerely to serve God and his
Son Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 6.5. 1. Pet. 2.18
in holiness and righteousness all the days of their life. This is the
general calling of Christianity; in this general calling, Prince and people,
young and old, learned and unlearned, bond and free, honorable and base, if
they be true professors of Jesus Christ, are the Servants of God: this title is
more glorious then the diadem of Emperors, then the Crown of Princes, The
Servant of Christ an honorable Title.
then any dignity of a Duke, more honorable then the stately Titles of any
Peer, and more magnificent then the name of the greatest monarch, to be
dignified with the title of the Servant of Christ: Therefore the princely
Prophet makes protestation hereof to God before the title of his kingdom, as
his chiefest glory: Behold Lord, for I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant, and
the son of thine hand-maide; so all the holy Patriarchs and godly Kings of
Judah, as their chiefest honor, entitle themselves the servants of God. As in
general, so also in special, men are called the Servants of God, who in their
special charge do serve God, and further his kingdom: so Princes in their
places, Preachers in their functions, are the Servants of Christ in their
several callings, and special service in the Church and Commonwealth, in
which respect our Apostle here calls himself The Servant of God: 1. Cor.
1.1. Phil. 1.1. Tit. 1.1.
So Paul calls himself the Servant of Jesus Christ. So again he calls
himself and Timotheus, the Servants of Jesus Christ, and to Titus he uses the
same Title.

It is meet then (Brethren) that we should all acknowledge our selves the
Servants of Jesus Christ, and labor faithfully to perform our duty toward
him. for all things were made through him. John 1.4.
for in him we live, move, Acts 17 28
and have our being: rule over us, for all rule is given unto him in Heaven and
in Earth: John 5.22.
for the Father has given all judgment unto the Son. Seeing then (Brethren)
that in so manifold a bond of duty we are bound unto our Christ, let us so
serve him in sincerity of heart, that we be never numbered among the number of
stubborn and disobedient servants, of whom our Savior speaks, Mat. 25.30
Cast the unprofitable Servant into utter darkness, there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth. The duty of a good Christian showed by the duty of a
profitable Servant.
But let us now a little examine the duty of a profitable Servant, that we
may perceive how far off most men are from the regard of this duty. The
profitable Servant employeth the chiefest part of his time, not in his own,
but in his Masters business: they receive from the hands of their Masters:
but now men catch and scrape whatsoever they may, and by what means soever,
and what they can not catch, they still covet it in heart, and envy it unto
others. Good Servants, They have made a covenant with death, Esaias 28.15
and with hell are at an agreement: of their masters: but now the
commandments of God are kicked at, and trodden under foot: Is this to be the
Servants of Christ? are these the marks of our Christian profession? All
covetous wretches then are not the Servants of Christ, but of their god Mammon:
the glutton and drunkard are not the Servants of God but of their belly, which
they make their god: all filthy and carnal livers, serve not God, but the
unclean spirit: All proud and ambitious men, are not the Servants of Christ,
but do homage unto Satan. But for what stipend and reward do they serve?
Bernard. li. Senten.
Saint Bernard shows, Quatuor sunt, quorum in hac vita, obsequijs,
deseruimus: caro, mundus, diabolus, Deus: habent singuli principes isti dona
propria, etc. There are four masters, to whom men in this life yield their
service, the flesh, the world, the devil, or God. The flesh gives to her
seruitours a little momentany pleasures, full of stings and remorse: the world
transitory aduancements: the Devil perpetual captivity; but God eternal
felicity: quibus ergo potius aut impensius seruiendum? says he. Which of
these, now (tell me) ought thou rather, or more earnestly to serve?

(The Servants of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ) among the learned
Expositors I find two Interpretations; first, that the Apostle speaks
coniunctim, that he is the Servant of Christ, who is God and Lord, as well of
the Apostle, as of all men. Heretics confuted.
And here he meets with the heresy of the Ebionites, Cerinthians,
Carpocratians, Arrians, and the Jews, which affirmed Christ to be only man,
the son of Joseph, and not God the Lord; whose blasphemies, in few, but in
most effectual words he confuteth, teaching that the same Lord Jesus Christ is
both God and Man, the very consubstantiall Son of the Father.

disiunctim, Seruus Dei, and Domini nostri, the servant of God, and of our Lord
Jesus Christ; where he has respect unto two of the Persons in Trinity, the
Father and the Son, whose servant our Apostle here professes himself to be.
And this interpretation proves also the Divinity of Christ, seeing that
equally he professes himself to be the servant of God the Father, and of his
Son Jesus Christ, and both his God and his Lord. And here the heresies of
the Sabellians and Priscilians are refuted, etc.

The second part.
Unto the twelve Tribes which are dispersed, salutation.
Having spoken before of the person of the Writer of this Epistle, and of his
Office, next he shows to whom he wrote, to the twelve Tribes dispersed,
wherein these three things comes to be considered.

1 Of the dispersion of the Jews.

2 Why he wrote especially unto them.

3 Of his salutation.

It is well known that the Israelites were divided into twelve Tribes,
according to the number of of the twelve sons of Jacob, which were the twelve
Patriarchs, from whom, as from Fountains, sprang many and great Nations. Genesis
35. and 49.
They first dwelled with their father Jacob in the Land of Canaan, afterward
in Egypt, after that in the Deserts of Arabia, from whence they inhabited the
Land of Palestina, where having received the Law of God and Religion, they were
joined together into the body of one Kingdom, and Synagogue, and so long they
remained united, as they claue unto God; but when they revolted from the high
God, unto idolatry, and the service of strange Gods after the manner of the
Heathen, who in steed of the true God worshipped devils, Psalm. 106. ver. 40.41.
then was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people, and he abhorred
his inheritance, and he gave them into the hands of the Heathen, and they that
hated them were Lords over them; As the Lord also before had threatened, if they
would not be reformed, but walk stubbornely against the Lord, that he would
scatter them among the Heathen, Leuit. 26.33.
and will draw out a sword after them, and their land shall be waste, and their
Cities shall be desolate. Again, Deuteronomy. 4.27
and the Lord shall scatter you among the people, and you shall be left few in
number among the Nations whither the Lord shall bring you.

And least any should think these threatenings to be vain, and but words, let
us see with what horrible examples the Lord has confirmed them. Hoshea
reigning over the ten Tribes in Samaria, they turned from the Lord, and
committed all abominations against him, wherefore God stirred up Salmanazar
King of Assiria, who after three years war, took Samaria the Metropolis of
that Kingdom, 2. Reg. 17.
spoiled the Country, carried away all the people into the most cruel
captivity of the Assirians. Secondly, the other two Tribes; namely, the Tribe
of Judah, and the Tribe of Benjamin, 2. Reg. 25.
were dispersed, Jerusalem being taken with their perfidious King Zedekia, by
Nabuchadnezzar, with their wives, children and other Princes, as Jeremy before
prophesied; Ierem. 27.
then was the City ouerthrown, the Temple consumed with fire, and they that
escaped the sword, famine, fire, and pestilence, as flocks of Cattle were
driven away into the miserable captivity of the Chaldaeans. Thirdly, the
Relics of the Israelites were oppressed, and dispersed, now by the King of
Syria, now by the King of Egypt; sometimes with civil wars among themselves;
so that wretched Iudaea standing in the midst, and addicted sometimes to this
side, sometimes to that, was trodden down of both and exposed to the
direptions of both sides; so that many good men, not enduring the sight of the
profanation of their Country, and holy Things, wandered far and near; Yea
some betook them to the Desert, choosing rather to lead their lives with brute
beasts then with such kind of men, as the History of the Machabees does
testify: and they wandered up and down, Heb. 11.37
in Sheep skins, and in Goats skins, being destituted, afflicted, and
tormented.

Here (brethren) we are to observe two notable Lessons for our instruction.

Esaias 55.10 11, etc.
Surely as the rain comes down, and the snow from heaven, and returns not
thither, but watreth the earth, and makes it to bring forth and bud, that it
may give seed to the sower, and bread unto him that eats: So shall my word
be that goes out of my mouth, it shall not return unto me void, but it
shall accomplish that which I will, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I
sent it. And the Lord has in all ages, severely punished the contempt of his
Word and Messengers; 2. Chron. 36.15.16.
Therefore the Lord God of their Fathers sent to them by his Messengers, rising
early and sending: for he had compassion on his people, and on his
habitation. But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and
misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people,
and till there was no remedy.

The evils of sin.
Sin blindfoldeth the mind, taking away the supernatural light of Gods
grace, it defiles and spotteth the conscience, as a thing most filthy and
unworthy for a man, it accuses us guilty before God, as injurious to his
Divine Majesty, it impouerisheth us, spoiling us of all our spiritual riches,
it dishonors us, making us odious in the sight of God, and of his holy
Angels; in this life is the cause of sickness, famine, sword, pestilence, and
all evils that may happen to the body, and of eternal destruction of body and
soul in the life to come. To conclude, seeing that God is the inexhaust
treasury of all goodness, and sin separateth from God, it follows then
that sin brings upon us incomparable and infinite loss; for it depriueth
us of God the infinite good: Your sins have divided betwixt your God and you,
Esaias 59.2.
If then o man thou do so diligently take heed of temporal loss; if thou so
carefully keep thy money and treasure: how art thou deceived through
blindness of mind? how is thine understanding darkened with folly? how is thy
reason obscured by the devil? If thou fear not to fall into sin which
depriuest thee of God the fountain of all happiness: Why make thou so small
account of the God of infinite Majesty? Why fear thou more to loose one
penny, then by sinning to be deprived of thy God? and through lying, deceiving,
swearing, etc. to be separated from him who is insititly good, and who has
power to cast both body and soul into hell, and without whom there is no
blessedness?

Thus, for their sins, was that Nation of the Jews (Gods vengeance pursuing
them) many times dispersed and persecuted: But of this the Apostle has not
respect in this place, but of the dispersed Christians, which for the name of
Christ were scattered abroad and persecuted. For many, out of all the Tribes
which professed Christ, after Saint Stephen was stoned, Acts 7.
flying the rage of the Pharisees, were scattered in diverse Countries. Acts
8.1.
At that time (says the Scripture) there was a great persecution against the
Church which was at Jerusalem, The state of the Church Millitant.
and they were all scattered abroad, except the Apostles.

And here (brethren) again, we are to note the state and condition of the
Church militant, and of all the faithful while they are in their exile and
pilgrimage in this life, traveling toward their Country; in the way they are
to suffer many crosses, troubles, persecutions, and many iuiuries of the world
and the devil, and if we will arrive at the haven of happiness and port of
felicity, we must follow our Pilot and Captain Jesus Christ, the same way he
went before us: Act. 14.22.
For through many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of heaven: 2.
Tim. 3.12
And all that will live godly in Jesus Christ must suffer persecution: It
cannot then be otherwise, but the godly going to heauen-ward, must be enforced
to suffer diverse troubles. Pathemata. Mathemata Afflictions are instructions.
These are the trials of the faithful by which God exercises the faith, hope,
charity, and patience of his children: and confirms them, and therefore in
the book of Wisdom, this trial of faith is compared to the trial of gold.
As gold is tried in the fire, Wisd. 3.6.
so men are tried in the furnace of affliction. And again, 1. Pet. 1.6.7
Through manifold temptations ye are in heaviness, that the trial of your
faith, being much more precious then gold that perishes (though it be tried
with fire) might be found unto your praise and honor and glory at the
appearing of Jesus Christ. For as by the fire, gold is tried whether it be
pure or no; so by the cross, faith whether it be without the dross of
hypocrisy.

Now the comforts that all the faithful (and chiefly Gods Ministers which for
their calling sake, are most subject to all crosses and injuries of the wicked)
may gather from hence in all their troubles, are









Augustine says: Afflictions to the faithful, are but as files and hammers to
the gold, Milles to the wheat, or the Oven to the bread: gold by the file and
hammer, wheat by the mill, and loaves by the oven, are brought to their
perfection: So a true Christian is purified and perfected by crosses and
afflictions. Aug. de tempore ser. 78.
This is the highway to our heavenly Country.

The last thing in the Epigrapha or Title, is the salutation or greeting. The
third point.


A certain form of salutation, has ever been usual among all Nations, Three
manner of salutations Plat. in Epist. 3. Dionis.
as both holy and profane Writers witness, who have set down diverse forms
thereof. Plato expresses three that were most in use among the Grecians, as to
wish Prosperity, to wish Health, to wish Joy. The first was common to the
Philosophers, the second to the Physicians, the third to the vulgar people.

The ancient Romans used commonly but one form of greeting, as Salutem
optare: to wish Health, as it is evident by Ciceroes Epistles. The most usual
among the Jews was to wish Peace. The Apostle Saint Paul in every of his
Epistles, uses this form of greeting. Romans 1.7. 1. Cor. 1.3. 1. Cor. 1.2.
Gal. 1.3. Ephe. 1.2. Phil. 1.2, etc. Acts 15.23
Grace be with you and Peace, from God our Father and from the Lord Jesus
Christ. Saint Peter uses the same form. Saint Jude wishes, Mercy, peace, and
love to be multiplied. The first general Council held at Jerusalem uses the
same manner of salutation as this our Apostle Saint James does. The word (...)
signifies to Rejoice, laetari, bono animo esse, to be of good cheer, or
comfort, howsoever the external affairs of this world fall out.

He wishes them all health and happiness which may happen to strangers and
Pilgrims in this life, both of body and soul. He wishes them a true and
constant faith whereby they may acknowledge God. He wishes them a steadfast
hope, whereby they may cleave to Gods promises in Jesus Christ.

He wishes them true charity, whereby they may love God with all their heart,
with all their soul, and with all their mind. He wishes them patience in
adversity, moderation in prosperity, eternal salvation, with perfect
glorification, both of body and soul.

Math. 6.33
Seek first (says Christ) the Kingdom of heaven: For what shall it profit a
man though he should win the whole world, Mat. 16.26
if he loose his own soul. So the Apostle John, inspired with the same
Spirit, wishes to the Elect Lady, 2. John 3.
and her children, above all things, Grace, mercy, and peace from God our
Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. And Saint John unto the seven Churches
wishes Grace and peace from him which is, Apoc. 1.4.
which was, and which is to come. He wishes not unto them, these false, fading
and corruptible goods, which are common to the good and bad, to the just and
unjust indifferently, and which do perish with us; but the gifts of the
Spirit, which can neither be given, nor taken away of men.

over the Flock of Christ, as they that were to give account for their souls:
They knew well the word of the Lord to be stable and sure: Their blood will I
require at thine hands: Ezech. 3.18
This care also had all Gods servants in the succeeding ages, as Clemens Alex.
Iustinianus, Tertullianus, Cyprianus, etc. a president for all true Pastors to
have before their eyes.

Can a woman forget her child, Esa. 49.15.
and not have compassion on the son of her womb? though she should forget,
yet will I not forget thee, says the Lord. So David in his exiles, in the
wilderness and wars, and in his greatest temptations, this loving Lord never
forsook him, but with his comforts always accompanied him. The Use.
Let not the godly therefore in their sorrow and adversities despair; let none
distrust Gods fatherly care toward them. Blessed is the man that makes the
Lord his trust, Psalm. 40.4.
and regards not the proud, nor such as turn after lies.

Math. 28.9. Luke 24.36 Ioh. 20.26. The Use.
and the women, being in distress, God save you: Peace be unto you.

Here are reproved the proud Stoicall, sullen Sectaries of our time, who being
puffed up with selfe-conceite of their own worthiness, disdain to afford so
much as salutations to any they meet, which dissent from them in some
opinions, concerning their humorous fancies; rightly resembling the old
Donatists, or Anabaptists of this age: plainly showing hereby, how far off
they are, (...), from the disposition of the true servants of God, Bis per
omnia. musicorum prouerbium.
and the humility of the soul wherein the Spirit of CHRIST delights to
dwell. And thus much for the Title.

The second Sermon.
2 My brethren, count it exceeding joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations.

3 Knowing that the trying of your faith brings forth patience.

4 And let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and
entire, lacking nothing.


Having ended the Title and Inscription of the Epistle, now follows the
Narration.

First, he begins with an exhortation to suffer affliction, The division.
which is the proposition of the place contained in this second verse.

Secondly, he confirms his Proposition, with certain motives or reasons in
the third and fourth verse.

By tentations he understands the hatred of wicked men, Temptation what.
their threatenings, slanderings, persecutions of the godly, their exiles, loss
of temporal goods, imprisonments, death, and all kind of calamities inflicted
upon the godly, for the faith and true religion. In this sense the plagues of
Egypt are called temptations. Deur. 29.
And Christ says to his Apostles, Luke 22.28
Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations: that is, in my
travails, watchings, and persecutions. Cicero also sometime uses the like
phrase: Cicero in Tuscu.
Animi valentes morbo tentari non possunt, corpora possunt, etc. Our minds
being strong, cannot be tempted or assailed with diseases; our bodies can: as
if the Apostle had said in express terms, Seeing the community of Faith,
Baptism, and Religion, unites all Christians as brethren: and among brethren
there should be a society and partaking of joy and sorrow; your misery would
much perplex my mind were I not thoroughly persuaded of your constancy in the
faith: Neither am I ignorant that to the children of this world, which measure
all their felicity in earthly goods and pleasures, it would seem heavy and
intolerable, besides law and right, to be driven into exile, to be banished
from their dear friends, to be hated of all men, for the truths sake, to be
exposed unto all injuries: But as for you, which do place Foelicitatis puppim
ac proram, the sum of your felicity in Christ only, which do aspire to your
heavenly country, which believe the immortality of the soul, which expect a
blessed resurrection, and eternal life after this, should be far otherwise
persuaded. For if you would weigh with your selves the manifold fruits that
spring of these temptations, surely you will find, Plus mellis inesse quam
fellis; more honey then gall in them. For they happen not unto you by chance and
fortune, but are sent us of God, our most loving Father, who is most tender of
our salvation, that with them he may shake off our drowsinesse, prove our
patience, exercise our obedience, purge out our filthiness, stir us up to
fervent prayer, teach the contempt of the world, and kindle our minds with the
love of heavenly things: Ye ought therefore not in mind to be cast down, or
faint in adversity, but rather with all your hearts to rejoice when the world
frowneth and rages against you for CHRIST his sake, and repute it as great
gain: For as much as this is an infallible sign that ye are dear unto GOD,
who is at hand as your sole and only Comforter and Deliverer at time
convenient in all your crosses and afflictions.

In this Proposition there are many things which are to be observed.

and troubles are inseparable companions of the true faith and Christian
godliness; 2. Tim. 3.12
so that the Apostle says; All that will live godly in Jesus Christ shall
suffer persecution: Ioh. 15.20. and 18.
And Christ, If they have persecuted me, they will persecute you also, If the
world hate you, ye know that it hated me before you. So the Apostle, not
complaining, but rejoicing, Romans 8.36.
says: For thy sake are we killed all the day long: we are counted as sheep
for the slaughter. 2. Cor. 4.11
Again, We which live are always delivered unto death for Jesus sake, that
the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh.

But what is the cause of these crosses of Gods servants above others? The
cause.


First, the hatred of Satan with all his Army, against mankind, which he
seeks by all means to bring to final destruction: Hence proceed the
horrible titles and names, given to him in holy Scripture.

The second is the malice of vnpure and wicked men, the very members of the
devil, which serve him in all filthy desires, and cannot endure to be rebuked
of their beloved sins: hereof speaks our Savior: The world hates me,
John 7.7.
because I testify that the works thereof are evil.

The third is the secret judgment of God, who by these crosses would prove the
patience of his servants and crown them.

They proceed from his merciful providence. Amos 3.6. Esa. 45.7.
through his will and merciful providence, as the Prophet says: Shall there
be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? And again, I form the
light, and create darkness: I make peace, and create evil: I the Lord do all
these things. And: 1. Sam. 2, 6.
The Lord kills and makes alive: brings down to the grave, and raises
up. Yea satan himself that Prince of darkness, had no power over the body of
holy Job, his children, oxen, sheep and camels, farther then the Lord
permitted: Math. 8.
neither had the Legion of devils without his permission, ability to enter so
much as into the swine: no tyrants therefore, no bloody persecutors, Gods
punishments upon persecutors. Augustine.
not all the infernal spirits, are able to touch Gods servants, but as far
forth and as long, as pleases our omnipotent God, Cuius voluntas occulta esse
potest, iniusta esse non potest, whose Will may be secret, but cannot be
unjust. Eusebius.
Eusebius reports that Aurelianus the Emperor was presently stricken with
sudden death, Aurelianus.
as he stretched forth his hand to subscribe unto an Edict for the persecution
of the Christians. Anno 380. Valens.
The like happened to the wicked Emperor Valens, a fautor of the Arrian
heresy: going about to confirm the unjust sentence of condemning Saint Basil
to exile, his pen by no means would take any ink, but when he still
persisted, his sinews shranke, and hand withered, and was able no longer to
hold his pen; that God might manifest unto the world, that we are punished,
not when the Tyrant will, but when it pleases God.

Mat. 5.10.
Blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousness sake: for theirs
is the Kingdom of heaven. And the holy Apostles being afflicted and beaten
went rejoicing from the Council: Acts 5.41.
and Paul speaking of himself and fellow Apostles says; Romans 5.3. Gal. 6.14.
We rejoice in tribulation: And again, God forbid that I should rejoice but in
the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ: And Justinius Martyr witnesses, that the
Martyrs of the primitive Chruch, being led to their death, said to the
Magistrates, Gratias agimus quod a molestis dominis liberemur, and ad patre^
regemque coeleste^ proficiscimur: We give thanks, that we are freed from cruel
masters, and do go to our heavenly King, and loving Father.

And Tertullian says: Tertul. ad Scapu.
Magis damnati qua^ absoluti gaudemus: we rejoice more being condemned, then
when we are set at liberty.

Thus the holy Martyrs and Saints of God, have in all ages counted it exceeding
joy when they fell into temptations, and by the inward consolations of Gods
Spirit, have, above the strength of man's nature, rejoiced, when the wicked rage
and stare, mutter and murmr against God, in all their miseries. Of the sweet
comforts of the godly in all their adversity, speaks the Apostle: 2. Cor.
1.3.4.
Blessed be God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
mercies, and the God of all comfort, which comfort us in all our
tribulations, that we may be able to comfort them which are in affliction, by
the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. Aug. in soliloq. cap.
22.
I cannot here omit the sweet words of S. Augustine to this purpose, speaking
to God: Tu solus dulcis appareas qui es dulcedo inestimabilis, etc. Thou only
seem sweet unto my soul, which art the inestible sweetness, which makes
all bitter things sweet. Thy sweetness made pleasant unto Saint Stephen, the
stones cast at him: Thy sweetness made pleasant to Saint Laurence the iron
gridiron whereon he was broyled to death. For thy sweetness the Apostles went
rejoicing from the Council, Act. 5.41.
that they were counted worthy to suffer for thy name. This made Saint Andrew
go securely to his cross, for he hastened to thy sweetness. This thy
sweetness did so fill the hearts of thy Apostles Peter and Paul, that the one
went willingly to his cross, the other joyfully yielded his neck to the
sword: To buy this sweetness, Bartholmew gave his own skin. This, as soon
as Peter had tasted, he forgot all worldly things, and as drunken, cried out:
Lord here is good being for us: Mat. 17.4.
if thou will let us make three Tabernacles, one for Thee, one for Moses, and
one for Elias: Vnam stillam dulcedinis gustauit and omnem aliam fastidiuit: He
had tasted but one drop of this sweetness, and he loathed all other. What
think thou then would he have said, if he had tasted the full draught of
the sweetness of thy Divinity, which thou have in store for all them that
fear thee? This that tender Virgin had tasted of, whom we read of, that she
went joyfully to the prison as invited to a banquet. This, Lord, is the
blessedness which we expect at thy hands, for the hope whereof we fight
continually under the banner of Jesus Christ; for the hope whereof, we are
killed all the day long, that we may live with thee for ever. So far
Augustine.

Job says) take the Tabret and Harp, Job. 21.12.13.
and rejoice in the sound of the Organs. They spend their days in wealth, and
suddenly they go down to the grave. Laetantur cum malefecerint and exultant
in rebus pessimis: Prou. 2.14.
They rejoice in doing evil and delight in the frowardness of the wicked.
Therefore extrema huius gaudij luctus occupat: Prou. 14.13
The end of that mirth is heaviness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth. Math. 8.12
Woe be unto you (says the Judge of the quick and dead) that laugh, for ye
shall weep: Luke 6.25.
woe be unto you for ye have your consolation here. The wicked rejoice, some
in one vain thing, some in another, as in riches, honors, worldly pomp and
pleasures, etc. and account sickness, poverty, slander, backbitings,
reuilings, hatred of the world, and such like, with other of Gods crosses, to
be evils, and undoubted signs of Gods wrath and hatred unto them, which are
afflicted with them; such was the sentence of Eliphas against Job, Job 4.
who condemned him as wicked because God afflicted him. But the children of God
rejoice greatly in afflictions, as the signs of Gods love, being assured that
these afflictions shall tend to their furtherance and salvation in Jesus Christ:
their joy consists in the testimony of a good conscience, and in the
expectation of the future and eternal blessedness: Your sorrow shall be
turned into joy (says Christ) and your joy shall no man take from you. And
with the Apostle they say: 2. Cor. 4.17
Our light affliction which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far more
excellent and eternal weight of glory. The labor is little, but the reward is
infinite.

Virg.
Durate, and vosmet rebus seruate secundis.
Endure the state that adverse is,
And keep your selves for future bliss.
If we put in the balance the afflictions of this life, they will be found of
no weight, nor in any wise able to counterpoise the greatness of the reward.

Tribulation is but a passion, Tribulation is but a Passion: But Glory is an
Action.
and therefore small is the force thereof; but Glory is an action, and
therefore powerful and increases every moment. This life passes away and
soon vanishes, but the glory has no end and endures for ever. Persevere
therefore O Christians, and constantly finish your course, for great is the
reward that we expect.

The Use.
in that he uses the word (Fall) he makes a difference betwixt the
sufferings of the godly and the wicked. We are here taught not to deserve, or
procure, through our default, to be afflicted of the world, as Thieves,
Murderers, Quarrellers, Busybodies in other men's matters, which by their
own desert procure their own misery: These ought not to rejoice in their
afflictions. 1. Pet. 4.15 16.
Let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a Thief, or an evil doer, or as
a busie-bodie in other men's matters: But if any man suffer as a Christian, let
him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God in this behalf. We should
therefore rejoice under the cross which God imposes upon us.

(when) that is, whenever ye fall into temptation: Whereby we are taught,
that it is not enough once or twice to rejoice in affliction, but as
oftensoeuer we are assaulted with temptations, so often to show our selves
patient and joyful; For the Crown is not given before the end of the combat:
Be thou faithful unto the death, Reu. 2.10.
and I will give thee the Crown of life.

Our life cannot be without sin, Aug. sup. ps. 60. vita nostra non potest
esse sine peccato, sine tentatione, quia profectus noster per tentationem fit,
etc.
nor temptation: for our profit and increase in godliness, is through
temptations, says Aug. And his reason follows, for neither does a man well
know himself except he be tempted, neither can he be crowned except he
overcome, neither can he overcome except he fight, neither can he fight except
he have an enemy and temptations to encounter with: So far S. Aug.

(diverse) and that in three respects.

First, in regard of the diverse instruments, which God uses in inflicting
them: for sometimes he uses the devil, sometime wicked men he uses as
means, sometime other creatures.

Secondly, they are diverse, in regard of the temptations themselves, which are
diverse and man if old: therefore the Prophet says, Psa. 34.18.
Great are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of
all: as famine, banishment, hatred, slander, infamy, poverty, etc.

Thirdly, they are diverse in regard of the ends, for which they are inflicted,
which are also diverse; sometimes we are afflicted that we may be humbled, and
the pride of our hearts abated; sometime to the end we may not fix our love
upon the world; sometime to make us more zealous in good works; sometimes that
partaking with Christ in his sufferings, Romans 8.17.
We may also be glorified with him.

VER. 3. Knowing that the trying of your faith brings forth patience.

THE Apostle, not ignorant that it seems a hard thing to carnal men, to
rejoice in the afflictions of this world, by an elegant gradation he recites
certain vtilities and profits that comes of them, as reasons why the
children of God should be comforted in afflictions, considering the fruits that
come thereby.







what it is, but that we knowing our own weakness should always fly unto
him, and say, Luke 17.5.
Domine adauge nobis fidem: Lord increase our faith. Genes. 12.
He proved the faith of Abraham, when he commanded him to depart from his
Country, and acquaintance: Genes. 22.
He tempted him also when he commanded him to sacrifice his dear and only
son Isaac, in whom only was the hope of the promise. By many peregrinations
and troubles, he proved the Israelites by the space of forty yearcs in the
Desatt. Again, Deuteronomy. 8.
he proved them, by suffering many false Prophets to arise and seduce the
people: which was only for their trial, as Moses witnesses. Deuteronomy. 13.3
The Lord your God proves you, to know whether you love the Lord your God with
all your heart, and with all your soul. He proved also the Apostle Philip,
Ioh. 6.5.6.
when he said: Whence shall we buy bread that these may eat, (and this he
said to prove him: for he himself knew what he would do) and of all the
godly it is said: Wis. 3.5.6.
They are punished but in few things, yet in many things shall they be well
rewarded, for God proves them and finds them meet for himself, he tries
them as the gold in the furnace, and receives them as a perfect
fruit-offering. Tribulation therefore may be compared to the herb Cheledonie,
Greg.
with the juice whereof, Pliny.
as Pliny writes, the Swallows purge and clear their sight, from dust and
dung that makes them dim. So says Gregory: oculos quos culpa claudit, poena
aperit: The eyes which sin shuts, the punishment for the same opens. A
Simile.
It is like unto the root of the Vine or Olive tree, which though the radical
humor of the root thereof be bitter, yet through the influence of the Sun
and heat, it is so digested that it becomes sweet in the branches, and
yields most pleasant fruit: So the bitterness of tribulation, through the
benefit of GODS grace, causes the sweetness of consolation: In the multitude
of the sorrows af my heart, Psalm 94 16
thy comforts have refreshed my soul. Tribulation may be likened unto the
Tree called Rhamnus, whose root, leaves, Rhamnus.
and branches, though (as Physicians say) be exceeding bitter, yet are they
very medicinable, for the seed thereof purges the body of all gross humors,
and the juice clears the sight. So afflictions, Simile.
though they seem bitter to flesh and blood, yet they are very medicinable and
healthful to the soul, they purge out the noisome humor of sin, and clear
the eyes of our mind, which prosperity blinds, that we may truly know our
selves, and see our own corruption, and horrible filthiness, and become
henceforth more wary, and careful, how we offend, or displease, our loving
and good GOD, and fly unto him in all our miseries. Aug. sup. ps.
Flagellum tribulationis excitat torpentem, humiliat superbientem, purgat
poenitentem, and coronat innocentem. The scourge of tribulation stirs up the
drousie, humbles the proud, purges the penitent, and crowns the innocent.

Math. 26. Mar. 14.67 Ioh. 21.
So Christ proved the faith of Peter on the Sea, at his Passion, and after his
Resurrection, when he asked him three times whether he loved him above the
rest: And the Apostle witnesses, that through his persecutions and bands,
Phil. 1.14.
Many of the brethren were boldened, and did more frankely speak the word.
Hence proceeded these confident speeches of the Christians, to their tyrants
and persecutors: Cruciate, torquete, damnate, atterite, Tertul.
probatio innocentiae nostrae est iniquitas vestra. Torment us, rack us,
condemn us, break us in pieces; your iniquity, is the trial of our innocence.

As therefore the Chrysopass, Chrysopass. Simile.
or Ethiopian stone shines in the darkness, but waxes pale in the light:
for (as Isidorus says) in the night it shines like fire, but in the day time
looks pale like gold: So in the night of adversity, the virtues of Gods
children shine most clear, which when men are in prosperity are obscured and
covered. The godly then count it exceeding joy when they fall into diverse
temptations; knowing that afflictions are therefore sent of God for the trial
of their faith: and this is the first reason of the confirmation taken from the
profit of affliction.

Knowing that the trial of your faith brings forth patience. Here is now
the second profit that comes of affliction, The second profit of
Afflictions.
namely, patience, the beauty, foundation and crown of all other virtues. A
virtue (says Tertullian) which has such a pre-eminence in the rank of
virtues, Tertul.
that without it no man can fulfill any precept, The praise of patience.
or do any work acceptable unto God: as contrariwise, impatience is the
mother of all finnes, and every vice may be ascribed to impatiencie. God
himself is unto us a daily example of patience, From the example of God the
Father.
which makes his Sun to arise upon the just and unjust, and bestows
innumerable benefits upon unthankful men, and such as fight against him, and
makes as though he saw not the sin of men, Wis. 11.20.
because they should amend. And the same Son of God, Of Christ.
showed his wonderful patience at his Conception, Nativity, Death, and
Passion: he cured his enemies, he washed the traitors feet, and gave him a
kiss: Esaias. 53.7.
He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a sheep dumb before the
Shearer, so opened not he his mouth: When he was reviled, 1. Pet. 2.23
he reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed it
to him that judges righteously. The faith and patience of Abraham was proved
by many and hard peregrinations, Of the faithful.
by domestical broils, by the sacrificing of his only son. The patience of
Esaias was proved, being cut asunder with a saw. Of Jeremy, by imprisonements,
captivity, and stoning. Of Micheas by reproaches and buffeting. Of Elias by the
terrible threatenings of Kings, in the Desert, and of famine. Of Job, by his
plagues of body, and loss of all his temporal goods. And to conclude with
Saint Paul, Heb. 11.25
they chose rather to suffer adversity with the people of God, then to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season. Who now would not embrace this noble
virtue, who would not aspire to such a treasure?

But with what Simile should I delineate this noble virtue unto you? Simile.
Let us compare it with the purest metal: Patience is like unto pure gold,
and that in three respects.

Patience compared unto gold.
in regard of the soliditie of it; for nothing is more solid and compact then
gold, for being put into the fire, it neither cuaporateth or is diminished in
the weight, or consumed; but when through the violence of heat it is dissolved,
if it have any admixtion of impurity, it is cleansed and becomes more bright.
So the patient man has such soliditie of mind, that being put into the fire
of tribulation, does neither euaporate through anger and impatiency, neither is
diminished in the weight of virtue, through diffidence and distrust, or
consumed through pusillanimity, or faint-heartednesse, but is made the more
pure, and shines the more bright in virtue, 1. Pet. 1.6.
Though now for a season ye be in heaviness through manifold temptations,
that the trial of your faith, being much more precious then gold that
perishes (though it be tried with fire) might be found to your praise, and
honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ.



scolding against a contumacious tongue, after the example of Christ, Who when
he was reviled, 1. Pet. 2.23
reviled not again, when he suffered he threatened not, but committed it to
him that judges righteously. Such also was the patience of the blessed
Martyrs, which being scourged and buffeted of their persecutors, answered not
again, nor resisted through impatiency: if then we will retain this noble
virtue, we must in these properties resemble the pure gold.

Contrariwise the devil himself is the perswader and author to impatience;
for, not able to suffer that God had made all things subject unto man, through
envy deceived he our first parents, discontented with their estate, which
brought all misery to them and their posterity. Cain, Genesis 4.
not able patiently to bear the felicity of Abel, oppressed and slew him. The
Israelites always sinned through impatience. The want of patience was the
cause that they rose up against Moses and Aaron, yea against the Lord himself.
The Jews and Gentiles persecuted the Apostles and Martyrs, because they could
not patiently endure their preachings and reprehensions.

Here (brethren) we see that patience and suffering of adversity, None a
perfect Christian without patience.
is so necessary unto a Christian man, that without it he can indeed be no
perfect Christian: For against the fiery darts of the devil, through
innumerable snares, through infinite assaults, we must pass through and
endure to the end, before we come to our heavenly Country: unless therefore
we be armed with a strong and constant patience we shall often faint before
we come to the midst of our course; Heb. 10.36 Nulla anceps luctamen init
virtute sine ista. Virtas nam vidua est quam non patientia firmat. Prudentius
therefore says the Apostle: Ye have need of patience that when ye have done
the will of God, ye might receive the promise. No virtue may endure conflict,
if Patience be away,
For virtue like a Widow goes, where Patience does not stay,
As well says the Christian Poet Prudentius

This is the true patience, which is not overcome with any adversity, and is
exercised chiefly in suffering three things, which are: Oris opprobria,
corporis flagella, damna temporalia, the reproaches of men's mouths, Patience
exercised chiefly in three things.
the stripes of body, temporal losses, into which a certain Schoole-man
reduces all adversity, which the true patience must vanquish.

First, it is not overcome with opprobrious speeches, for commonly the wicked
are wont to load the godly with contumelies, injuries, reproaches, and
tauntings, scoffings, and raylings, and such like. Now they have retained the
true patience which can carry themselves uprightly in these things, not
rendering evil for evil; this the Apostle counsels, Romans 12.17 1 Thessalonians.
5.14.15.
or rather commands; Recompense to no man evil for evil: And again: Be
patient toward all men, see that none recompense evil for evil unto any man,
but ever follow that which is good, both toward your selves and toward all
men. And this is the weapon of Gods children, whereby they are conquerours as
Prudentius aptly says: Prudentius
-- Lex habet illud
Nostra genus belli, furias omnemque malorum
Militiam, and rabidas tolerando extinguere vires.
This noble kind of conquering, our Christian Law does tell,
The furies of all wicked rage, with patience to repel.


When contrariwise wrath is vanquished with his own weapons; as he says
again. -- Moriturque suis ira ignea telis,

The second note of true patience, consists in suffering scourges and crosses
which are inflicted upon the body, wherewith Gods children are nothing daunted
or weakened, but patiently endure whatsoever plague, or sickness, the Lord
shall lay upon them. Simile. 1. Reg. 6.
And even as at the building of the Temple, there was heard neither the sound
of the Axe, Hammer, or any tool of Iron: So when God by afflictions, crosses,
and corrections, builds his spiritual house in the hearts of his children,
they murmr not, repine not, nor are overcome with impatience, knowing that we
must through many afflictions enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Act. 14.22.


Job, who when he had lost all his substance, which was very great, he was
not touched with the least motion of impatiency, but said: Job. 1.21.
The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord:
So in all temporal losses the godly should say with Job and Ely the Priest: 1.
Sam. 3.18
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: and this is the second
reason why the godly should count it exceeding joy when they fall into diverse
temptations, because the trial of their faith brings forth patience. For
what our patience is, it is not known but by adversity; Simile.
For even as a man that is sick of a fever Quartane, or Tertian, if he have
some rest in the time between his fits, is not said therefore to be cured of
his fever: So no man may be said to be patient when he is never disturbed, or
assailed with adversity; but if in the midst of tribulation and misery, he be
not shaken from a constant and quiet mind, he is truly said to be patient:
as he that in the time of his fit, is not touched with his fever, is said to
be perfectly cured. Simile.
And as the Tree that moves not when the wind is still, is not said therefore
to be immovable: or as the wood that burns not, when there is no fire, is
not therefore incombustible: So a man that never tasted adversity, cannot be
said to be patient: Qualis quisque apud se luteat illata contumelia probat.
For (as Gregory says) whatsoever a man's disposition is, secret with himself,
reproaches make manifest. And thus we see, the trial of our faith brings
forth patience: tribulation therefore is so far off from harming us, if with
all humility we submit our selves unto God, that it is a cause of our
exaltation. Simile.
As the wood of the Egiptian Fig Tree, being cast into water, contrary to the
nature of other wood, sinketh down to the bottom; but being full of water
(when by nature it should be more heavy) it mounteth up to the top: so if in
the water of adversity we descend to the bottom of humility, we shall be
exalted (though the world thinks otherwise) unto the top of felicity.

VER. 4. And let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and
entire, lacking nothing.

Now that patience may have this work in us, it must not be momentany, and for
a while, but we must perseruer unto the end: that the whole building of our
patience may be perfected and consummated. Some in the beginning do show an
heroical fortitude of mind, but in midst of their course they faint and give
over, but our Captain Jesus Christ approves, and allows, and crowns them
that persist constant unto the end.

Eze. 18.24.
If the righteous turn away from his righteousness, and commit iniquity, and
do according to all the abominations that the wicked men does, shall he live?
all his righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned: and to them
only that endure to the end, Math. 10.
our Savior promises salvation. And the Spirit of God says? Apoc. 2.10
Be faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the Crown of life.

Judas began well, but his defection made him a Traitor: So did Simon Magus,
Nicholas, Cerinthus, Hymineus, Alexander, Philetus, etc. which at first
professed the Gospel of Christ, but at length, both to the shipwreck of their
own souls, and many others, they were back-sliders. In cassum bonum agitur,
si ante vitae terminum deseratur, Greg. mon.
says Gregory; It is in vain to do good, if we give over before the end of
our life: And why? Quia frustra velociter cunit, qui priusquam ad metas
venerit, defecit: because in vain he begins to run, which faints before
he come to the gole. And to this purpose, S. Ber. in Ser.
Bernard has this golden sentence: Bonam vitam ego duco, mala pati and bona
facere, and sic perseuerare vsque ad mortem: A Golden saying of S. Bernard.
I count that a good life, to do good, and suffer evil, and to persevere unto
death.

Perseverance may be likened unto the brave flourishing Laurel tree, Simile.
which remains always green, and is not spoiled of his vigor and beauty,
neither in the heat of Summer, nor in the cold of Winter: So the truly
perseuerant man is neither broken in the Winter and storms of adversity, nor
puffed up with the heat of prosperity, but keeps still the same mind, the
same constancy, the same tenor of of virtue. Simile.
And even as the skillful seafaring man is not daunted with every storm, nor
gives over for a contrary wind, but labors with perseverance against the
wind, until he comes to the haven: And as the hound follows the Hare
through brambles, thorns, hedges, until he catch her: So we must not give
over our purpose of well-doing for any adversity, difficulty, or temptation, but
with perseverance to overcome the troublesome storms and waves of this world,
until we come to the safe haven and port of everlasting life: 1. Cor. 9.
So run that ye may obtain. Simile.
The wicked contrariwise may be likened to a rotten wormeeaten apple, which
falls from the Tree before it be ripe, when the sound grow fast until they
come to maturity: So they that are putrified and worme-eaten, through custom
of sin, fall away from a good purpose, through want of perseverance, with a
little wind of temptation; He is as the chafe which the wind scatters
away from the face of the earth. Psalm. 1.5.
Who ever continued in weldoing and found not the mercy of the Lord? Mar. 16.
Ioh. 20.
Mary Magdalen perseuered at the Sepulcher, and the Lord first apeared unto
her. The woman of Canaan perseuered in prayer unto the Lord, Math. 15.
and ceased not at so many repulses, and therefore heard these words: O woman
great is thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou will. The importunate friend
in the Gospel, who knocked at his friends door, craving to borrow three
loaves, Luke 11.
obtained that by perseverance, which for friendship he could not. To conclude,
the people continued with the Lord three days in the Desert, and our Savior
rewarded this their perseverance with a notable miracle, whereby both their
bodies were fed, and (which is more) their faith also confirmed. O (brethren)
that we would persevere thus in prayer and in our good purposes, in hearing the
word, in meditation of heavenly things, etc. O that they which spend whole
days and nights in play, cards, dice, and filthy pleasures, would spend but
one day with the Lord in prayer, godly meditation! etc. How far greater would
their gain be, then what they get by vain pleasures? But what say I one day?
I would to God they would bestow but one hour in a day in this duty, great
surely then would be the profit they should get thereby, etc. And thus
through perseverance, patience has her perfect work in us: it follows, that
ye may be perfect and entire lacking nothing,

Here the word (perfect) signifies stable, constant, persisting to the end in
the profession of the Gospel. For God uses patience as an instrument and
mean to make us perfect. Now in that some in Scripture are called just and
perfect men, Math. 2. Luke 2. Math. 5. Math. 19. Perfection two ways taken.
as Joseph and Zacharias; be ye perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect.
We must understand that perfection is two ways taken, either absolutely, or
(...), that is in respect of some other thing. day, and therefore the very
Apostles prayed the Lord to increase their faith: Luke 17.
And the Apostle speaks of himself, and of all the Saints of God in this
life: Romans 7.18.
For I know that in me, that is in my flesh, dwells no good thing: for to
will is present, but I find no means to perform that which is good: That we
might understand that in the most perfect dwells the body of sin, as he
says again: O wretched man that I am, Romans 7.24.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death?

certae cuiusdem rei respectu tantum, only in respect of some certain thing:
so was Joseph, Job, Zacharias, called just or perfect men; not because they
were absolutely perfect, but because they had attained to the perfection of
sundry virtues, as far forth as of men this life might be attained. Thus the
godly are called perfect, either in comparison of the wicked, in respect of
whom Gods children are holy, and in comparison of them, perfect. Or because the
measure of their gifts and graces, and the virtues to which they aspire by the
imputation of Christ's perfection, are reputed perfect, and made acceptable unto
God. We are now therefore in the way where we are tending toward perfection,
and shall at last obtain the same in our Country, and as all our
righteousness is of faith; so, as our faith does increase in us, so does also
our righteousness and perfection. What this perfection is in this life, the
Apostle notably explaneth: Phil. 3.12.13.
Not as though I had already attained to it, either were already perfect: but
one thing I do; I forget that which is behind, and endenour my self to that
which is before. This the Apostle teaches by an elegant Simile taken from
runners in a race. But what do these valiant runners in a race? In dies
vlterius.
They forget that which is behind: That is, first, they never look back, nor
regard how many paces they have run, but what yet remains farther for them
to run, that with an unwearied course they may hasten to finish it, going
still farther, never declining from the mark and goal, until they have
attained the same. Secondly, they endeavor to that which is before, they have
their eyes and mind, intent and fixed upon the mark to which they run, and
will by no means divert either mind, or eyes from the same: Herein consists
our Christian perfection in this life, and therefore he adds: Let us
therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded.

The use (beloved) we should make hereof is: The Use.
that seeing by patitience under the cross, and afflictions of this life we
increase in godliness, and grow toward perfection, and this our aspiring
toward perfection, and growth in godliness, is by the imputation of Christ's
perfection, accepted and accounted for perfection before God; O then, let this
move us to hold fast this exhortation of the Apostle: Brethren, count it
exceediug joy when ye fall into diverse temptations: Knowing that the trying of
your faith brings forth patience: And let patience have her perfect work,
that ye may be perfect and entire lacking nothing.

The third Sermon.
5 If any lack wisdom, let him ask of God, which gives to all men
liberally, and reproacheth no man, and it shall be given him.

6 But let him ask in faith, and waver not: for he that wauereth, is like a
wave of the sea, tossed of the wind and carried away.

7 Neither let that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord.

8 A wavering minded man is unstable in all his ways.


THERE are some which would have this to be the Apostles second exhortation of
craving the true and Christian wisdom at the hands of God, by faithful and
fervent prayer. Others restrain the name of wisdom, to the doctrine of
bearing patiently the cross: where the Apostle uses a predcupation, or
preventing of an objection, answers them that might object against the former
doctrine, that they want the gift of constancy and fortitude, joyfully to
undergo the manifold temptations of this wretched life: as if he had said:
Indeed herein consists a principal point of the true Christian wisdom,
without which it seems a hard thing to flesh and blood, patiently to suffer
crosses and afflictions: But if any want the gift of this wisdom, let him
ask it of God, the giver of all goodness, who is exceeding bountiful and
liberal, and it shall be given him. Here I note

1 What this wisdom is.

2 Of whom, and how it is to be sought.

3 The motives that should confirm our hope of obtaining the same.

Augustine thus defines it generally: Definitio sap. secund. Aug. lib. 1. con.
Acad.
Sapientia mihi videtur esse rerum humanarum, diuinarumque quae ad beatam vitam
pertineant non scientia solum sed etiam diligens inquisitio: Wisdom seems
to me to be, not only the knowledge, but also the diligent inquisition of
both divine and humane things. Lact. l. 3. c. vlt. Qui vult sapiens esse and
beatus audiat Dei volantate^, discat iustitiam, sacramentum, suae natiuitatis
norit, bumana co^temnat, etc. Psalm. 19.7. Job. 28.28.
And before him very aptly Lanctantius: who so will be wise and blessed, let
him hear the voice of God, learn his righteousness, know the Mystery of his
Nativity, contemn earthly things, love heavenly things, that he may attain
to the sovereign good to which he was created, etc. This true wisdom is
grounded upon the word of God; hereof speaks the Princely Prophet: The
testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom to the Simple: And holy Job:
Behold the fear of the Lord is wisdom, and to depart from evil is
understanding. Job. 28.15.16.
This wisdom shall not be valued with the wedge of Gold of Ophir, nor with
the precious Onix, nor with the Sapphire, the gold nor the Crystal shall be
equal unto it. This wisdom as it is most necessary unto all men, so
especially for those which are under afflictions and persecutions, Romans 5.3.
for it causes them to rejoice in tribulation: This wisdom causes to feel
inwardly the comfort of the Spirit; this teaches us to know the causes for
which we are afflicted of God: First, for the punishment of our sins:
Secondly, for the trial of our faith: Thirdly, for the advancement of Gods
glory: Fourthly, that we being touched, might repent, least we be condemned
with the world. This causes to feel the comfortable presence of Gods Spirit,
in the midst of our miseries, whereby the burden of the cross is made light
and easy.

wallow in pleasures and delights of the world, to scrape together riches, to
cogge, lie, deceive, and undermine their neighbors, etc. which indeed they
shall find, too late, to be mere folly and madness, to labor to win the
fleeting world, and loose their own souls. Not of the Philosophers, which
observing but the second causes only, and following nature their guide, do
miserably ensnare, rather then comfort, the wretched minds of men. Not out of
Adonis garden of the wanton Poets, which are wont rather to corrupt and
effeminate the minds of their Readers, and amaze them in the labyrinth of
folly, then yield any solid comfort. But of God only is this wisdom to be
sought, therefore says this Apostle: If any lack wisdom, let him ask it of
God: To this subscribeth the mirror of wisdom: The Lord gives wisdom,
Prou. 2.6.
and out of his mouth comes understanding. And Daniel, Dan. 2.20.
the name of God be praised for ever and ever, for wisdom and strength are
his. And Augustine in his Meditations, speaks thus to God: Abs te sapere est
desipere, te vero noscere, est perfect scire: Aug. med. cap. 5.
To be wise without Thee is to be a fool, and to know thee is perfect
wisdom.

But let him ask in faith and waver not. We must ask in a firm and constant
faith, if we would have our prayers acceptable unto God, and profitable unto
our selves: If we would obtain at the hands of God what we crave, we must
ask without any distrust of Gods power, liberality, and goodness: There is
nothing that so much withholdeth Gods bountifulness, in granting our
petitions, as doubtfulnesse, when our minds are distracted into diverse
opinions, and not fully persuaded of Gods power, and readiness, to hear our
prayers, or grant the things which we desite. What is this else, but to teach
God how to deny us? as one says. It is truly said in the Tragedy: He that
asks fearfully or doubtfully, Seen. in Hip.
teaches him of whom he asks to deny him. The Greek (...), signifies both
him that doubreth and judges of Gods power and mercy. The Greek Scholia
expounds it of him, which being pressed down with the weight of his sins,
thinks them to be greater then God is able, or willing, to forgive.

Here we are taught that without faith there is no access unto God, unless
faith as a most clear light, does disperse the darkness of our minds, show
us the way, and as it were lead us by the hand unto the Throne of God: Romans
10.14
For how (says the Apostle) shall they call upon him in whom they have not
believed. Without faith it is not possible to please God: Heb. 11.6.
For he that comes to God, must first believe that God is, and that he is a
rewarder of them that seek him. This our Savior commending to the Centurion
says: Math. 8.13
As thou have heleeued, so be it unto thee. And to the two blind men (that he
might teach them the efficacy of faith) he says: Believe you that I am able
to do this? Math. 9.28 29.
according to your faith be it unto you. And to the Ruler of the Synagogue:
Be not afraid, Mar. 5.36.
only believe: And at the raising of Lazarus, unto Martha: John 11.
Beleeuest thou this? By faith, only then, our prayers are strengthened and
made effectual, whereby approaching unto God, we are heard. And this that the
Apostle might persuade us, wills us to ask this wisdom of God, by faith,
without wavering: For God is near unto such as call upon him (says the
Prophet) but yet only to such as call upon him faithfully.



The first (says the Apostle) is Gods liberality: He gives to all men
liberally. Gods liberallity is altogether infinite, in imparting his goodness
and graces most copiously unto his creatures: for so the Aduerbe (...)
affluenter, largiter, as (...), that the Apostle might express not only the
readinesie, but also the effuse liberality of the Giver. God is prompt, ready,
and free in his gifts; not like unto most men, which give grudginly, nigardly,
and semiclusa manu; as the proverb is, as it were pinching away part of their
benefits. He gives superaboundantly above what we deserve: Romans 10. Ephe.
3.20
For he is rich unto all that call upon him: He is able to do
superaboundantly, above all that we ask, or think, says the Apostle, as his
nature is infinite, so is his bounty. Abraham craved but a son of the Lord, as
an heir of his goods, and God promised to multiply his seed as the Stars of
heaven, Genesis 22.17
and as the sand that is by the Seashore: And, which is the greatest of all,
the Messiah and Savior of the world was borne of the same seed. Jacob desired
but bread to eat, and clothes to put on, and a safe return into his Country,
Genesis 28.29
And he had the Angels to his keepers, and companions of his peregrination, an
happy marriage, a plentiful offspring, ample riches, great Flocks, Divine
Visions, and sweet Promises. 1. Sam. 9.
Saul seeking his fathers Asses, received the Kingdom and government of all
Israel. Solomon desired of the Lord but only wisdom; 1. Reg. 3.13
and he received with the same incredible riches, a peaceable Kingdom, and
great glory, riches, and honor: so that among the Kings there was none like
unto him. Neither do there want examples in the new Testament: John 4.
The woman of Samaria sought but for water to quench her bodily thirst, and
she found the water of Life, the Savior of the world. The thief on the
Cross, craved of the Lord only to be mindful of him: and heard these wotds
of our Savior: This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. Luke 23.
Grace (says Saint Ambrose) is so much more abundant then our prayers: Amb.
Com. in Luc.
that the Lord does always give more then we crave. Seeing then so great is
the liberality of our God in giving; Let wretched man be ashamed (says
Augustine) of his slacknesse and slothfulness in asking.

Emphasis. If God gives liberally unto all men, will he not give wisdom
unto us, if we ask in faith? Shall we susspect his liberality unto us, who
is so bountiful unto all flesh? So liberal is our good God, Romans 8.32.
That he spared not his own Son, but gave him for us all unto death, and
shall he not with him give us all things also? He gives food unto all
creatures, And feeds the young Ravens which call upon him, And shall he
neglect to hear the prayers of man, whom he has above all other creatures
created to eternal glory? Great surely is the weight of this general speech
(unto all men) he denies himself to none, he is the inexhaust fountain of
all goodness, ever open unto all thirsty souls, without exception, he
calls all unto him: John 7.37. Mat. 11.28
If any man thirst let him come unto me and drink: Come unto me all that are
weary and laden, and I will ease you. To all he gives the law of nature,
reason, the admirable glass of his creatures. Math. 6.
He makes his Sun to arise upon the good and evil, and causes his rain
to fall upon the just and unjust: No man then, but through his own default, is
deprived of these blessings; which serves notably to confirm our hope of
obtaining all good things at the hands of God, who is so liberal to all men.

He reprocheth or casts no man in the teeth: So great is his love and
kindness, that he never vpbraideth us with his former benefits, that thereby
he should shame or repel those that pray unto him. We see men (yea of the
most liberal sort) will oftentimes reproach such as crave of them, with their
former gifts, that thereby they might shift and shake off importunate suitors.
Eccl. 18.17
A fool (says the Wiseman) will reproach churlishly, and a gift of the
envious puts out the eyes: An odious kind of men which reproach a friend
with a benefit received, which the receiver, and not the giver, ought to
remember and commend: Wherefore men are loath to make request to such for any
thing, neither have they any hope to obtain of men of this disposition;
Obiurgatio est in aduersis crudelis. Seen. in Proverb.
but the thank and grace of a benefit is lost by such bragging, even among
men, as the Poet aptly says.

Creed mihi, quamuis ingentia (Posthume) dones,
Authoris pereunt garrulitate sui.
Although thy gifts on me are great (friend Posthume) and thy cost,
Yet through thy bragges they perish all (believe me) and are lost.
think to receive any thing of the Lord, and therefore Verse. 6. He compares a
doubtful wavering mind unto a wave of the sea tossed of the wind; such
indeed is the mind that doubts in his prayers, whether God be able to
deliver him, or willing to stand to his promises, which as a wave tossed with
the wind, inclines sometime to this side, sometime to that; now he
presumes, anon he despaireth and faints. Therefore when thou come to
commence thy suits unto the Lord, trust confidently in his mercy; say with the
Prophet: I will trust in thy mercy, Psalm. 13.15
and then assure thy self, as Saint Bernard very truly says: Ber. Ser. 5. de
quadrag.
Vnum e duobus indubitanter sperare possumut: aut dabit quod poscimus, aut quod
nouerit nobis esse vtilius: One of these two we may undoubtedly hope for, that
either he will grant that we desire, or that which shall be more profitable
for us:

VER. 8. A wavering minded man is unstable in all his ways, etc.

THIS general rule the Apostle adds to the former conclusision, as it were
assigning a reason thereof: to wit, he whose mind is two ways divided, on
this side beholding God, on the other side the world: now believing God to be
omnipotent, and the sovereign good; now again doubting of them both: This man
is not only inconstant, and wavering, in his prayers, but also in all other
things that he thinks or does, having one thing in his tongue, another thing
in his heart, changing his affections with the time, now here, now there, as
the wind: What marvel then, if such a man obtain nothing at GODS hands? Does
not this so filthy inconstancy deserve a just repulse? He is called (...),
which with diverse cogitations about the same thing is distracted, and has
nothing certain what to follow, as indeed have all such as are doubtful, as
though they had duos animos, Beda.
two minds. Beda reputeth him a double minded man, which in praying to the
LORD boweth his knee, but distrusteth that he shall obtain; And would Hic cum
saeculo gaudere and illic cum Deo regnare, and follow the delights of the world
here, and yet there reign with GOD. Again, he is double-minded, which in
the good works which he does seeks not to please the Lord, but hunteth
after the favor and applause of men. Haec secu^d. Bed.


Here it appears, that to bear a double and inconstant mind, causes that
our prayers are not heard. Of this kind, first are all hipocrites, whom the
Son of God very elegantly, and fitly, compares to painted Sepulchers, Math.
23.
outwardly curiously wrought, but being within full of dead men's bones: They
honor God with their lips (says the Prophet Esaias) but their heart is far
from him. Simile. Clemens Alex. lib. strom.
Clemens Alexandrinus says, They are like to the Temples of the Egyptians,
which outwardly appear fair to the eye, but within are full of poisonous
Serpents, and other venomous and unclean beasts. Simile. S. Chrisostomus.
Saint Chrysostom likeneth them unto harlots, which though by nature they are
most stinking, corrupt, loathsome, and filthy, Simile. S. Bernard in sermon de
Benedict.
yet they affect and forge beauty, with painting and garish attire.

Saint Bernard says they are like Simon of Cyren, who carried the cross of
Christ, but not willingly: So hipocrites and counterfeites, will outwardly
sometime do the works of a Christian, but not willingly; for in heart they
love not that, which outwardly they make show of: the hipocrite is like unto
copper, which emulareth the gold in color, when it is far off in value and
worth.

He is like the stone called Chrysolenium, Simile.
which resembles the Chrisolite, Isidor.
when yet it is not the same in price nor profit, which (as Isidore says) is
of a golden color, and in the morning appears most fair and bright, but
afterward looks dark and dim, and has such affinity with fire, that being
holden near the same, it is straight inflamed: So the double-minded man is all
golden in show, when he pretends sanctity, and in the morning is most fair,
when he begins with feruency, but is afterward obscured with many vices, and
is easily inflamed with the fire of temptations.

Vult and non vult piger: Salonius super Proverb. c. 13.
The sluggard would reign with God, but will not work the work of the Lord,
they would attain to blessedness, yet will reject the precepts of Christ: and
be not there an infinite number of these?

duplices animo, double-minded, Athanasius orat. quod Nicoena Synodus. Hisunt
tamvarij and versi-pelli animo qua^ Cameliontes in mutandis coloribus.
which are not stayed, not steadfast, in any opinion, as Heretics,
Schismatics, and Nullifidians, which lean sometime to this opinion, sometime
to that, that they may please the humors of men, of whom they expect some
advantage. These are (says one) so variable, and such turne-coates in their
opinions, as the Camelion is in changing his colors: And to use Irenaeus
words, Cum sint duo vel tres, Ireneus.
de eisdem non eadem dicunt: when as there are but two or three, they dissent
in opinions, and speak not the same of the same things. They are like unto the
reed which grows on the sands, which are in danger of three things, of the
wind, the rain, Math. 7.
and the flood, as it is in the Gospel: So this hypocrite, because like this
reed he fixes the root of his opinion on the sands, is either broken with
the wind of temptations, or corrupted with impatience in the rain of
adversity, or rooted out with the flood of persecution: And therefore among
many other praises of John Baptist, he is commended by the mouth of the Son
of God; Math. 11.
That he was not like unto a reed shaken with the wind: That we from hence
be no more children, Ephe. 4 14
wavering and carried about with every wind of doctrine.

Fourthly, S. Ber. Epist. 99.
Saint Bernard calls them duplices animo, double-minded, which once
professing a religious zeal in the service of God, in hearing the word
Preached, and all Christian exercises, do shamefully renounce the same, that
they may follow the pleasures and liberty of the world. They are like unto Lots
wife, Genesis 19.
who being delivered out of Sodom, looked back as loath to forgo the pleasures
thereof, and was turned into a pillar of Salt: They are like unto the Jews,
who loathing the heavenly Manna, Number. 12.
longed for the fleshpots of Egypt, their pepons and onions.

Vua manu pauem, altera lapidem aut gladium ostentant: hold in one hand bread,
and in the other a stone, or a sword. They bless with their mouths, but curse
with their hearts. They resemble Cain, Genesis 4.
who under color of walking in the fields, slew his brother Abel. They are
like Ioab, who traitorously with a fained kiss slew Abner: 2. Sam. 3.
They are the children of the Traitor Judas, who also with a kiss betrayed his
Master, the most innocent Lamb, the Son of God. Such the Wiseman
pronounces accursed: Eccles. 2.13
Woe be unto him that has a double heart: And the Spirit of God: Psalm. 12.1.
Ovid. Impia sub dulci melle venena latent.
They speak deceitfully every one with his neighbor, flattering with their
lips, and speak with a double heart.

The fourth Sermon.
JAMES 1.9.10.11.12. 9 Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is
exalted.

10 Again he that is rich, in that he is made low: for as the flower of the
grass, shall he vanish away.

11 For as when the Sun rises with heat, then the grass withers, and his
flower falls away, and the beauty of the fashion of it perishes: even so
shall the rich man fade away in all his ways.

12 Blessed is the man, that endures tentation: for when he is tried, he shall
receive the Crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him.


THE Apostle returns again to his former proposed doctrine of patience, The
Analysis.
and comfort in afflictions, and shows the profit that comes to poor and
rich thereby, for which they ought to rejoice; for which he also gives a
reason.

Secondly, he concludes this doctrine, with the reward of patitience: Verse
12.
Blessed is the man that endures temptations etc.

There are two sorts of men, poor and rich, to both which the doctrine of
patience under the Cross is necessary: For the Greek word (...) is he which
is abject, afflicted with poverty, sickness, exile, hatred of the world, and
other calamities, to which is opposed (...) the rich, to whom all things
pertaining to this mortal life do succeed after their desires. The Apostle
wills the poor brethren to rejoice in affliction, because they are hereby
exalted, either to the true profession of the Gospel of Christ, or because
they are thereby made like unto Christ himself, and his holy Saints, who have
all in this world drunk of the cup of afflictions, and have thereby a sure
testimony, to their conscience, that they are the adopted sons of God, and
therefore heirs of the heavenly glory, as Christ himself testifies: Luke
24.25 26.
O ye fools and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken:
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?
The rich again should rejoice in affliction, as very profitable unto them,
because being taught thereby how vain the pomp and riches of this world is,
they are restrained within the bounds of their duty: So that the poor thereby
are made content with their abject condition, and the pride of the rich thereby
abated. The Elect of God ought not to change their minds with the blasts of
Fortune, as the common sort of men do. But a brother, that is, an humble
Christian, pressed down with diverse miseries, should rather rejoice in this,
for that being contemned of the world, he is beloved of God, who will exalt
him to the fellowship and glory of his Saints above. Again, let the rich when
he is made low, rejoice, because whereas he was, for the deceitful goods of
this life, honored in the world, now for the profession of Christ he is
contemned and despised. (...) Exaltatio is the glorificatio^ of the Saints
which Christ gives unto his faithful servants: I go (says he) to prepare a
place for you, Ioh. 14.
and I will receive you unto my self.

First, here let us note the love and mildness of the Apostle, who calls
all Christians, though never so poor, abject, and base in the world, Brethren:
for all which have partaked of the same Baptism, having the same God their
Father and Creator, the same Son, their Savior and Redeemer, the same holy
Ghost, their Sanctifier; Members of the same Church, professors of one and the
same Religion: What are they else but brethren, yea more nearly linked
together then in any carnal affinity? Christ himself calls us Brethren, and
wills us to repute one another brethren. Math. 5 22
Whosoever is angry with his brother, etc. The etrnall Son of God himself,
calls us his brethren; Math. 6. Math. 23. John 20. Math. 10.
Go tell my brethren, says he. Again, He that does the will of my Father
which is in heaven, he is my brother, sister, and mother, But is it not to be
lamented that this excellent virtue of charity among Christians, is not only
cold, but almost altogether quenched? How many brawles, strifes, hatreds,
treasons of one toward another, and murders, have crept now into the place
thereof? This proverb, Homo homini Deus, one man is as it were a God toward
another, this wretched age has turned into, homo homini damon, Lupus, one man
is a devil, or a wolf toward another: So that this complaint of the Poet is
verified among us: Ouidius.
Illud amicitiae sanctum and venerabile nomeu,
Nunc tibi pro vili, sub pedibusque iacet.
The reu'rend name of friendship pure, which once was sacred sweet,
As thing most vile, of thee, is quite trodden under feet.


The friendship and love of the world aims only at profit, Seneca. Mel
muscae, cadauera lupi, frumenta formicae; praedam, non hominem, sequitur turba
ista.
and makes it the ground thereof, as Seneca once truly said: As the waspes
and flies follow the honey, Wolves the dead carcass, Emets the corn: so these
kind of friends, follow their prey, and not the man.

The word (exalted) I find among the Fathers to be two ways expounded. The
word (exalted) 2 ways taken.
First, it signifies the Crown of heavenly glory, wherewith Christ will
crown all in his Kingdom which here suffer patiently the cross and
afflictions for his names sake, with the most certain expectation whereof the
servants of God do erect their minds and comfort themselves in all adversity,
yea, and in death it self: For the afflictions of this life are but temporary
and very short, but the crown of glory in their exaltation is eternal: He
that loves his life shall lose it, John 12. Luke 18.
and he that hates his life in this world shall keep it unto eternal life.
And again, this word (exalted) may be taken for the inward and spiritual joy
of the mind, wherewith Gods children are cheared and comforted, when they are
hated and afflicted of the wicked, as the Apostles, Acts 5.41.
Which went rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for
Christ's name: Blessed are ye when men revile you, Math. 5.11 12.
and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you for my names sake
falsely. Rejoice and be glad for great is your reward in heaaen. And we must
not think (as the reverend Beda notes upon this place) that this pertains
only to the Apostles and holy Martyrs, but unto us all, as the example of
blessed Job, whom God first humbled with many afflictions before he exalted
him unto glory, tells us: so Abel, Noe, Abraham. David, and the rest of the
Patriarchs and Prophets, and all the rest of the Fathers could find no other
way to heaven, but through exile, persecutions, and diverse troubles, let every
man in his afflictions apply this unto himself, and he shall find great
comfort unto his soul.

The rich in that he is made low. THE other part of his exhortation pertains
to the rich men, To the rich.
for he takes here (...) diuitem, for a man any way fortunate in this world,
Psalm. 144.
Whose sons are as the young plants, and their daughters, as the polished
corners of the Temple, whose Garners are full and plentious with all manner of
store: He is here commanded to rejoice (...) in his humiliation, and
abiection. As then the cross and afflictions are profitable to the poor, who
are thereby exalted, so is this doctrine also very profitable to the rich, for
he is taught thereby, not to be proud, Ne nimium fortunae blandienti credat,
that he trust not too much flattering Fortune, seeing that his riches are
unstable: the fire may consume them, the rust may fret them, the mothes may
eat them, the thief may steal them, or at least when he dies, will he, or
nill he, he must forsake them. When God then takes from the rich these
deceitful baits of the world, when he turns their wealth into want, their
mirth into misery, their plenty into penury, their happiness into heaviness,
they are exhorted here by the Apostle to rejoice, seeing the occasion of many
sins, Arist. lib. 3. Polit. Plato lib. de legibus. Hieron. Greg. Propert.
Auro pulsa fides, Auro venalia iura. Aurum lex sequitur, mox sine lege pudor.
which commonly riches ministers, are taken away. Is not the world full of
examples that riches are the cause of tyranny, insolency, arrogance, and
intolerable pride. Aristotle says, Pecunia seditionem essicit and
malignitatem. And Plato: Diuites ac bonos esse impossible, as if it were
impossible for riches and goodness to dwell together. And Saint Hierom says:
Prouerbium hoc verum est, omnis dives iniquus aut iniquihaeres. And Gregory:
vbi aurum, ibi and vitium: Where there is store of gold, there is store of
vice, much gold and little goodness. And does not the Scripture witness the
same? 1. Tim. 6.10.11.
They that will be rich, fall into tentation and snares, and into many foolish
and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction, for the
desire of money is the root of all evil, etc, And our Savior himself: That
a rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of heaven: Math. 19 Math. 13.
And he compares riches unto Thorns, which choke up the good Seed. And the
Apostles exhortation pertains not only unto them which gape by all means
soever to hoard up riches, but also unto all such as are puffed up with honor,
nobility, wisdom, or any other external things. When the rich man then is
humbled, by loss of goods, spoil of wealth, decrease of riches, he is
exhorted to rejoice, in as much as the occasion of much evil, yea perchance of
the destruction of his soul, is taken away. This then is the Apostles
doctrine, that seeeing in every estate of this life, in poverty and riches, in
high and low estate, many occasions of impatience are ministered, the only
remedy then is, in all the alterations of Fortune, in all the changes of this
world, to bear our selves patient under the cross. Afflictions profitable to
poor and rich.
And thus ye see how afflictions are profitable both to poor and rich. Out of
which I observe two most excellent Doctrines.

Dives cum moritur non sumet secum omnia, neque descendet cum eo gloria eius:
The rich when he dies shall not carry his goods with him, neither shall his
pomp follow him. Two dreadful examples we have hereof in holy Scripture: One
of him, who, when he had heaped up much riches, heatd this voice: Luke 12.
O fool, Luke 16.
this night will they fetch away thy soul from thee. The other, being in the
midst of hellish flames, one drop of warer was denied him. To these may be
added the churlish Naball, 1. Sam. 25.
who after his royal and princely feastings, refused to give a little bread
unto David, and was stricken with sudden death, and David enjoyed both his wife
and riches. So Pharaoh, Antiochus, and Herod, after a few days pleasure in
this life, left all their riches, and in a moment descended into hell. How
needful then is it to hearken unto this counsel of the Apostle? 1. Tim. 6.17.
Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high-minded,
Propert. Non vllas portabis opes Acherontis ad vndas.
and that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living God, which
gives us abundantly all things to enjoy.

riches and honors, whereas the spirit of God pronounces such happy and
blessed; Blessed are ye, 1. Pet. 3.
if ye suffer for righteousness sake: Consider the examples of the Saints of
God, as of Moses, who preferred the rebuke of Christ before all the treasure of
Egypt: Heb. 11.
And of Paul, who counted all things as dung that he might win Christ. Phil.
3.
And in deed to loose riches, what is it else but to be rid of most sharp
thorns, and to be eased of a heavy burden which stops the entering of
eternal life?

James wills the brother of low degree to rejoice, etc. and the rich when he
is made low and humbled, he is contrary to other places of Scripture, as
Ierem. 9. Phil. 4. where we are commanded to rejoice only in the Lord.

when we are brought low, what is it else but to rejoice in the Lord?

Next the Apostle adds a reason of this his exhortation, The reason.
For as the flower of the grass he passes away. This reason he takes from
the nature of riches and worldly prosperity which is inconstant, momentany, and
vain; for the success of worldly prosperity he compares unto flowers, then
which nothing may be imagined more glorious to behold, but the glory thereof
is most brittle and fading, for with the heat of the Sun they vanish and
wither; so that the flower which flourishes at Sunne-rising, and pleases the
eyes with the grateful color, and delights the smell with the sweet favor
thereof, ere Sunne-set fade and perish. Like unto this is the felicity of rich
men: now stately in their purple, shining in their gold, glittering in pearl,
guarded with a great train, honored as a God among men, but shortly after,
when fortune changes her countenance, despoyled of all their goods, wandering
in exile, pining in prison, and if none of these happen unto them, yet death,
with stealing steps, will arrest them, and deprive them of all their pomp.
Histories are full of these examples. Policrates Prince of Samos.
Policrates the mighty Prince of the Samians, who had fortune a long time so
obsequious, that his hope was always the apprehension of the thing desired:
Vota enim nuncupabantur, simul and soluebantur, cuius velle and posse in aequo
positum videbatur, says a Writer, whose wishes and vows were together made
and performed, whose will and atchiuements seemed to be both alike: who when
he would make proof of his fortune, cast a Jewel of great value into the
sea, which in short time he received again, being found of his Cook in the
belly of a fish which his Cater had unwittingly bought in the market; yet he
miserably dyed: for being taken in the war by King Darius, he was hanged on
the top of a Mountain, and left to be devoured of the fowls of the air.
Cyrus.
Cyrus King of Persia, who divided the river Ganges, wherein one of his
Soldiers was drowned, into 400 and 60 Channels, was at last taken by Thomiris
Queen of the Masegetes, and his head cast into a barrel of man's blood. The
mighty Xerxes, who ouerturned Mountains, and covered the sea with his Ships,
this flower quickly faded, for he became contemptible to his own servants,
and at last was slain by Artabanus, one of his own Captains. What should I
speak of King Darius, Darius.
who being vanquished of Alexander, was bound in chains and fetters of gold,
and drawn in a Chariot about the City Thara, where having received many
wounds miserably dyed? What of Alexander the Great, which after so many
victories, so many triumphs, and almost all the whole world subjected unto
him, was at last by Cassander the son of Antipater poisoned? And almost
infinite more recorded in histories, Lucan. Fertque resertque vices and habent
mortalia casum. Amb. lib. 1. hexa.
whose miserable fall proved true this of the Apostle; The glory of this world
vanishes as the flower of the grass. Hodie (says Ambrose) videas
adolescentem validum, pubescentis aetatis virtute florentem: Thou may see to
day a young man, strong, flourishing, in the vigor of his youth, with a lively
hue and fresh color, the next day he meets thee with his face and color
changed. Plerosque enim, aut labor frangit, aut inopia macerat, aut cruditas
vexat, aut vina corrumpunt, aut senectus debilitat, aut luxuria decolorat, aut
morbi fatigant: For most men (says he) either labor does break, or penury
makes lean, or cruditie vexes, or wine corrupts, or old age enfeebleth, or
riot discoloureth, or sickness wears out; such is the miserable condition
of our mortal life. Pharaoh was in the morning flourishing, Exodus 14.
but ere the evening made meat for fishes. Dan. 5.
Balthazar King of Babylon in the midst of his wines, and banquettings, was
stricken with sudden horror, and the next night slain of his enemies. Dan. 4.
Nabuchadonozor now glorious in his Palace, but presently after cast out among
brute beasts. Hest. 7.
Haman had in hope even devoured the Israelites, but shortly after was hanged
on a tree. Acts 12.
Herod was honored as a God, but in a moment consumed of worms: and many more
such examples in holy Scripture. One example more I cannot omit, Niceph. lib.
18. cap. 22.
recorded by Nicephorus. Theodorus the Physician, a man wise and prudent, who
being sent of Mauritius the Emperor unto Chaganus a most mighty Captain about
a composition of peace, and finding him very obstinate, uttered this history
unto him. Sesostris King of Egypt, through his many conquests, being drunken
with the wine of pride and ambition, caused a Chariot to be made, adorned with
gold and precious stones, which he caused to be drawn by four of his
conquered Kings: And beholding one of them never auerting his eyes from the
motion of the wheel, demanded of him his conceit in so doing, who answered,
that in the wheel he considered the wonderful change, and uncertainty of
worldly things, the inconstancy of humane prosperity, which is now aloft, and
presently down again, up and down, like a wheel in his motion. The tyrant
hereby calling to mind the frailty of humane glory, restored these Kings to
their former liberty. Chaganus smiling at this History, confirmed to Theodorus
the propounded conditions of peace.

If then the goods of fortune be so instable, if nothing under the Sun is
durable, if all things in this world are subject to corruption: O then how are
our minds bewitched, how is our understanding blinded? that forsaking God the
unchangeable and eternal good, we will follow the fading shows of this
deceitful world?

Consider again how vain, futile, and less then nothing, the things are
before the eyes of God, which this world so greatly admireth, and desires,
seeing the Spirit of God, the most wise ponderer of things, compares them to
the flower and the grass. The Prophet Esaias incultateth, and beats this
lesson into our ears, comparing not only man's life, but also the riches and
glory of this world, unto the grass and flower. I heard a voice saying unto
me, Esaias 40.6.
Cry, and I said what shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and the grace thereof
is as the flower of the field. The Princely Prophet also falling into the
consideration of the frail and wretched condition of man, uses the same
comparison, Ps 103.15.
saying: The days of man are but as grass: as a flower of the field so
flourishes he. Solomon also painting out the uncertainty of the riches of
the world, says; Will thou cast thine eyes upon that which is nothing? Prou.
23.5
for riches takes her to her wings as an Eagle, and flies into heaven. What a
folly then is it to account them happy which swim in worldly prosperity? It is
even as if seeing a man in a goodly bed, served with all dainties, and with
sweet music, should think him much blessed, when yet the intolerable pain
of the Gout, will suffer him to take no rest nor pleasure day nor night.

VER. 12. Blessed is the man that endures temptation, etc.

HERE is the Apostles conclusion of the whole doctrine of the Cross, which is
taken from the reward of patience, which is blessedness: The division.
In which conclusion these things are to be considered, which in order are
here set down.

1 When it shall be given; when they are tried.

2 Whereunto it is compared; to a Crown of life.

3 The certainty thereof; because it is God which promises it, and not man
that oftentimes deceives and is changeable.

4 To whom it shall be given; to such as love God.

The reward promised is here noted under the word (Blessed) which is the
greatest reward that may happen unto any man, for, Beatitudo est status omnium
bonorum aggregatione perfectissimus: Blessedness is a state most perfect of
all good things heaped together.

The wise men of this world do greatly err, which place their felicity in
bodily pleasures, riches, honors, etc. For blessed indeed is that man which
for godliness sake is dispoyled of all his goods, suffers imprisonment, and
all misery in this life: if for the love of Christ he patiently endures them
to the end, he shall certainly be happy and blessed, for he shall receive an
immarcessible crown, not querneam or lauream coronam, a crown made of Oken or
Laurel boughs, but a crown of everlasting life, a diadem of the Kingdom of
heaven, which God, which cannot deceive, has promised.

This paradox then the Apostle defends against the common opinion of the
world, which is the same which the Son of God himself preached on the Mount:
the wisdom of the world says, blessed are the rich, etc. but Christ says,
Math. 5. Luke 6.
blessed are the poor: Woe be unto you rich, for ye have your consolation
here. The wisdom of the world counts them blessed which are filled with wine
and al delicate fare; but Christ pronounces them blessed which hunger and
thirst after righteousness: The wisdom of the world esteems them blessed
which have all things at their desire, but Christ them which suffer persecution
for righteousness sake, whom the wicked men of this world revile, sla^der, and
put to death, for as much as now they are blessed in hope, and shall shortly
com to the real fruitio^ of blessedness: Wisd. 3.
Though in the sight of the unwise they appear to die, yet they are in rest.

We are here to observe the old distinctions of the Divines, duplicem esse
beatitudinem, that blessedness is twofold; the one of this our peregrination
while we are in the way toward our Country, which consists, in spe, in
hope; and the certain expectation of the heavenly good things which in our
Country we shall enjoy. Of this speaks the Apostle: Romans 8.24 Ephesians. 2.
We are saved by hope: And again: Ye are Citizens with the Saints, and of
the household of God: And the Psalmist: Psalm. 32.1.
Blessed is he whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered. For
this hope ought to be so firm and sure in our hearts, as if already we had
reigned with Christ in heaven. With this hope all the faithful did comfort
themselves in their miseries. For Christ (says Augustine) has carried with
him already into heaven a portion of the flesh and blood of every one of us;
Aug. medit. cap. 5.
Vbi ergo portio mea regnat, ibi me regnare credo, vbi caro mea glorificatur,
ibi gloriosum me cognosco, vbi sanguis meus dominatur, ibi dominari me sentio:
Where a portion of me does reign already, there believe I that I shall
reign, where my flesh is glorified, there know I that I shall be glorified,
etc. Though I be a sinner, yet distrust I not the communion of this grace,
Etsipeccata mea prohibent, substantia mea requirit: Though my sins forbid
this, yet my substance which is there already in Christ, requires it.

The second blessedness is in our Country, The second blessedness
and in the true and real possession of the Kingdom of heaven, which
consists in the bright vision and fruition of God: 1. John 3. Luke 12.37
When we shall see him as he is: Blessed are those servants whom the Lord
when he comes shall find waking: Verily I say unto you he will girde
himself about, and make them to sit down at Table, and will come forth and
serve them. And again, Apoc. 19.9
Blessed are they which are called to the supper of the Lamb: And, blessed are
they that dwell in thine house: Psalm. 84.
With the hope whereof the Spouse in the Canticles, in the person of all Gods
children, comfort her self saying; Can. 1.3.
We will be glad in thee: where the Latin has out of the Hebrew: Exultabimus
and laetabimur in te, memores vberum tuorum super vinum: Which imports thus
much: In thee only o thou sweet Bridegroom of my soul, I will rejoice, which
art able to give me the true joy, the full joy, the joy every way absolute and
perfect, the joy immarcessible, and never ceasing, to which all earthly joys
being compared, that spring of riches or pleasures, seem vile and loathsome.
Such are these joys, that the very hope, and remembrance thereof is sufficient
to glad our minds above all worldly joys: Memores vberum tuorum super vinum
(says he) In which words he notably distinguishes between the true and the
worldly joys; by Wine the Scripture understands worldly consolation and joy,
as: They shall not drink wine with mirth: Esaias 24.
But by this word (vbera) the Divine Consolation is signified, that most
precious Nectar of eternal glory, proceeding from the breasts of GOD,
wherewith all the blessed Saints inebriabuntur, shall be drunken, Esaias 66.
that ye may suck and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolation. O
good GOD whose heart is so stony, yea, harder then adamant, which hearing these
things is not dissolved and softened? O how blessed a thing shall it be to see
so many holy Saints, so many blessed Spirits, to hang (as it were) at the
breasts of GOD, and suck from thence that most sweet, comfortable, and
precious milk of Consolation, according to the measure of every ones
capacity! Inebriabuntur ab vbertate domus tuae (says David) and torrente
voluptatis potabis eos: Psalm. 36.8
They shall be satisfied with the fatness of thine house, and thou shall give
them to drink out of the Rivers of pleasures. This (dearly beloved brethren)
is the blessedness of Gods Elect, these are the joys which the Spouse, the
Church, affirms to be better then any wine, for the sweetness thereof
incomparably surpasses all pleasures that may be imagined, the remembrance
thereof is sufficient (where there is one drop of the love of God) to stir up
the desire, to refresh the mind, to draw the will; This inuiteth the Virgin,
strengthtneth the Martyr, and after his conflicts and labors crowns the
Confessor. O how sweet must the fruition of this blessedness be, when the
remembrance thereof, as a little taste in this life, makes men despise all
earthly delights? This made the Prophet cry out: Psalm. 34.
O taste and see how sweet the Lord is. Again, Quam magna multitudo
dulcedinis tuae domine (as the Latin has) How great is thy goodness which
thou have laid up for them that fear thee? Psalm. 31.19.
The Apostle Saint Paul, having tasted the same, but cursim and raptim, could
not contain himself, Romans 8 18.
but protested, That the afflictions of this present time are not worthy of the
glory, which shall he showed unto us.

Blessed is the man that endures temptation.

temptations, and thereby prepared to receive the Crown of Glory: so would the
Lord have Abel, Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, David, etc. to be subject to
this cross: For if any man will follow me, Mat. 16.24 1. Tim. 3.
let him forsake himself and take up his Cross: All that will live godly in
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.

The Apostle expresses also the time when it shall be given, when we are
tried; the Crown is promised after our conflict, the hire is not rendered
before we have done our labor: 2. Tim. 2.
No man (says the Apostle) is crowned except he strive lawfully, 2. Tim. 4.7.
The Use. There is no garland where is no gole to run unto: There is no Crown
where the race is not lawfully run.
And setting down his travail before his reward, he says: I have fought a
good fight, and have finished my course I have kept the faith. There is no
price where there is no striving.

Here we learn that is is not enough once or twice to resist sin, for the
whole life of man is a continual warfare upon earth. Again, we are here
taught that our life was not given us of God, that we should serve our lusts,
follow our fleshly pleasures, to give our selves to covetousness, and
ambition, whereby the soul is defiled, but that we should serve the Lord,
etc. This being so, they then flatter and deceive themselves, which think to
be partakers of the reward, without ever entering into the combat and trial
of temptations.

Ciuicas, Murales, Castrenses, Nauales, made some of Laurel, some of Oak,
etc. So all good Christians, that fight in the cause of the sovereign Emperor
of heaven and earth, have a Crown of heavenly glory reserved for them, as the
reward of their labors. O sweet comfort to the faithful, the which in this
life endure so many labors, so many crosses, so many persecutions; in the life
to come they shall be free from all these things, and reign with God for ever.
A shadow hereof is figured in the Wells which Isaac dug in Gerar; Genesis
26.20.21.22. A Figure.
the first for which they contended with the Philistimes, they called
Contention; the second, for which they also strove, they called Hatred; the
third, which without contradiction they enjoyed, they called latitudinem,
largeness; saying, dilatauit nos dominus, the Lord has now made us room: To
signify unto us, that before we come to the fountains of living waters,
where there is true rest, true safety, eternal felicity, we must first pass
through hatreds, contentions, labor, strife, in this life. The Apostle Paul
calls this reward, 1. Cor. 9.
An incorruptible Crown; The Spirit of God also in another place, promises to
the Church of Smirna a Crown of Life. Apoc. 2.10
This being so (brethren) I may justly cry out unto this wicked age, with the
Prophet Esaias: Quare appenditis argentum and non in panibus? laborem vestrum and
non in satietate. Esaias 55.
Wherefore lay ye out your silver, and not for bread: and your labor without
being satisfied? By silver is meant the time of this present life, that
precious gold which we should lay out for eternal felicity, which yet we
spend not upon Bread; that is, upon necessary things, but on things of no
value, and profit. Simile.
Should not he be judged for a fool and a madman, who being ready to perish
with famine, and having but one piece of silver, should lay out the same to buy
him a fether to wear in his hat? Would ye not justly say to such a one; O
fool were it not better for thee to buy bread to relieve thy hunger? So may I
say to the children of this world which follow vanities: Why ye fools spend
ye your time, a thing so precious, in sinful vanities, and not in bread, not
in things necessary for your salvation, but rather in filthy pleasures, worldly
delights, in the pursuit, and greedy scraping together of corruptible riches?

This Crown of glory is not given as a due desert for the worthiness of the
work of patience, but by the promise of God, as a free reward of our labor.
An Example.
God deals with his children as a bountiful and loving father, who promises
his son, that if he will do such or such a thing, he will make him his
heir of all his ample inheritance, which far exceeds the deserts of his
child, yet the father performs it for his promise sake, and not for the
obedience of his son: and therefore says the Apostle here, that such as are
tried receive the Crown of eternal Life, by promise. To this the Apostle Paul
subscribeth: I have fought a good fight, 2. Tim. 4 7.
I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth is there laid up
for me a Crown of righteousness: And least he might seem arrogantly to
claim the same, as merited for the worthiness of his works, he ascribes
all to the gift of God, when he adds; Which God, the righteous Judge, shall
give me at that day: If it were given of God, then did not the Apostle merit
it by his works: As he says again, Romans 6.23.
Eternal life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. For if a man
could merit eternal life, then must there needs be a proportion betwixt that
which meriteth, which is man's righteousness, and that which is merited, which
is Eternal Life: but betwixt these (the one being temporal, the other
eternal) there can be no proportion at all, and therefore says the Apostle:
Romans 8.18.
I count the afflictions of this present time not worthy of the glory which
shall be showed unto us. Again, 2. Cor. 17.
Our light affliction which is but for a moment causes unto us a far more
excellent and eternal weight. Let us then hold for a truth that this crown is
due to patience, not by our merits but by the promise of God, and in as much
as patience is a noteable effect of a true, lively, and justifying faith.

Now this reward is most sure and firm, and shall never fail us, in regard of
the unchangeable and everliving God, upon whom it is grounded, Verse 17.
With whom is no variableness neither shadow of changing, says this our
Apostle: 2. Cor. 1.20
For all the promises of God are in him; yea, and are in him, Amen. To
conclude, this reward is given to such as love God: And why? because we can by
no means better express our love, then by suffering for him, and in patient
undergoing whatsoever he shall lay upon us: Thus the Crown of Life, shall be
given unto such, as thus manifest their love unto him in patience, and true
obedience unto his will, etc.

The fifth Sermon.
JAMES 1.13. etc. Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, etc.


HITHERTO the Apostle having entreated of outward temptations whereby our
faith, patience, and constancy is proved; and having many ways set down the
profits that come thereby, he now comes to the other kind of temptations,
which are the inward temptations of the mind which proceed from the flesh, our
depraved will, and the malice of Satan, which solliciteth and stirs us up
to sin.

1 The proposition, The division.
that men may not impute their temptations unto God, as the cause and author
thereof.

2 The reasons confirmatory. The first taken from the nature of God, which
cannot tempt nor be tempted: The second is by an Antipophora, whereby he
opens the fountain of all sins, But every man is tempted, etc.

3 He confirms this, by an elegant metaphor and gradation, when lust has
conceived.

The Apostle in the proposition meets with this cavil, which some wicked men
might pretend to excuse their sins, saying it was Gods will I should do this,
he provoked and tempted me thereto. Let not a man say he is tempted of God,
when pleasure pricketh him, when envy renteth him, when pride provoke him,
when covetousness catches him, when the world enticeth him, or any other
temptation assaileth him, let him not, I say, impute this unto God: For it is
an horrible blasphemy to make God the author of temptation; he that
overcomes, by Gods grace he overcomes; and he that is overcome, by his
own fault he is overcome: For God gives no occasion of sin unto man, but
what God gives as an occasion of godliness, the same our mind inescated, or
corrupted, with diverse affections, turns into an occasion of destruction. For
as God by nature cannot be tempted with any evil, so tempts he no man unto
evil: and this the Greek explaneth: for (...) is he Qui ad male agendum
solicitatur, which is solicited to do evil, and the species in these words
(...), a propria cupiditate.

But that the doctrine of this proposition may the better appear, we must
understand that there be three causes of temptations: GOD, Satan, Man tempts.
either God tempts, Satan tempts, or Man tempts, and in regard of these
three causes, there are three kinds of temptations, diverse in regard of the
sundry ends of every one of them, as probationis, deceptionis, praesumptionis,
of probation, deception, and presumption.

God is said to tempt; How God tempts.
that is, to prove, to make trial of, that our faith, hope, patience, and
other virtues might be known unto the world; and this the name and word
imports, (...); and (...) signifies experimentum, The word expounded.
hence comes (...) tentare, experimentum capere de re aliqua, the primitive
seems to be (...) stimulo, pungo, which is the property of temptation. In
this temptation of trial, or proof, God tempted Abraham, willing him to
sacrifice his dear and only son Isaac, Genesis 22.
not that he himself was ignorant of it, but that his singular faith and
obedience might be a pattern for all posterities to follow: so promising Manna
to the Israelites, said; That I may prove them whether they will walk in my
Laws or not. Exodus 16.
So forbidding them to hearken unto false Prophets, he says; Deuteronomy. 13.
For the Lord proves you to know whether you love the Lord your God: that is,
that ye may be known unto the world what manner of people you are. So he
proves his children by afflictions, that their faith may be made manifest:
The Apostle says: 1. Cor. 11.9. 1. Cor. 10
It is necessary that heresies should be among you, that they which are
approved among you may be known; but to these he ever gives a good event.
The Church of Christ in all ages has been proved with these temptations: In
the Apostles time many execrable heresies sprang up among them; in the
succeeding ages how Satan bestirred him with his tares and darnell of false
teachers, the writings of the Fathers, and Ecclesiastical Histories are full.
These our times have tasted of the like temptations: How many Papists,
Seminaries, Jesuits, are sprung up; yea the devil seems to have opened hell
mouth, and to have spewed out all heresies again to trouble the world: The
Libertines have taken breath again, the Anabaptist is revived, the Faulily of
Love is set a broach again; yea in the very bosom of the Church, among our
selves (as the Apostle before prophesied) some are start up speaking perverse
things (and that under the color of reformation) drawing Disciples after them:
Act. 20.
Under the color of religion bringing in a hotch-poch, and mingle-mangle of
all old heresies; borrowing their disdain of the Donatists, their supposed
purity of the Catheroy, their pretended equality in the Ministry, of the
Aerians, their sequestring themselves from others, and disdaining to salute, of
the Donatists and Anabaptists, as also their impugning of government, their
pinching at Princes prerogatives, of the Papists, etc. And all this, God
permits for the proof and trial of the godly, that we should not be like
children, Ephesians. 4.14.
wavering and carried about with every wind of doctrine by the deceit of men.
In all which temptations how wicked soever the instruments are, which God uses
to effect his will, yet in all things respects he his glory, and the good of
his Church, and so he is ever just, and in no wise the author of sin and
wickedness among men.

Pharaohs heart, Exodus 4.
that he blinds man, and gives him over to a reprobate mind.

Three kinds of hardening.
Naturalis, Voluntaria, and Diuina: Natural, Voluntary, and Divine.

fleshy heart, that is a soft and mollified heart, flexible unto good motions.
Ezoch 36.
Whereby it is manifest that when God is said to harden, it is not so to be
understood as if he did harden them which before were soft and flexible: but
thus; that it, which by his own nature is hard, he suffers it still to be
hard, and through his just judgments (but per accidens) more and more, by the
means of Satan, to be hardened. And how? Per accidens: Surely because God
herein works no evil, but the devil abuses Gods benefits bestowed upon a
man to his obduration and hardening of his heart, and causes a wicked man, of
his own accord, to abuse the same to his own destruction, as it is to be seen
in Pharas, and therefore in this kind of hardening there is no compulsion, but
a man is voluntarily hardened: and in this respect Satan hardneth.

heart: which is, when a man confirms and hardens himself in evil
purpose; neither will he hear nor be obedient to the voice of the Lord, or
to any admonitions whereby he is called to repentance, but abuses Gods
suffering to his own damnation, which not only Pharaoh did, but also Saul and
Judas, and many other, though we do not peculiarly read of them, as we do
of Pharaoh, that God hardened their hearts, but only because they voluntarily
stood obstinate in their own conceived wickedness, against all admonitions: And
thus not God, but man hardens himself.

such properly was the hardening of Pharaoh, so often mentioned in Exodus, and
in the ninth to the Romans, and besides other places, in the ninth of Exodus
it is said, that Pharaoh sinned, and hardened his heart. First, it is said he
sinned, expressing plainly the cause of obduration, which is his sin: next,
his heart was hardened, showing the punishment of sin, which is hardness of
heart; Hardness of heart is sin, the cause of sin, and the punishment of
sin.
For Pharaoh himself first sinned: then God, as a punishment of his sin,
hardened more and more his heart; so that hardness of heart is sin, the
punishment of sin, and the cause of sin. Here now it is manifest that
sin, and the custom of sinning, is that which hardneth the heart of the
wicked, and therefore it is said of Pharaoh that he sinned, and his heart was
hardened; and the Scripture plainly teaches, that GOD hardneth, Satan
hardneth, and Man himself hardens his own heart, but in a diverse sense,
and after a diverse manner. It is spoken of God, not as the author of evil,
but per accidens, by doing good, by bestowing his benefits, by using well the
wicked putposes of the ungodly, and disposing them, as a sovereign agent, unto
a good end. Satan hardneth as the author of sin, blindness, and prince of
darkness, he working in the wicked, peruerteth the good motions which God
instilleth into their minds, and under the pretext of good abuses them to
evil, unto their own destruction, he always sophistically concludes, and
shows reasons to effect it, and therefore he is called Princeps tenebrarum,
Prince of darkness: Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, that
is, Collos. 1.
from the power of Satan: John 13.
the example of Judas makes manifest this, who did not so obstinately proceed,
before the devil entered into him, and began wholly to carry him after his will:
First he consented to the counsel of Satan, but after the taking of the sop;
he fully possessed him, and this is called of the Divines; proxima causa
indurationis, quae extra hominem considerari potest: The next cause of
obduration which may be considered without man.

Ad actiones simpliciter a Deo motus, and ad peccandum alectus a diabiolo
(says a Father) being of God simply moved to actions, but of the devil
allured to sin. By sinning willingly and perseuering in sin, he obstinately
hardens his heart to resist God, abusing all Gods benefits to his own
destruction; for except the will of man consented there could be no hardening,
for to harden the heart, is nothing else but the will to be more and more
obstinate in an ungodly purpose. So that Satan hardens by suggesting, Man by
consenting, Aug. con. Fauslum
God by forsaking, as Augustine pitihily says: Diabolus suggerit, Homo
consentit, Deus deserit: the devil suggesteth, man consents, God forsakes:
And so this Oracle of the Prophet holds ever most firm. O Israel, Hos. 13.
thy destruction is of thy self, but thy help comes only of me. This
being so, I conclude with the Apostle: Let no man say when he is tempted, I am
tempted of God.

Job. 18.
A snare is laid for him in the ground, and a trap for him in the way. The
snare and the trap are the devils instruments to catch souls. The devil is
like a Fowler or a Hunter, A Simile.
who that he may take birds or wild beasts, shows forth a pleasant bait,
but hides the snare, that being allured with the bait, they may be caught
with the snare: For when he promises to the proud man honors, to the covetous
man money, to the loose man pleasures, etc. what does he else, but under the
bait, hide the net and the snare, that he may catch unwary souls? The Latin
more plainly expresses it: Abscondita est in terra pedica eius, and decipula
super semitas: His snare is hidden in the ground, and his trap upon his paths.
In which words (as a father notes) are signified two kinds of temptations.
Hugo Card.
The one open, which, except it be hidden under the color of some good, it is
perceived of all men, and this is signified per pedicam, by the ginne which is
hidden in the ground, as is fornication, and other carnal sins. The other
more secret, subtle, and hidden, which scarce of the wise is discerned, which
is signified per decipulam, by a deceitful trap. The devil then has his
ginne and his trappe, for all kinds of men, for he knows the manners of men,
and to what vice they are most prone, and lays that bait before their eyes
to which he knows their mind will be most easily inclined: as to
effeminate, joyful, and delicate men, the bait of lechery, and vainglory; to
Stoicall, stern, and angry men, the bait of wrath and pride, etc. And which
is most to be feared, he works not this by himself only, but also by his
servants and instruments. And even as a Prince, or nobleman, riding a Hunting
or Hauking, has many hunters and servants that accompany him, and whatsoever
is taken in hunting is ascribed all unto the Prince: The devil has his agents.
So the devil has his guard, has his hunters to take souls. For what else
shall we call the whoorish woman, Note this.
the fraudulent friend, the alluring companion, him that keeps a house of
play and baudry, but the devils Huntsmen? for so the Lord himself calls
them; Ier. 5.
There are found among my people wicked persons, that lay wait, as he that
sets snares, they have made a pit to catch men. What remains then
(brethren) but that we hearken to the counsel of the blessed Apostle? 1. Pet.
5.8.
Be sober and watch, for your adversary the denill as a roaring Lion walks
about, seeking whom he may devour. Ye had need to be very careful and
vigilant, for ye have to do with a most vigilant enemy, which compasses you
with a greedy desire to hurt you, seeking not only whom he may wound, but
also kill and devour. Simile.
If any Soldier or Mariner should fall into the hand of the Turk, and be
carried unto Constantinople, though he would greatly fear to fall into the
hands of so cruel an enemy, of the name of Christ, yet he has some hope of
redemption, for silver and gold may redeem him: but if he fall into the hands
of the Lystrigons, or Canibals, which as soon as they have taken men,
presently devour them alive: What hope then remains? O man, created after
the image of God, that thou might enjoy eternal blessedness, take heed of
this cruel enemy, which, as a bloody beast, destroys and deuoureth men,
trust him not, enter into no friendship with him, there is no hope of favor to
be expected at his hands.

The third kind of temptation is, presumptionis, of presumption, whereby man
tempts God; as when men abuse Gods patience, and suffering, to a security of
sinning, flattering and deceiving themselves in the mercy of God, and final
repentance, Ephesians. 4.
and in the mean time wallow in their wickedness, sin with greediness,
saying; I have sinned, Eccles. 5.
and what evil has happened unto me? The Lord has mercy in store for us all,
he will receive me whenever I come, I will repent at the hour of death, and
I shall do well enough, etc. This is a presumptuous tempting of God, an
abusing (as Paul says) of the riches of Gods goodness, patience, and
long-suffering: and those do, Thesaurizare sibi iram in diem irae: Romans 2.
Heap up unto themselves wrath unto the day of wrath.

Here let us learn (brethren) how dangerous a thing it is to defer
repentance, and, while we have time, not to turn unto the Lord: Surely it is
a fearful thing for a sinner to pass the whole race of his life in pleasure,
and to protract repentance to the last minute of our life. A wise man repaireth
and covers his house in Summer, least he be anoyed with the storms of
Winter. The provident Saylor, when the sea is calm, and the weather fair,
prepares all things necessary against a tempest, least being prevented with a
storm he labors in vain. The breach in a Citty-wall in time of peace, and
not in the brunts of battle, is to be repaired. And Alexander is reported to
have disgraded a Knight, because he was then preparing his armor when he
should encounter with his enemies: So should we betimes, while opportunity
serves, provide us of things necessary for our journey toward our Country, I
mean repentance and amendment of life, without which we shall never attain
to our wished end. For if we be slack herein, and do foolishly defer it, till
the future time, death may prevent us, while we are a preparing, Augustine. Cum
vult improbus homo non potest, quia quando potuit noluit, and ideo per malum
velle perdidit bonu^ posse. Non facile inueniuntur in aduersitate praesidia
quae non fucrunt in pace quaesita. Luke 14 31.
and cast us into eternal torments. Truly, says Augustine, when the wicked
would he cannot, because when he could he would not, and therefore through the
evil of his will, he lost the good of his power. And in an other place:
Succors are not easily found in adversity, which were not sought in time of
peace. Our Saviors example of the King, teaches us this: What King (says he)
going to fight with another King, sits not down first, and takes counsel
whether he be able with ten thousand, to meet him that comes against him
with twenty thousand. O thou unhappy and foolish sinful man, which wagest
war with the highest King, even the King of Kings, whose beck all things
obey, by whose providence all things are governed, whom the Angels do serve,
whom the devils do fear, whose power is greater then heaven and earth can
comprehend, who has the keys of life and death in his hands: What is this thy
vain confidence, upon what counsel rebellest thou against thy God? Do thou
trust unto the health of thy body, and a long life? O vain man, thou trustest
then to a broken reed, which by the sin of thy first parents is bruised and
crased with a thousand chinckes of infirmities, and laid open unto death; why
do thou not then crave of him the conditions of peace, why take thou not
truce with him? why with all humility, do thou not convert unto him with true
repentance, crave pardon for thy sins while he is yet far off? We read
of Alexander, Alexand.
that mighty Monarch of the world, when he besieged any rebellious City, at
length he would hang forth a Candle, burning before the gates of the City, and
proclaimed that if before the same was out, they would render the City, he
would receive them into favor; if not, they might know that there was no hope
of mercy. While then the Lord calls us, and offers his mercy unto us, o let
us come by repentance, least when it is too late, the door of mercy be shut,
and it happen to us as it did unto Esau, who found no place of repentance, Heb.
12.
though he sought it with tears: Woe be unto them which only with their
life give over their sins, which will then repent when they can sin no
longer: Peccata tunc te dimiserunt, Augustine.
non tu illa, says Augustine, Then thy sins have left thee, and not thou
them. And again: When I come to old age, (thou will say) then I will repent:
Quare hoc fragilitas humana presumat cum diem vnum in potestate sua non habeat:
Augustine.
Wherefore does humane frailty presume on this, seeing he has not so much as
one day in his power.

Martialis.
Non est creed mihi sapientis dicere viuam
Sera nimis vita est crastina, viue hodie.
Believe me, it is no wise-mans part to say; live here I will:
Live well to day, to trust is vain to live to morrow till.
Herein we are like unto Pharaoh, which when the whole land was so plagued with
frogs, Exodus 8.
that they filled the fields, the streets, the houses, and no place was free
from them, and Moses asked him when he should pray unto the Lord for him,
answered, To morrow. O the madness of men which are always deferring their
repentance till the morrow, till the hour of their death, when they see the
sword of the wrathful Judge drawn over their heads, on the one side death
ready to strike them, on the other side their sins to accuse them, below them
hell with open mouth to receive them, the devil gaping like a roaring Lion to
devour them; then, I say, when they have lived in war with God all their
life long, they fly unto him for mercy, and seek peace; this repentance
proceeds rather of a servile fear then of any love, 2. Mac. 9.
like that of wicked Antiochus: Sero sapiunt Phryges, beware of had I wist. Let
us not therefore tempt the Lord by presuming upon his mercy.

Again, they tempt God by doubting of his providence and goodness, Exodus 17.
as the Israelites did at Raphidim, where was no water. Of this sort are they,
which distrusting Gods providence for their posterity, hoard up riches by all
unlawful means, etc. On the other side, they tempt God, which presuming upon
his providence, neglect all ordinary means in their several Vocations, etc.

For God cannot be tempted, etc. Here is now the first reason why God is not
the author of evil, which is taken from the nature of God, who is pure,
perfect, and by nature most holy; yea, holiness it self: So that purity and
holiness is a prerogative which God has only reserved unto himself. This
the Princely Prophet witnesses: The Lord is righteous in all his ways, Psalm.
145.
and holy in all his works. Therefore the Saints of God affirmed: Who shall
not fear thee o Lord, Reu. 15.4.
and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy, and all Nations shall come and
worship before thee, for thy judgments are made manifest: It is then as
impossible for any spark of unholiness, or uncleanness, to be in God, as it
is for darkness to be in the midst of light, or coldness in the midst of
fire, etc.

The sixth Sermon.
JAMES 1.19. etc. 19 Wherefore (my dear brethren) let every man be swift to
hear, slow to speak, and slow to wrath.

20 For the wrath of man does not accomplish the righteousness of God.


THE Apostle before, having commended the excellency of the word of God, in
that it is the word of God, the word of Truth, and mean of our regeneration;
he next adioyneth these excellent precepts, teaching us how we should
fruitfully hear the same, which consists in observing these three moral
precepts.

The first concerns the facility of hearing.

The second of restraining the tongue.

The third of moderating of wrath.

For the first, it is manifest that this noble sense of hearing was given us of
God; that is, the power of discerning voices and sounds: For he that created
the whole body of man, and powered into it a reasonable soul, created also this
sense so profitable to his glory, and necessary to the attaining of eternal
life, and this is it he says: Exodus 4.11
Who has given the mouth to man? and who has made the dumb and the deaf? or
him that sees, or the blind? Have not I the Lord? Again, Psalm. 94.
He that planted the ear shall he not hear? Hereupon Lactantius
concludes, Lactan. lib. 3. cap. 9.
that the sense of the ear is more necessary to salvation, then the sense of
the eye: for doctrine and wisdom is received by the ear only, and not by
the eye: And the Apostle says, Romans 10. Luke 11. John 8.
Faith comes by hearing, And Blessed are they that hear the word of God and
keep it: He that is of God hears Gods word. And how should we use this
excellent sense to the glory of God, we are instructed in the fabrication
thereof, which expresses the wonderful skill of the Creator. First, they are
not Osseae sed cartilaginiae substantiae, not of a bony, but of a gristely
substance, which having their beginning from the bone called Os temporium, The
fabric of the ears out of the Anatomists.
serves to extend the holes of the ears, that the sound may be the better
perceived: and these Cartilagines, are hollow, dry, and hard; Hollow, that by
their concauity they may receive the air; tortuous, or winding, least by any
sudden, or vehement collision of the air, the tender membranes and organes
of hearing should be hurt, and that the sound being temperately received
should the more delight the sense of hearing; Hard, that the collision of the
air might be the more mild, and the sound the greater.

Via domini ad cor dirigitur, Gre. inhom.
cum sermo veritatis humiliter auditur.

Mary, of whom it is said, that she kept all these sayings, and pondered them
in her heart.

durus and siccus, hard and dry, in retaining of the word of God. For a thing
that is hard and dry, receives and keeps better, what it received, then that
which is soft and tender. And Aristotle says, Arist. lib. de sen.
that Organum auditus est aer: The air is the instrument of hearing, Air the
instrument of hearing
and is contained within the ears, and included in the miringa, which is a
little skin, and that air must be firm and still, for if it have his
proper motion and sound, it perceives no external sound; as it appears in
them which through the motion of such air, feel tinkling, or ringing, in
their ears. In like manner we should receive this heavenly doctrine into the
inward cells of the memory, there hold it fast, and persevere therein, as our
Apostle says, not as forgetful hearers, Iam. 1.25. John 15.
but doers of the word: And our Savior, If ye abide in me, and my words
abide in you, ask what you will and it shall be done unto you.

How the sound is brought into the ears.
Between the bones of the Temples, there is a way ad basim cerebri, to the
ground or foundation of the brain, having within a certain concauity after
the manner of a labyrinth, in the middle whereof are two little bones annexed
to their membranes, the one called malleus, the other Incus, Malleus Incus.
in regard of the use thereof, which the prudent Creator of nature, has so
artificially placed, that in the thicker part they do almost touch one another,
because the hearing is made through the motion of the air, which is brought
into the passage unto these bones, and there is made a certain repercussion of
the air, which makes the sound which is heard. Here we are taught, that
even as the sound is brought into the ear through the agitation of the
external air: so the sound of the heavenly Doctrine is brought by the
Preacher into the mind of the hearer: Romans 10.
Faith comes by hearing. Who so loves his own soul will dilligently
frequent the hearing: The heart of man that has understanding seeks
knowledge. Prou. 15.
He indifferently hears all that can instruct him, he despises not the
doctrine for the person of the man: Non quantum sciat, sed quantum ignorant,
considerat: He recounteth not how much he knows, but how much he is
ignorant of.

Isidor would have it) are called Aures ab hauriendis vocibus, of drawing in
the voice. More hereof might be spoken, but I am here to supply the place of
a Divine, and not to play the Anatomist in the Physicians Art.

Again, when the Apostle wills us to be swift to hear, he means not an
unfruitful hearing, that we may carpe, taunt, or scoff, or give ear to
scurrile, filthy, and lewd speeches, etc. but as if he had said: Seeing that
God offers himself unto you so lovingly, so kindly, in his holy word, the
mean of our regeneration, it behooves you to show your selves attentive,
tractable, and obedient hearers. Therefore the diligence of the people is
commended, John. 6. Math. 14.
which forsaking all things, yea the care of meat and drink, came from all
parts unto Christ, to hear the word out of his mouth. But now how few be there
found, in this declining age, that have that zeal and love to the word of God,
as to prefer the hearing thereof before their earthly commodities?

The second precept is of brideling the tongue, The second precept of bridling
the tongue.
that is, the petulancy and loquacitie thereof. The tongue, and the faculty of
speaking, is the singular gift of God, and only proper unto man, as it
appears as well by the framing of the whole body, as by his miracles and
judgments, declared in this member. When all men had but one language, he
divided and confounded it into many; at the building of the Tower of Babell;
Genesis 11.
by giving an humane voice to Balams Ass; Numb. 23. 2. Match. 3.
Heliodorus, that Church-robber, by his just judgment was stricken dumb. The
Priest Zacharias, Luke 1.
as a punishment of his incredulity, remained dumb nine months. Acts 2.
To the Apostles he gave the gift of all tongues; whereby he manifested that
the tongue and the use thereof is by him and from him. Lactantius li. de
opific. Dei.
And Lanctantius says, that the faculty of speech is so wonderful, and so
divine a work, that he only that created it, and no other, is able to unfold
it. Again, he elegantly expresses four offices of the tongue: Four offices
of the tongue.
The first is with his motions to articulate and form the voice; the second is
an interpreter of the mind, to utter the cogitations, or thoughts, there
hidden; the third to gather together the meat broken and chawed with the
teeth, and to send it into the stomach: the fourth, to receive the drink, and
to discern the taste of things, etc. This the Apostle strictly forbids to
abuse, that we speak not rashly, and irreverently, of God, his holy word, and
his judgments; not to reason and talk of those things we know not, when we
are utterly unlearned and ignorant: if, Mat. 12.
as our Savior says, we shall give an account of every idle word, how much
more then for our profane talking of God and his holy word? And surely if any
age, then most of all this age, has perverted this precept of the Apostle. Now
every Artificer, Boy, etc. are given not only quick to speak, but also to
teach, yea their own Pastors, of whom they should learn with reverence, hear
with silence, and ask counsel with humbleness. David once gave thanks unto
God, because he had made him wiser then his teachers: Psalm. 119.
But now men and women, in arrogance of spirit, in the pride of their hearts,
in presumption of their own knowledge, will be slow to hear whatsoever shall
cross their conceits, but swift to speak, without weight, number, or measure
of their words, against order, law, government, learned Fathers, yea and
Prince also, when (as Irenaeus says) De eisdem non semper easdem sententias
habent, Irenaeus.
and amantes vel non amantes haud eadem de eisdem iudicant: According to their
love or hatred, their judgments are not the same of the same things.

This (brethren) the Apostle here forbids, as a hinderance to the fruitful
hearing of the word, and would have us with all! quietness, godly unity, and
Christian humility, to hear the word of God; and not rashly and insolently
prate and prattle thereof, in a presumptuous conceit of their own knowledge.
For if any man seems to himself that he is somewhat when he is nothing,
Gal. 6.3.
he deceives himself in his imagination. This moderating of the tongue, not
only the holy Scripture, but also the Heathen Philosophers teach us.
Aristotle, when he was asked why, when he taught others to speak, he himself
was silent and sparing of his words, said: Cos ipsa non scindit, cultros tamen
acuit, The whetstone it self cutteth not, but yet it sharpeneth knives.
Simonides was wont to say: Simonides.
Silentij se poenituisse nunquam, sermonis saepius, that it never repented him
of his silence, but often of his speech. Zeno hearing a young man full of words
told him in derision, Zeno.
that his ears were grown into his mouth, because he heard little and spoke
much. Yea, nature her self in the very situation of the tongue, teaches thus
much: It is fenced and included, as it were, with two walls, the teeth and the
lips; it has placed it below the brain, the eyes, the ears, the nose, as it
were insinuating, that we should first ponder in our mind, first see, first
hear, before we speak. Note.
This nature teaches in that she has placed the organes of the other senses
above the tongue. Again, Nature has given us two ears, two eyes, two
nosthrils, and one tongue, as it were inferring hereby, that we should hear
more, see more, and know more, then we should speak. Besides, nature has, as
it were, tied the tongue with a certain ligament, which makes that Candidam
lineam in the midst thereof, which springs a basi ossis hyoidis, which
because it is an impediment to the speech in some children, it is cut off.
Notwithstanding all these documents of nature her self, The fools heart is in
his mouth, Eccles. 21.
whereas a wise man's mouth is in his heart, says the Wiseman: And as one
says, their words are first sent ad rationis limam priusquam ad linguam, to
be polished by reason, before they come to the tongue: fideli silentio tuta
est merces, says the Proverb, Faithful silence has ever a safe reward.
Prou. 10.6
In many words there cannot want sin, but he that refraineth his lips is
wise: And therefore the Apostle would have our words always, to be gracious,
Col. 4.6.
and poudered with salt. He that will speak advisedly must first ponder his
words before they come to his lips. Simile.
And even as those that are at variance need a Judge, who discussing the matter
on both sides, may give true sentence: So he that will speak discreetly, must
first sit as a Judge betwixt his heart and his tongue strictly examining
whether the words be right which his heart offers to his tongue, before he
speak.

There is a pestilent kind of men, of whom Solomon says: Prou. 12.
There are that speak words like the pricking of swords: Hereof speaks the
Princely Prophet: Psalm. 5.7.
Whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword. Of this
serpentine kind are such, as with slanderings, backbitings, whisperings, rent,
obscure, and blemish the good name of their neighbor, and spoil them of that
treasure, Prou. 22.
which as Solomon says, is more precious then gold and great riches. And even
as thieves, which rob us of temporal goods, the Law punishes by hanging: So
they that rob their neighbor of a far greater treasure, deserve a far
greater punishment: Which the Athenians considered, who made a Law (as Vtimus
de legibus witnesses) that whosoever was convinced to be a backbiter,
talebearer, or slanderer of his neighbor, he was first bitterly reproched
through the whole City, and afterward slain. Solon made a Law, that the
evil tongued and backbiter should be sined for every such offense three
Drachmas to the party grieved, Plutarch in vita Solon.
and two to be paid to the treasury. For they judged such to be very
pernicious members in a Commonwealth, disturbers of peace, authors of
contentions, hatred, and murders: which I think the Poet would signify by
the Serpents teeth which Cadmus sowed in the ground, of which straightway
sprang up armed men, which presently imbrued themselves in each others blood.

Ovid. lib. 3. Metamor.
Mart cadunt subitiper mutua vulnera fratres.
-- This earth-bred brood anon,
By mutual stroke of civil wars dispatched every 'chone.
The devil ucertainely is the sower of these teeth, of which spring wars,
broils, and dissentions in the world. Was not Doeg the Edomite a Serpents
tooth, who secretly accused Abimelech the Priest unto Saul, for relieuing
David, perverting his innocent intention, and plain meaning, which so kindled
Saul with wrath, that he slew four score and five which ware the Ephod, with
the whole City of Nob, 1. Sam. 22.
not sparing man, woman, child, and suckling. Were not the Princes of Amon
Serpents teeth, 2. Sam. 10.
which traduced King David's messengers unto their Master King Hanun, and
perverted David's kind intention, which was the cause of cruel wars and much
bloodshed? Therefore it is truly said: Eccl. 10.11
If the Serpent bite if he be not charmed: no better is a babbler. Where the
vulgar Translation has: Simordeat serpens in silentio, sic qui occulte
detrahit: If the Serpent bite in silence, so does he which secretly
backebiteth. The Serpent is a treacherous beast, for he does not as the Bull
which threatens with his horns before he hurt, neither roareth he as does the
Lion, nor barketh, as the dog before he bite, but secretly stingeth making no
noise: So the backbiters in silence, under the color of religion and zeal,
with their Serpents teeth, rent the good name of others, and with their vipers
tongues degenerate and stain the life of others.

Horat.
Pelliculam veterem retinens, and front politus,
Astutam vapido condis sub pectore vulpem.
This in effect.

Thy wonted form retained, a friendly face do keep,
A crafty Fox is hid, in wily heart so deep.
As truly says the Poet:

Nunquid non vipera est lingua detractoris ferocissima? S. Bernard.
Is not the tongue of the backbiter a most cruel viper, which with one breath
gives so deadly an infection? Nunquid non lancea est lingua ista? profecto
acutissima, quae tres penetrat ictu vno, scil. detrahentem, audientem and eum
cui detrahit. Is not the tongue of a backbiter a iaueling? yea surely, and that
a most sharp one, which kills three with one stroke, to wit, the backbiter
himself, the hearer, and whom he backbiteth, says S. Bernard. But of this
better occasion will be offered me to speak, when I come to the handling of
the third chapter.

Slow to wrath. THE third precept is of moderating and brideling of wrath;
Duplex definitio irae secund. Arist. lib. 2. rhetor. c. 20
which Aristotle two manner of ways defines. First, wrath is a desire, joined
with grief, of revenge, for some apparent contempt, or injury, done unto our
selves, or friends. Secondly, Ira est ebullitio sanguinis circa cor: Anger is a
boiling or inflammation of the blood about the heart. To this definition
subscribe all the Physicians. To both these definitions Damascence seems to
lean. Dam. lib. 2. de Ortho. fide. Greg. moral. l. 5. c. 30
Gregory makes three species of anger: The first is a kind of bilious passion,
which is quickly kindled, and as soon calmed, and this has less danger, and
malice: It is like stra^ which quickly takes fire, and quickly goes out; This
the Greeks call (...), and Cicero excandescentia, Ira furor breuis.
An anger soon come and soon gone: The Logicians, a Passion. The second is
called of the Latins Iracundia, which carries in mind a longer remembrance
of an injury received, and is of more continuance: This Aristotle calls
(...), though this does not always proceed to revenge, either because men
cannot, or for certain reasons will not: and this is worse then the first,
because it is fixed more fast, and takes deeper root in the mind. The third
kind is of such which are soon kindled with the flames of anger, and slow to
repress it: And this is a great sin so long to foster wrath in thy bosom
until it turn into hatred: for what is hatred but inueterat wrath? and this
seeks all occasions of revenge, which is truly diabolical. To these may be
added a fourth, which is of such as are slow to conceive wrath, and quick to
remit and cast it off, which is the best of all. All these are sins, though
not in degree equal.

Christ, Math. 5.22
if he makes not three kinds, yet three degrees of wrath, when he says,
Whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly, shall be culpable of
judgment, which is meant of that which is hidden, and inward in the heart: The
second Racha, is that which is expressed and manifest, yet without any open
reproach. The third, Whosoever shall say thou fool, shall be worthy to be
punished with hell fire, is when it is converted into hatred, and manifested in
tauntes, reproaches, and proceeds to revenge.

Anger in general, being considered in it self, is a thing indifferent to
vice or virtue: And therefore the Apostle here does not absolutely condemn
all anger, but only says that a man should be slow to wrath, that is, wise in
moderating the same: For it is a virtue when it follows reason as his guide,
that the action of justice might with courage be executed, and punishment
inflicted upon malefactors, according to the judgment of reason, and order of
Justice. And the end of this holy anger is manifold.

First, that the person may be saved; to which pertains this of the Apostle,
1. Cor. 5.
that such a one (he means the incestuous person) be delivered unto Satan
for the destruction of the flesh, 1. Tim. 1.20
that his Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

Secondly, that the wrath of God may be pacified: for if we judge our selves
we shall not be judged of the Lord. 1. Cor. 11.
Example hereof we have, Joshua 7. after the punishment of Achan, the wrath of
the Lord was appeased: the like we read of the zeal of Phinees.

Thirdly, the advancement of Gods glory, and his Kingdom: This is confirmed by
the example of Joshua, on Achan; Phinees, on the adulterers; of Moses, on the
Seditious; and of others, of whom we read, that, the due punishments
inflicted upon wicked men, the wrath of God was pacified.

And this reasonable anger is twofold; 1. In the will.
the one in the will, the other in the sensitive Appetite. The first is nothing
else but a voluntary motion, whereby, not by any passion, but by the judgment
of reason, a man has a desire to punish sin. And this may be in the mildest
man, as was Moses; yea, it is most necessary for those that are in authority,
to punish vice; and so necessary, that if it be wanting in a Magistrate, he
does most hainously and grievously sin, as we may read of Helie the Priest,
in the first book of Samuel, and the second and third chapters.

The other is in the sensitive Appetite, and is nothing else then the motion of
the sensitive Appetite, 2. In the sensitive appetite.
to be obedient to reason for the punishment of vice. And this necessarily
follows the judgment of reason, and the rule of a just and upright will.
This zealous and holy anger was in Christ, when he whipped the buyers and
sellers out of the Temple: And when He looked round about on the Pharisees
angerly, Mark. 3.5.
mourning for the hardness of their heart: And in Moses, Exodus 32.
when he brake the Tables, seeing the Israelites worship the Calfe.

Contrariwise, anger is a great sin against God, when it transgresses these
bounds and limits, when it follows not the right rule of reason, but
preuenteth, blinds, Homo iratus non est home.
and peruerteth the same, being carried headlong with fury, rage, and a bloody
desire of revenge, and this may be termed a mad fury, Ira furor breuis: Such
was the rage of Saul, who for hatred he bare to David, 1. Sam. 21.
most cruelly murdered the Priests of Nob. Of Pharaoh when he commanded the
male children of the Hebrews to be cast into the river. Exodus 1.22
Of Herod, who in hatred of our Savior caused the children of Bethlem to be
slain. Math. 2.


Now the Apostle here reproves this anger, as also that which springs from
a desire of contending, which hinders the fruitful hearing of the word of
God, whereby men cannot endure to be reproved of their faults; and being
kindled with wrath, rail, taunt and scoff at the Preacher, whereby the word
of God is made frustrate, and fruitless in them, when through self-love, a
preiudicate opinion of themselves, a conceit of their own wisdom, they
disdain to be reproved, and controuled, in their wicked courses, and bend all
their malice against their Pastors, from whence spring persecutions,
imprisonments, etc. This was the cause that King Asa put Hanam into prison; and
of the fury of the Princes against Isay, 2. Chapter 10.16
Jeremy, Micha, Amos, and the rest. This caused Stephen to be stoned, Act. 7.54.
and all the Apostles to be persecuted; but Gods vengeance ever pursued the
contempt of his Word and Servants, as the book of God expresses: 2. Chro. 36
16.
But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his
Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, and till there
was no remedy.

This anger is a most grievous sin, the reason is here rendered by the Apostle:
Because it works not the righteousness of God: that is, a man possessed with
this Passion, leaves in his heart no place for the righteousness of God: For
in such a one is left no humanity, no commiseration, no religion, no equity, no
justice, no charity at all. It works not the righteousness of God, because
it banisheth the fear of God out of our minds, takes away love, and
obedience, quenches brotherly kindness, and utterly spoileth us of all
Christian virtues which are acceptable unto God. Seneca could say: Sen. lib. 2.
de ira.
Necesse est virtutem ex animo tollas priusquam iram recipias, etc. Thou must
first of necessity expel virtue, before thou retainest anger, for virtue and
vice cannot dwell together: This vice being so great, and such a hindrance to
the fruitful hearing of the word, the mean of our salvation; I will now
proceed to set down certain remedies for the curing and suppressing of this
dangerous disease. The remedies then are twofold: Some for repressing of anger
in others, and some for brideling the same in our selves.

Now for the suppressing these furies in others, these remedies do profit.

First, The first remedy.
Silence, that thou answer not again, nor return to the angry man taunt for
taunt, reproach for reproach. This is the counsel of the Wiseman, Eccles.
8.16, Strive not with him that is angry, put not sticks unto his fire. And
Solomon: For wrath is a fire, and answering again is, as it were, the fuel:
without wood the fire is quenched: Pro. 22.24. Prouer. 26.
And the blessed Apostle Saint Paul says, Romans 12.19. Avenge not your
selves but give place unto wrath, for vengeance is mine, and I will revenge
says the Lord.

But because it chances oftentimes that we are compelled to answer again,
The second remedy.
as when by our silence the angry man is provoked the more, thinking thereby
that he is contemned, John 19.
as was the anger of Pilat against Christ; in this case another remedy is to be
sought: Pro. 25.15.
and this is lingua mollis, a modest and gentle answer: Such was the wisdom
of Abigal toward David, being angry. 1. Sam. 25.
For says Solomon, Prou. 15.1
A soft anger puts away wrath, but grievous words stir up anger.

Thirdly, The third remedy.
to win an enemy by benefits is a singular kind of remedy, prescribed both
by wise Solomon, and by the blessed Apostle: If he that hates thee be hungry
give him bread, Pro. 25.21. Romans 12.20.
if he be thirsty give him water to drink, for thou shall lay coals upon his
head, and the Lord shall recompense thee. And this is a most noble kind of
victory.

And now the remedies for the repressing of wrath in our selves are these.
Remedies for suppressing of wrath in our selves.


Christ's sufferings for thy sins; and why then should not thou suffer a
little for his sake? Ephe. 4 32
Forgiving one an other, even as God for Christ's sake forgave you. Imitate
their example which being stinged with the fiery serpents, looked upon the
brazen serpent and were healed. Wrath is a fiery serpent; fix the eyes of thy
consideration upon Christ, and thou shall be healed.

Ephe. 4.31
Let all bitterness, and anger and wrath, crying, and evil speaking, be put
away from you. Plutarch commends this counsel of Atheriodorus the
Philosopher, who persuaded Augustus Caesar that when he was angry he should
not say, or do, any thing, before he had, to himself, said over the Greek
Alphabet, that by this means the rage of his wrath, by delay might be cooled.

Augustine: Irascoris patri tuo, and peccas: irasccre tibi ipsi ne peccas: Thou
art angry with thy father and sinnest, but be thou angry with thy self that
thou may not sin.

hairs of your head are numbered, Math. 10.
says Christ: And again, Shall I not drink of the cup which my Father has
given me? John 18.11


of thy patience. Example we have in King David: when Shemei cursed and
reviled him, he was so far from taking revenge, that he said: The Lord has
bidden him to curse David, 2. Sam. 16.10.
who dare then say, why have thou done so? To conclude, if thou be angry,
hearken to the Apostles counsel: Ephesians. 4.
Let not the Sun go down upon thy wrath: and this may suffice to moderate
this passion in a Christian man.

Ira debet rationi ac virtuti accubare, Basil.
tanquam canis pastori, quae mordeat, increpet, allatretque vitium and vitiosos
velut lupos: Anger should lie down by reason and virtue, as the dog by the
Shepherd: it should bark at, bite, and rebuke vice and vicious men, as wolves.

The seventh Sermon.
JAMES 1.21. 21 Wherefore lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of
maliciousness, and receive with meekness the word that is graffed in you,
which is able to save your souls.


THE Apostle here exhorts the regenerate to the hearing of the word of Truth:
And first he shows how we must prepare our minds to the hearing of the word,
that it may fructify in our hearts, which consists in two things.

1 Laying aside all filthiness and malice, to hear it with meekness.

2 Next, the reason why we must hear it, because it is able to save our souls.

First, by an elegant metaphor taken from husbandry, the Apostle teaches that
the noisome weeds of vices both of body and soul, must be first rooted up and
extirpated, before the heavenly doctrine, the word of truth, can be received,
and be graffed in the field of our hearts: even as the husbandmen before they
cast the corn into the ground, do first purge their ground of Thorns,
Brambles, Stones, and such like, that it may yield the more increase. For in
every action, either natural or spiritual, two things are necessary: Alterum
quod agat, alterum quod patiatur: The Agent which works, and the Patient upon
which it must work. And in the Agent there must be power to work, and in the
Patient or Sufferer, a disposition to receive. For that the earth may bring
forth fruit, it is needful that the Seed be cast into it, and that it be
first prepared as I said, etc. and if either of these be wanting, in vain is
the hope of fruit. The Smith that he may finish his work, first softneth it
in the fire, and makes it tractable; for except it be molified, in vain he
labors to beat the cold Iron. And it is a Maxim in Philosophy, Actus
actiuorum esse in patiente dispositi: The greater in any thing the disposition
is to receive, the sooner and more perfect follows the action. We see dry
wood put into the fire quickly to be kindled, and a candle lately put out, and
yet smoking, with the least touch of fire to receive the flame, and sometimes
without fire, with the breath only, to be kindled. So much avails a
convenient and apt preparation in the thing that receives any action. So
though I confess the grace of God to be free, and nullis astrictam legibus,
and bound by no laws (as Aug. says) yet this grace commonly imitateth the
reason and order of natural things. Hence it follows, How we may profit by
hearing the Word.
that a man may profit by hearing of Sermons; It is not always enough that
there be a learned and apt Teacher, unless the Hearer also be apt and well
disposed, that is, that the ground of his mind be first prepared, that he hear
not the same negligently, only for custom, or in an affection of curiosity,
but that he hear with zeal and devotion; for there are many that come to
Sermons only to carpe, or to note if the Preacher utter any sentence acutely,
or eloquently, whereby they may feed their curiosity, Curious hearers.
and not satisfy the hunger of their soul. And even as (they say) there is
some ground so barren, that, if they sow the finest wheat in it, brings not
forth wheat again, Typha, a kind of wild corn.
but typham, or chafe, only (which in the nature of things is very admirable,
seeing it is a Maxim in Philosophy, Omne agens sibi simile generare, every
agent ingendreth his like) So it chances unto them, in whose hearts if the
word of God be sown, it brings not forth the frnite of this seed, but
chafe, or Typham, that is, not the fruit of godliness, but the chafe of
vanity.

Now that this word of God may be unto us the sweet savor of life unto life,
2. Cor. 2.
the Apostle teaches here how we must prepare the ground of our hearts, even
by casting out the noisome weeds of vices, which hinder the fruitful and happy
harvest of the seed of the word; and here he names two; filthiness, or
uncleanness; and malice; because they defile and perturbe the mind that we
cannot hearken nor be obedient to the word of God. By uncleanness he
understands all impurity which springs of gluttony, Siouth begets lust,
gluttony brings it forth.
drunkenness, fornication, incest, adultery, and such like, which spring of
fleshly lust, as a Father very truly says: libidinem torpor gignit, gula
parit, quid miri igitur filiam parents sequi. Sloth begets lust, gluttony
brings it forth, what marvel then, if the daughter does follow her parents?
Math. 5.19
Out of the heart (says our Savior) proceed evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, fornications, thefts, false testimonies, slanders, etc. And the
Apostle Paul would have all Christians to be free from all uncleanness; as for
fornication and uncleanness, Ephe. 5. Augustine.
let them not be once named among you: Vbi carnis immunditia, ibi habitatio
diaboli, qui maxim inquinato corpore gaudet, says Augustine: The devil
dwells with uncleanness of the flesh, who most delights in a polluted body.
For wisdom cannot enter into a wicked heart, Wisd. 1.
nor dwell in a body sub ect unto sin: And this not only the sacred
Scripture forbidded, but also humane wisdom: In hoc (says Seneca) nos
amplectuntur vt strangulent non aliter igitur quam latruncul^ viatoribus
insidiantes eosque seducentes ac perimentes declinandae sunt: Pleasures embrace
that they may strangle us, which, as thieues that lie in wait that they may
seduce and kill travelers, we should avoid.

And surely the counsel herein, Scip. Afri. counsel.
that Scipio Africanus in Liuie, gave to King Masinissa is excellent: Vince
animum: cave ne deformes multa bona vitio vno, and tot meritorum gratiam maiore
culpa, quam causa culpae est, corrumpas: Vanquish thy mind, and take heed thou
do not deforme many good gifts with one vice, and corrupt the beauty of (...)
many deserts, with a greater fault, then the cause of the fault is. Which a man
should the easier do, if he would consider the vileness, filthiness, shortness, and
end of this vice; the long shame, and the short time; and how, perhaps, the
pleasure of a short minute, shall be punished with the repentance of many
years, and (peradventure) with everlasting damnation. Seeing then that the
Wisdom of God cannot rest in polluted and unclean hearts: O let us cleanse
and purge our hearts of all unclean and polluting sins, that the soule-sauing
word of God may enter and dwell herein.

The second vice here noted is maliciousness, Maliciousness what.
which Augustine defines to be nocendi amor, the love of doing hurt; Saint
Ambrose, to be mentis deprauatio, a deprauatio^ of the mind: And Cicero,
versuta and fallax ratio nocendi: A subtle and deceitful kind of hurting: all
which comes to one sense. The mind then must first be pu^^^ed of all malice
before the heavenly seed of the word can take any root in our hearts; that is,
our hearts must be sweeped clean from envy, hatred, desire of revenge, and
wishing evil to our neighbor, for our hearts cannot be capable of them both,
neither can the light of Gods Spirit dwell together with the darkness of
these vices. This pestilent vice always accompanies virtue, glory and
prosperity: Vulgus and liuor in plateis habitant sic vt mala fere omnia (says
that famous Orator) The common people and envy, dwell together in the streets,
as for the most part does all wickedness.

And there are certain effectual remedies to quench malice and envy, Sed
morbo ipso peiora, but worse then the disease it self, The remedies of envy
are worse the^ entry it self.
Misery, and an Infamous life; Of the one sprang this proverb, miseriam solam
inuidia carere, that misery alone wants envy: and to the other pertained this
of Socrates, who when Alcibiades demanded on a time of him, by what means he
might avoid envy and malice, answered: Viue vt Thersites, Thersites a filthy
and base pesant.
cuius vitam si nescires in Homerica leges Iliade: Live as Thersites did, whose
life if thou know not, thou may read in Homers Iliados: a scossing and a
perfect Socraticall answer; For it is no wise part to forsake virtue that thou
may avoid envy; and better it is to be noble Achilles with envy, then base
Thersites without it. Achilles a noble and valiant Captain.
And very aptly he calls it Superfluity of maliciousness, a metaphor taken
of a stomach surcharged with meats or drinks, which labors to cast out:

Omne superuacuum pleno de pectore tollit. So when it once abounds in the
heart, it is cast forth at the mouth in cursed speeches: And this (brethren) is
the cause, that among so many, which all their life long have frequented the
hearing of Sermons, that they are nothing bettered thereby, because they come
with hearts laden with all filthiness, and superfluity of maliciousness,
which they should first vngorge. How many are there among us, of whom we may
complain, as the Prophet did once: The word of God is to them at a reproach,
they have no delight therein. For what have we profited (I mean the greatest
number) by so many Sermons, so many cryings out? Who has forsaken his wicked
custom of blaspheming, swearing, backbiting, cursing, deceit, or usury? Who
has cast off his hatred, contention, desire of revenge? Who has cast off his
unchaste love? Surely (with horror of mind I speak it) I may say with Saint
Augustine, it seems unto me by so many admonitions, Nos non alium refer
fructum, quam vt Dei aduersus eos causam in extremo iuditio tueatur; that we
reap no other fruit, then to defend the equity of Gods justice in condemning
them at the last judgment. So that the Preacher may say with the Prophet: Esaias
49.
I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength in vain, but my judgment
is with the Lord, and my work with God.

The Apostle alludeth here to the parable of our Savior Jesus Christ: The seed
is the word of God, whereof some fell by the way side, some among thorns, some
on stony ground, and some on good ground. This seed, of it self, is very
fruitful, but according to the diverse conditions of the ground, that is, of
the hearers, it yields none at all, or diverse fruit: For the heart of some
is like an high way which is worn and trodden on of all; that is, which
without any choice is laid open to all unclean thoughts, and desires. Their
heart is like a common Inn which admits and receives all kind of men,
good and bad, known and unknown, for it makes no difference of good or evil
thoughts. It is like unto a crazed boat, which leaketh water at every chinke.
It is like a City without walls, or gates, which is easily invaded of the
enemy. Like a vineyard without a hedge, whose fruit is spoiled of every one
that passes by. To conclude, such a soul is like unto a house without a door,
or lock, which every one uses as a filthy stable. And how shameful a thing
is it to suffer the soul to be thus polluted with all unclean thoughts, it
may appear by this one example: Were it not an indelible shame for a woman to
fall into the degree of impudency, to prostitute her self in a common stews,
Et omnibus sui copiam facere? And what an ignominy then is it unto the soul to
receive within it all unclean thoughts and desires, which the devil offers,
without any difference? What is this else but to commit spiritual fornication
with the harlot, whereof the Lord speaks by the Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 2.
Like an harlot thou runnest about, upon all high Hills, and under every
green Tree. What fruit now should the word of God yield in such a heart? For
even as an harlot, though she know many men, yet she remains always barren:
So though they oftentimes hear the word, yet are nothing bettered thereby: For
these vices do distract the mind with diverse perturbations, that they will
not permit it quietly and attentively to hear the word, etc.

The eighth Sermon.
JAMES 1.22, etc. And be ye deers of the word, and not hearers only, etc.


THE Apostle having before spoken of regeneration, here he proceeds,
exhorting the regenerate to show forth the fruits thereof, The Division.
which consists in three especial members,



to speak well also, If any among you, etc. with certain reasons.

Pure religion and undefiled, etc.

By doing the word, the Apostle means not an absolute and perfect fulfilling
of the Law, which no man can possibly perform, as the Apostle Peter
witnesses; Act. 15.
but the doing of the word, by the imputation of the righteousness and
obedience of Christ, who has perfectly fulfilled the Law for the salvation of
the faithful, which when they have truly received Christ, by faith, he
gives them such measure of the spirit of sanctification, that they obediently
endeavor to conform their will to the will of God, to fear, love, and to
serve him, to love their neighbor, and always to proceed toward perfection.
Men dinersly affected to the word.
There are some which neither hear, nor do the word of God; others which will
hear, but not do; and there are others which hear the word and endeavor to
do the same. For the first sort of these, it is plain that they are of their
father the devil, by the sentence of Christ himself: John 8. chapter, and 47.
verse, He that is of God, hears Gods word, ye therefore hear them not
because ye are not of God. Simile.
Does it not seem that he is not the Lord of a Castle, which when he would
enter, the gates are shut against him? So the gate by which God would enter
into our hearts, is the hearing of the Word Preached: who so then that refuses
to hear, does, as it were, shut the gate of his heart against Christ: Even as
a City which receives victual, and all necessaries, for the sustentation of
their life from some other place, if thou stop the ways and passages by which
it was wont to be brought, they must needs faint and perish with famine: So
the life of our soul depends of some other: For every good giving, and every
perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father. The word of God
is the way by which all good things comes to the soul, which if thou stop,
thy soul must needs perish. The ground which is not manured and tilled, what
can it yield but weeds, brambles, and thorns? it brings not forth corn of
his own nature: If thou will not hear the word, Quid nisi peccata germinabis,
says one.

Cicero says) was wont to say, Philosophandum esse, Vt ne quid nimis. Terent.
sed paucis, that is, He would not wholly addict himself to the studies of
Philosophy, Sed summis tantum labijs degustare, that is, but a little taste and
away. Such are many professors now a days, which will not give their whole
heart, and love, to the word, but lightly and carelessly touch this heavenly
Philosophy. Such care for the word of God, in the same measure, Vt canis e
Nilo. Simile.
as they were wont the holy water coming into the Church, content to be
sprinkled with a few drops, but taking it in evil part if one should cast much
upon them: So these content themselves with never so little, or none at all, so
much do they fear to fall into the excess of ne quid nimis. Again, as that
man seems not to be of his household, or family, whose commandment he will
not hear; for shall he do that which he refuses to hear? Is it not a
wonderful thing that all the members of the body should be consecrated to
Christ, both for that he has created and redeemed us, and yet we cannot
afford him one member, not so much as an ear? To the poisons of detractions
we have our ears open, but to the word of salvation men give a deaf ear.
How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? Romans 10.14
and how shall they hear without a Preacher? But leaving these men as
incorrigible and desperately wicked, Contra negantes principia non est
disputandu^.
but praying to God for them, I will proceed to the rest.

Ecles. 2.10.
So that this of Solomon may be verified in them: Whatsoever mine eyes desired,
I withheld it not from them, I withdrew not my heart from any joy. Those idle
hearers our Savior likeneth unto seed sown among thorns, stones, Math. 13.
or in the highway. Simile.
And are not many like unto away, in which if there lie any money, or thing of
value, it stays not long there, but is taken up of trauellours; but if it be
a clout or some vile thing, it is let alone, there is none that takes it up:
So, scurrile things, dishonest speeches, filthy songs, we receive into our
hearts, and fix in our memory, as things very precious, but the divine and
precious jewel of Gods word is straightway forgotten, the devil catches it
away: and why? because we are like the highway; we are hearers and not
doers. What shall I say? Simile.
He that hears the word and does it nor, is like unto him that carries his
adversary with him, which will accuse him, and deliver him to the Judge to be
condemned: The word which I have spoken shall judge you in the last day: John
12. Mat. 5.25.
Again, agree with thine adversary quickly whiles thou art in the way with
him, least thine adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver
thee to the Sergeant, and thou be cast into prisou. Will you know what an
adversary the word of God is to the wicked? How the word of God reproves.
it crosses all their desires, it stands by and reproves them to their
faces, it tells the wicked that their palate is infected, their taste
corrupted, the sweet seems bitter unto them, and bitter sweet: it tells
them that they are like unto swine which have no smelling, and therefore they
willingly wallow in the mire, which if they had in them a spiritual nose, a
sound judgment, they could not endure their own stink, by reason of the
filthiness of their swinish lives: It tells them that they are near unto
death, and must give account unto God for the least sin they commit, and that
if God does not punish them in this life, he has reserved them to the more
severe punishment in the world to come: It tells them that no sin shall
escape unpunished, nor no virtue be defrauded of a reward: It denounces woe,
woe, woe, unto them, if they repent not betime; woe be unto them in their
life, woe unto them in their death, and woe be vnro them after death. O what a
terrible litigator is this (brethren) agree with this adversary betime, while
thou art in the way of this life: Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers
only: Contend not with it, strive not with it, repine nor at it, for thou
shall never overcome it. For a while, happily, you may plead excuses, extenuate
your sins, sed tandem, tandem, causa cadetis, but at length your cause shall
fail and be overthrown, and thy conscience it self being illuminated, and
better informed by reason, shall one day condemn thee, and deliver thee into
hell never to come out from thence, so great is the sum of thy debts which
thou shall never be able to pay. Our Savior joining the hearing and doing of
the Word together, Math. 7.24
says: Whosoever hears the word and does it, is like unto a wise man which
has buth builded his house upon a rock, etc. be ye therefore doers of the
word and not hearers only, etc. Many can boast that they have heard a Sermon
this day, or that day, yet diminish they nothing of their pride, and other
vanities, neither have they left their boiling malice, their swelling hatred,
their cursed coueteousuesse, their fleshly pleasures; neither abate they any
thing of their wanton banquets, their riotous feasts; neither stay they their
bribing hands, their slanderous mouths, their blasphemous tongues, their lying
lips; neither refrain they from pestilent usury, cruel oppression, violent
extorsion, fraudulent dealing with their neighbors: Therefore says the
Apostle, Be ye doers of the word, not hearers only.

Luke 11.
Blessed are they which hear the word of God and keep it; and showing whom
he counts for his brethren, he says; that they are his mother and his
brethren, Luke 8.
which not only hear, but do the word of God: And, If ye know these things,
John 13.
happy are ye if ye do them. We all make profession of Christ, and say we
have faith, when we never go about to bring in tune our iarring lives to this
unison: Faith indeed is the foundation, says the Apostle, but where is our
Christian building? 1. Cor. 3.
O build upon it, build upon it, be ye doers of the word. This then shall be
my counsel and request to you all, even for Christ's sake, and so I will
conclude, I beseech you be attentive.

Ye Gentlemen, Gentlemen
build upon this your faith in Christ, the works of clemency, justice and
liberality, that ye may be indeed such as your names do import, this is the
first I would have you to build upon your faith. Oppress not your poor
Tenants with unreasonable rents, and heavy fines: Esaias 3.15.
What have ye to do, that ye beat my people in pieces, and grind the faces
of the poor, says the Lord, even the Lord of Hosts. Give one part of your
substance unto God, another to the poor, and with the rest uphold an honest
estate and calling; this is the second. Be humble, not proud of Gentility and
riches, but remember ye must all die, return naked into the earth, and give
account to the supreme Judge for all your actions; let this be the third, so
shall you not be hearers only, etc.

Ye Merchants, Marcha^ts.
build you also three things upon your faith in Christ. Play not the usurers,
and prostitute not your money to unlawful gain, this is the first: Do not
adulterate, or falsify, your money or wares, let this be the second. Deuteronomy. 25.
Have not in your houses two weights, and two measures, one to buy with, and
another to sell with, for this is abomination to the Lord, let this be third,
so shall you not be hearers only, etc.

Ye Yong-men do not impinguate and pamper up your flesh, Young men.
least like an untamed horse, it does recalcitrare, lift up the heel against
you, but chastise the same with fasting, embrace sobriety; let this be the
first stone you lay upon the foundation of your faith: Inure and exercise your
selves in the wholesome discipline of learning, least idleness effeminate your
minds, and satan make it a seed-plot of al vices, which like Pthisicorum
Febris, a fever hectic, will cleave ever after to your bones, and depart only
with your life; Adeo a teneris assuescere magnum, so much prevails an evil
custom taken in youth: Have always in mind this counsel of the Spirit of
God: Eccle. 12.1
Remember thy Maker in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not,
nor the years approach wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them; let
this be the second. Fly evil company as from a noisome pestilence, Fly evil
company.
which, that ye may the better do, be sometimes alone, and meditate with your
selves, that youth soon vanishes, you must one day die, and give account for
your whole life past; let this be the third, which if ye do, Ye shall not
be idle hearers but doers of the word.

Women.
Ye women build you also these three things upon your faith in Christ. Keep
inuiolated your matrimonial chastity, train up your children in the fear of
God, be honest in your apparel, in your gesture in your words and works, and
be obedient to your husbands, which if you do, notwithstanding the cares and
troubles which wedded estate brings with it, ye shall one day enjoy the
incorruptible crown of glory, being doers of the word and not hearers only.

Ye Poore-men, Ye poor.
whose vocation affoordeth nothing in this world but cares, labors, and
sorrows, and conflicts with penury, build you also these three virtues upon
your faith: use patience in adversities; hope that at length you shall be
delivered; give thanks unto God in all events and accidents of this life,
which if you do, ye shall one day, with poor Lazarus, exchange your sorrows
for neuer-failing joy, being doers of the word, and not hearers only.

Ye sinful men and women, despair not of Gods mercy, Ye sinful men and
women.
but, without delay, build these 3 things upon your faith in Christ: True
sorrow and contrition of heart for your sinful lives; sure hope of pardon at
Gods hands; and amendment of life, in the study of all good works for that you
have displeased God, offended your neighbor, and most hurted your own souls,
so shall not your sins separate betwixt God and you, being doers of the word,
and not hearers only.

Having before insisted at large upon the Apostles admonition, I will now
proceed with the reasons.

The first is taken from the detriment which comes unto them which join not
practice with their hearing, The reasons.
They deceive themselves: Non enim stertentibus prouenit regnum coelorum sed
laborantibus, Augustine.
sed vigilantibus: The Kingdom of heaven is not given to the careless,
sleepy, sluggard, but to such as labor, to such as watch. And this labor (as
he says again) to the loving sons, and good servants, seems not only not
hard and onerous, sed suauis and leuis, but sweet and light, as our Lord
witnesses: My yoke is easy, Mat. 11.30
and my burden light. It is an old proverb, Amanti nil difficile, and crcdenti
nil non possibile: Nothing is hard to him that loves, and nothing impossible
to him that believes. Surely it is a wonderful thing if we consider the love
of God toward us, which seeks by threatenings, promises, and rewards, to
induce us to the practice of his Word, and obedience to his Laws, which yet by
all these means will not yield unto him: When yet if there were in us, but
scintilla germanae pietatis: One spark of true piety, we would verily rejoice
that any occasion were offered unto us whereby we might declare our gratitude,
love, and obedience, to so loving a God: For whatsoever he commands us, for
our good he commands it: Vt ansam habeat nobis gratificandi: that he might
take occasion (says a Father) to do us good: But we unthankful wretches.
Surdis auribus praeterimus, pass by with a deaf ear: and yet are we not
ashamed of so great unthankfulness; but what get we by this? Surely the
Apostle here tells us, We deceive our selves: Nobis hic seritur, Bernard.
nobis metitur, our sowing and harvest is to our selves. Cyprianus. Et quid ta^
amentiae simile imo ipsa amentia, stolidius, quam in rebus serijs, quae non de
lana caprina, sed nostra vel salute vel pernitie sempiternaagant, tam esse
socordes ac stupidos.
Many can (says he again) verbis crepitare Euangelium, prattle of the
Gospel, but have no care to practice the same: But whom deceive they but
themselves? And what can be more like to madness, yea more foolish then
madness it self, then in things of so great importance, which concern our
salvation or damnation, to be so lumpish and blockish?

Many now adays of the Layitie will challenge to themselves great knowledge,
yea and think themselves (not in the mild spirit of David, but in a proud
conceit of themselves) to be wiser then their teachers, whose hearts are yet
puffed up with pride, whose minds are set on mischief, whose feet are swift
to swift to shed innocent blood, whose hands are full of briberies, whose heads
are full pestered with covetous desires, whose lives are stained with usury and
oppression, whose bodies are wearied and wasted with fleshly pleasures,
ravished with inordinate desires, choked with cares, entised with delights,
carried away with vanities. Is this (my brethren) to hear the word? what is
this else but to deceive our selves?

O my (brethren) we which thus deceive our selves, shall never be able to
deceive God: Be not deceived, Gal. 6.7.
God is not mocked, for whatsoever a man sows that shall he also reap.
Simile.
Should not he seem a fool, which would sow his ground with nettles, cockle,
and darnel, and expect a plentiful harvest of wheat? He that sows no good
thing, shall he reap any good thing? Shall not he that sows in the flesh,
of the flesh reap corruption? and he that sows in the Spirit, of the Spirit
reap life eternal? Surely then these idle hearers to whom the word is but
diuersorium otij, and have no care to lead their lives by the line of Gods
Laws, what do they else but deceive themselves.

Brethren, we all hope to be saved, we all make profession of the hope of
eternal life, but do we not deceive our selves, whiles we look for the
inheritance of sons, and our degenerate lives acknowledge not God for our
Father? Let us not (my sweet brethren) thus abuse the long patience of our
loving God, and so inhaunce our condemnation at that dreadful day. Some of us
he has waited for, which add sin upon sin, forty years, others fifty,
others sixty, with wonderful patience inuiting us to repentance. Why is our
life given us by God, the Author of Life, but that it should serve and obey
the Giver thereof? For he has not given us life, and necessary aids of life,
that is, the service and obedience of all his creatures, to this end, that
abusing his gifts, we should provoke and kindle his wrath against us, or
should let loose the raines of gluttony, drunkenness, and other wicked
desires. So many years then as thou have lived wickedly, so long has God
patiently looked for thy repentance: In which time what means has He not
attempted? what has he not done that he might reclaim and recall thee to a
better mind? With how many plagues has he stricken thee, with how many
benefits has he allured thee, with how many diseases has he rowsed thee?
with the loss of how many of thy neighbors has he set the image of thy
mortality before thee? With how many secret inspirations, and that in the midst
of thy sinful race, has he sought to reform thee? With how many calls of his
Preachers has he warned thee? how many and infinite sins, has he
patiently suffered, that he might draw thee unto him, and provoke thee to
repentance? The longer then he has forborne thee, and left nothing unattempted
to win thee, the more justly and fearfully will he strike thee: Patientia
laesa, fit furor. This the Lord himself says by his Prophet Esaias: Esa. 42.
I have a long time holden my peace, I have been still and refrained my self,
now will I cry like a traveling woman, I will destroy and devour at once.

Tste Philosophers say, A Simile.
that the Adamant (which of all stones is the most solid and hardest) if by
Art it be dissolved, it turns into so small a dust, that it may hardly be
descerned by the eye. Such is the nature of this high Judge, and his Divine
fury as the Psalmist says: Deus Iudex fortis ac patiens: Psalm. 7.12.
And God is provoked every day, if a man will not turn, he has whet his
sword, he has bent his bow and made it ready. Eccl. 5.
The Almighty (says the Wiseman) is a patient rewarder, but when his patience
is often and much abused, then his great lenity is dissolved into most
fearful and bitter wrath, and the more patient he is in suffering, the more
terrible will he be in punishing, Et tarditatem, Valor.
grauitate supplicij compensat, and for the slownesse of punishing he adds
the greater punishment in the end: then shall we surely find how bitter our
former pleasures are, which have been the cause of such horrible torments.
Fauus distillans labia meretricis, nouissima autem illius amara, quasi
absinthium, and acuta quasi gladius biceps: The lips of a strange woman drop as
an honey comb, Pro. 5.34.
and her mouth is more soft then Oil, but the end of her is bitter as
worme-wood, and sharp as a two-edged sword. Rightly says he (two edged) for
it gives a deadly wound, not to the body only, but to the soul also. This
considered, let us not tempt the Lord and promise to our selves security in
sinning, but let us be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving our
selves.

The second reason why we should be doers of the word, and not hearers only,
is taken from the loss of the use of Gods Word; the word of God serves to
reform in us the things which are amiss; of this profit we deprive our
felues, when we are content with bare hearing without any care of reforming
our lives thereby. This reason he confirms by a fit similitude, comparing
the Word unto a Glass in which every one may behold himself, The Word
compared to a glass.
from whence he came, where he is, and whether he goes: that is, his sins,
his exile, his misery: his future state of wretchedness, never after to be
changed, if he persist in sin, the face of our nativity is the manifold
misery to which we are borne when we come into this world, which being newly
borne we presage by our weeping.

The word of God is in many respects compared to a glass.

1 Even as in a glass we may behold our deformities, and blemishes, which we
seek to amend; So the word of God shows us the filthy polutions of sin. In
this glass, David, Mary Magdalen, and all the Saints of God, beheld their
wicked lives, and thereby conceived a just dislike of those sins whereunto
heretofore they were addicted. In this respect the word of God is compared
unto a Glass: and therefore the Apostle says, that thereby we come to see
sin, Romans 3.
and by the Law have knowledge thereof.

2 The Glass shows their own faces unto men, and not the faces of others,
that they might be careful to wipe away their own blemishes, and not to be
curious in scanning the lives of others: So the word of God shows, unto every
one that looks therein, his own sins chiefly, and not the sins of their
brethren, to the intent that every one should be careful of his own life,
and not too curious to pry into the lives of others; therefore the Apostle
wills us, by rule of the Word, to to prove your selves whether you are in the
faith: Examine your selves. 2. Cor. 13.5.
Hipocrites hear the Word, Hipocrits.
as fools are wont to look into a glass, to see themselves, not to correct
their deformities, but persuading themselves that they are fair, when they are
deformed, and so go away as wise as they came: So hypocrites think themselves
righteous when they are wicked, go as wise from a Sermon, as they came thither.

We have then the word of God as a glass to look in: We have in the Saints,
and true worshippers of God a glass of examples to look into. We have within
our selves a Glass of Reason and Conscience, wherein every man may know in
himself, what is praise worthy and what deserves reproof. All these are
rules for the direction of our lives, and yet we never care to reform our
selves thereby. Luke 19.
O if thou had known, etc. (says our Savior, unto that wicked City) that
is, thou would then bewail thy state, as I now bewail thee. Augustine
speaks thus unto the sinner, Augustine.
in the person of God, saying: Augustine.
O homo quia te non vides, tibi places, si te videres tibi displiceres: sed
veniet tempus quando te videbis, and tibi pariter and mihi displicebis, tibi
quia ardebis, mihi quia damnaberis, O man because thou see not thy self,
thou please well thy self, if thou saw thy self, thou would take small
pleasure in thy self: But the time will come when thou shall see thy self,
and shall displease both me and thy self; thy self, because thou shall be
tormented, and me, because thou shall be condemned. Then when the Lord shall
reveal the secrets of the heart, when He shall search Jerusalem with a
Candle, Zeph. 1.
and nothing can be hidden from his eyes. Now is the time (brethren) to behold
our blemishes in this glass, that we may be induced to wholesome repentance,
and by judging our selves to prevent the judgment of God: But, alas, how far
otherwise do we use this glass of the Word: Some beholding in this Glass
their frailty, sins, and dangers they are in, for a time are humbled and
touched with forrow, but by and by, being allured with worldly vanities, they
forget themselves: Luke 8.
Like the Seed which fell by the way side; which are they that hear the Word,
then comes the devil, and takes it out of their hearts, least they should
believe and be saved. Others having a conscience clogged with all kind of
sins, veridici speculi contuitum fugiunt, they cannot endure the true glass,
which shows their deformities, least their minds should be troubled: Such
are they, Job 22.
as it is Job. 22. which say unto God, Depart from us; those blindfold
themselves that they may not see, and therefore their fall shall be justly
imputed unto themselves. Others beholding their deformities in the glass,
depart away offended with the Glass, and not with themselves, defending their
vices for virtues: Those are like wicked King Ahab, which hated the Prophet
Micheas, for speaking the truth, etc. 1. Reg. 22.


The second Part.
VER. 25. But who so looks in the perfect Law, etc.


THIS is the Apostles conclusion of his former similitude, why we should be
doers of the Word, and not hearers only. Where he stirs up all Christians
to the fruitful hearing of the Word, by the vtility and profit that comes
thereby, consequently reproving those which hear the same perfunctorie, and
with contempt. Whosoever beholds in the glass of the Word the face of his
conscience, and cordis intimos recessus, The inward closet of the heart.
and seeing the deformities of his sin, wipeth away his blemishes by
repentance, and adorneth his life with Christian conversation; this man indeed
shall be the blessed of the Lord. Let no man therefore sit idle, let none be
careless, let none be negligent in serving the Lord, while we have time let
us do good; Gal. 6.
let us work while it is day, for the night will come when none can work. Now
is the time of our labor, but the life to come is the place of reward, what a
man sows here, he shall reap there.

Why the Gospel is the perfect Law of Liberty.
and a Law of perfect liberty, whether it be considered in it self, or whether
it be compared with the Law of Moses: For by the profession thereof we are
freed from the heavy burden of Circumcision, Sacrifices, Ceremonies, wherewith
the people of the Jews were so burdened, that Saint Peter calls it a heavy
yoke, Acts 15.
which neither they, nor their fathers were ever able to bear. Rabbi Moses.
Rabbi Moses writes, that the Jews had two hundred and eighteen precepts
affirmative, according to the members of man's body, and three hundred sixty
and five negative, according to the number of the days of the year.
Contrariwise the Law of the Gospel is complete in this one word (diliges) For
he that loves has fulfilled the Law. Romans 13.


perfect Liberty, because it sauoureth of nothing else but love, grace,
charity, sweet promises: As contrarywtse, the Law of Moses is full of
threatenings and terrors: therefore Aug. says well: Augustine.
Breuis differentia Euangelij and legis est amor and timor: Love and fear, is
the brief difference betwixt the Gospel and the Law. For the Law only
displayed sin, reproved, and condemned, but could not pardon: as; Deu. 27.26
Cursed is he that confirms not all the words of this Law to do them. And
therefore Saint Paul calls it the ministration of death, 2. Cor. 3.
and he compares it to Agar the Bondwoman, which engenders children unto
bondage. Heb. 10.
And again he says: The Law having the shadow of good things, and not the
substance, could make nothing perfect; but the Gospel lovingly inuiteth
sinners to repentance, and promises pardon to the penitent, it lays before
us the love of God toward mankind, the merits of Christ, and with the
promises of most ample rewards allureth us unto godliness. What heart is so
flinty, and hard, that is not mollified at these sweet inuitings of our
Savior? Mat. 11.28
Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you. I came not
to call the righteous but the sinners to repentance: Math. 9.13
And, the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost. Luke 9.


perfect Law of Liberty, because Christ has freed the true Professors
thereof from this fourfold bondage, Sin, Satan, Hell, and Death, and
promises a blessed life to his faithful servants: Blessed are the poor in
spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. Math. 5. Luke 12.32
Fear not my little Flock, for it is your Fathers pleasure to give you the
Kingdom. And again, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the Kingdom
prepared for you from the foundations of the world. Mat. 25.34


The doctrine and use hereof is this; The Use.
that calling to mind the misetable bondage and servitude of sin, from which
none but the Son of God can set us free, and for which purpose he shed his
own precious blood: John 8.
we would be wary how we captiuate our selves a fresh in this miserable
thraldom, and as the Apostle counsels, Galat. 5.
Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free. Sin is as
fetters, chains, and cords, to bind the sinner in bondage: Prou. 5.
He shall be holden with the cords of his own sin: And again, Woe be
unto them which draw iniquity with cords of vanity, etc. Esaias 5.
Upon which place, says Jerome, Ierom.
the ropes and bands wherewith the wicked are bound in the prison of Satan,
are their sins; John 8.34
For whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin: And these bonds (says
he) are, Foediora, arctiora, fortiora, grauiora, molestiora omnibus totius
orbis vinculis; are more filthy, straight, strong, heavy, and troublesome, then
all bands in the world.

First, 1 The filthiness of sin.
for the filthiness of sin, it takes away, or staineth, the beauty of the
soul, it blemisheth and deformeth the image of God, and transformerh men into
the image of satan; For seeing the devil, only through sin, is filthy, who
so plungeth himself in sin, what does he else but die and paint himself
with the devils colors? this only is the difference, that the sinner may wash
himself with timely repentance, which the devil cannot. And surely if the
wicked which without remorse of conscience eat finne as they would eat bread,
and swallow it down like drink, could see their own filthiness, they would
seem loathsome unto themselves: For whatsoever, by the instinct of sin, is
done, spoken, or in mind conceived, is abominable, filthy, and detestable
unto God, who clearly beholds the deformity of such a soul. And sometime
this filthiness of the soul shows it self in body also; the proud man,
Elata ceruice, prodit superbiam, By his lofty gate bewrays his pride, with
his scornful countenance, and proud gate, as if his feet made Geometrical
paces: The covetous man, with care and anxiety, always fears: the envious
man consumes himself in his sad humor: the wrathful man with his swollen
face, and staring eyes bewrays his wrath: the Drunkard resembles rather a
beast then a man. To conclude the unthrifty and wicked man, walks with a
froward mouth (says Solomon) makes a sign with his eyes, Prou. 6.
signifies with his feet, and instructs with his fingers: And thus much for
the filthiness of this bondage of sin. For even as the body is adorned with
chains of gold and Jewels, but is deformed with fetters and irons: So the
soul is beautified with the graces of God, but with sin is polluted and
defiled.

These bands also are (Straight:) 2 They are straight.
For the bands of the body can but bind the outward members, but the bands of
sin bind the soul within and all the powers thereof. For even as Gods grace,
resting in the soul restores the same to liberty, and makes it acceptable
unto God; so sin, so holds the wicked in the servile bands of Satan, that
they are bereaved of all true liberty, and become abominable in the sight of
God.

The bands of this scruitude are not only straight but most strong, 3 They are
strong.
wherewith the wretched sinner is drawn to and fro, at the will of the devil,
John 8.
For he that commits sin is the servant of sin: And to be delivered
from thence by his own power and might he cannot; for they are more hard then
adamant, more strong then iron, which not only in this life, but also in the
world to come, shall bind both body and soul (unless they repent) in eternal
fire. But even as iron is mollisied with fire, and the Adamant with the blood
of a Goat; so these bands of sin are only loosed by the Love of GOD, and
blood of CHRIST: O then (brethren) let us not wilfully entangle our selves in
these bands of satan.

The bands of sin are not only strong, but most heavy also, 4 They are most
heavy.
which by their weight do press us down, and draw still sin upon sin,
more and more, unto it, until we be pressed down unto eternal destruction;
and, like a talent of lead, or Millstone, plungeth us and drowneth us in
perdition. A Tipe hereof we see in our Savior, at his Passion, who sustained
the person of a sinner, that he might set before our eyes the weight of these
bands; the farther he proceeded in his Passion, with the more bands was he
laden of every Judge. First, he was bound in the Garden, John 18.
and Annas sent him bound unto Caiphas, he sent him unto Pilate, and Pilate
unto Herod, Herod sent him back again bound and laden with a white vesture;
then was laid upon him a Crown of Thorns, and an heavy cross of wood, to
bear to Mount Caluery, where he exchanged his bands of cords, for sharp
nails of iron: So the sinner augmenteth his bonds, by adding sin upon sin,
as to gluttony whoredom, to whoredom theft, etc. O (brethren) and shall we,
which are called into the glorious liberty of the sons of God, Romans 8.
which make profession of the Gospel, which is the perfect Law of Liberty,
wilfully, for a little momentany pleasure of sin, cast our selves headlong,
by adding sin upon sin, into satan's prison, to be chained with such
grievous and heavy bands?

To conclude, 5 They are most grievous.
these bands are also molestissima, most troublesome and grievous, for they
yield no rest unto the sinner: Quia non est pax impij dicit Dominus, Because
there is no peace to the wicked, says the Lord; nothing is more subtle then
the soul, nothing more tender then the conscience, unless it be cauteriata,
burned with an hot iron, 1. Tim. 4.
that is, which through desperate wickedness has lost the sense of feeling.
Simile.
For even as Nerves or Sinews affected, feel the least touch of the finger:
so the Conscience, in feeling the burden of sin, finds no rest; which the
very Heathen: Orator truly confesses, Cicero.
Animi conscientia improbi semper cruciantur, furiae agitant and insectantur
impios: Their conscience ever tormenteth the wicked, the furies pursue and vex
them. Not ardentibus taedis, with hot torches, as it is in the sabulous Poet,
but in very grief and sadness of conscience. No wicked man quiet in heart.
For no wicked man can be quiet in heart (what face soever he make) for his
conscience is an heavy burden unto him.

Consider therefore (brethren) the miserable servitude of the wicked which do
not know that they are in the miserable bondage of the devil, and therefore
they glory and boast of their sins, as if it were an ornament unto them to
be wicked: Et exultant in rebus pessimis, Prou. 2.14.
and rejoice to do evil: They bewray their sins even in their speeches: men
most wicked borne, and brought up in the servitude of sin, and therefore know
not the sweetness of liberty, which in the children of God is so pleasant that
no external cross may obscure or take away the same.

VER. 26. If any among you, etc.

THE Apostle shows wherein Christian Religion consists by the properties
thereof negative, and affirmative.

First, that the word of God teaches us, not only to do well, but also to
speak well, and this consists in the moderation of the tongue. The unfeigned
Professors of the Gospel must endeavor thereby, not only to reform their
actions, but also to restrain and bridle their tongue, that both in action and
communication they may be holy unto the Lord. Pro. 25.18.
A man that refraineth not his appetite is like a City that is broken down,
and without walls. Again: Sicut vrbs patens and absque muris, ita vir qui in
loquendo cohibere no^ potest spiritum suum. Pro. 10.19. Qui moderatur labia sua
prudentissimus est. Prou. 13.
He that refraineth his lips is wise. If a Castle, or City, be kept and
watched never so careful, yet if the gates be not kept their labor is in
vain. So, if a man be never so careful to keep watch over his affections in
other things, if he be careless in governing his tongue, it is all in vain:
He that keeps his mouth keeps his life. Howsoever a barrel be hooped it
is all in vain if there be any hole open whereat all the wine runs out: So
is his Religion in vain, though having attempted to the practice of many
virtues, if he polluteth them all with an unbridled tongue.

Leuis est sermo sed grauiter vulnerat, Bernard.
aptissimum euacuendis mentibus instrumentum; A word is but a light thing, but
it gives a deep wound, a fit mean to vngorge the mind of all goodness.

The sacred Word of God mentions many kind of tongues, thereby to express
the manifold vices committed by the tongue; but because it would be too tedious
to recite all, Three kind of tongues.
I will insist but upon three kind of tongues which are most common and
pernicious in the world: Lingua serpentina vel venenosa: the Serpentine or
poisoned tongue, and Lingua dolosa, the deceitful tongue, Lingua mendax, the
lying tongue.

The first of these is the backbiting tongue which is in envious wretches;
hereof the Prophet speaks: They have sharpened their tongues like a Serpent,
Adders poison is under their lips: And of this hatesome vice of detraction, or
backbiting, I will say three things.

1 How many ways it is committed.

2 How grievous a sin it is.

3 The comparisons thereof.

First, there are three kinds of detraction, as the Schoolmen have rightly
noted, Psalm. 144.3
Iniquus, Astutus, Simulatus; Unjust, Subtle or Crafty, Hipocriticall.

The first is called Iniquus, unjust, not that this so pestilent a vice may be
in any sort justly done, but because, Summa iniquitate committitur (says
Aquinas) it is committed with great iniquity, Aquin.
and is most repugnant to the rule of equity, uprightness, and justice, that
should be amongst men.

This backbiting for memory sake I will reduce to three heads, it is three
manner of ways committed: Ruelando, fingendo, scribendo; by revealing the
secret infirmities of our neighbor, by forging against him, and by writing
infamous Libels against him.

Mat. 18.15
If thy brother sin go tell him his fault between thee and him alone. This
evil how great it is, and how largely it has spread it self in the life of
man, who so blind that sees not? who so ignorant that knows it not? who so
wilful that confesses it not? Is not this the custom, and common course, of
most men, to revile, to speak evil, to judge, at their pleasure, whatsoever
is not squared after their fancies, then which, there is not a greater, and
more manifold mischief in the life of man? This vice is so odious in the sight
of God, that the Spirit of God reckons back-biters among the cursed crew
which God has given over to a reprobate mind: Romans 1.
Detractor expressa quaedam sathanae imago: Chrysostom. sup. Math.
A back-biter is the express image of the devil.

Secondly, fingendo, by forging against his neighbor things whereof he is
innocent.

Thirdly, by writing infamous Libels against any man, or inuectiues, Lenocinio
verborum fucatas. The first of these is a great sin, for it makes a breach
of the Law of brotherly correction: The second greater, because it is joined
with a lie and slander: The third most grievous, because a man is more
generally infamed by writing then by words only.

The second kind of these serpentine, and poisoned, tongues, The crafty
Backbiter.
is Detractor astutus, the crafty, or subtle detractor: for there are of this
cursed kind which with a subtle style and pollitique carriage of themselves
will transfufe and spread the venom and poison of their tongues like a
serpent, to the hurt and destruction of their neighbor: And this is also three
manner of ways, Tacendo, Negando, Venenando, by silence, by denying, by
poisoning their speeches.

By their silence: As when a man is asked of the virtues of his neighbor,
though he speak no evil, yet he concealeth the virtues and good gifts of his
neighbor, which he knows and ought to have spoken; and this he does of
hatred and envy he bears to his neighbor; as if he be asked of the chastity,
sobriety, learning, liberallity, or other gifts of God bestowed upon his
neighbor; he either says nothing, or else replies, I know not, I will not
meddle with other men's doings, etc. This kind of Backbiter, though not
directly, yet indirectly, hurts the good name of his neighbor, therefore
well says Gilbertus: Grauis est rapacitas cum veram alterius gloriam
etsimendacio non corrumpis, silentio tamen praeteris: It is a grievous theft,
though with a lie thou corruptest not the glory of another, yet with silence
thou passest it over: And therforein this pestilent kind, the very imps of the
devil sins against the goodness and glory of God, and as much as in him
lies (o fearful sin) seeks to overthrow and obscure it: against his
goodness, because all graces, virtues, and good things, which are in any man
are Gods gifts, and sparkles of the infinite treasure of his bottomless
bounty. Now to seek by our silence to suppress the same, what is it else but
to offer injury unto God, and to raze out his goodness, and so (as much as is
possible) to obscure his Godhead, who is altogether and nothing but goodness:
he sins against the glory of God; for the virtues that are in any man God
would have to be lights to shine unto others unto his glory; for our good deeds
are a part of his glory as he says: Mat. 5.16.
Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works and
glorify your Father which is in heaven: Therefore to seek by our silence to
obscure the virtues of any, what is it else but to labor to put out the light
which God would have to shine unto the world? and so to show our selves enemies
to Gods glory.

The second kind of these serpentine tongues are such, Second kind.
which though they say no evil of their neighbors, yet they deny the good
properties which they hear others to commend in them, and think the praises
of others to be an obscuring of themselves.

The third sort are such which cunningly backbite their neighbor venenando,
The third sort.
as when they are enforced to speak much good of an other, whom they know to
be favored of him to whom they speak, they will presently poison the same
again with some exception: As, he is a good man if he had not this or that
infirmity, etc. or such a man has many good gifts if he had not this or that
defect; or such a one is learned, but he wants humility; such a man or woman
is honest, etc. but very proud: So these cunning backbiters, that they might
not seem to be backbiters will praise, that they may with the greater liberty
dispraise again, and so with honey they reach poison to drink, and as Hierom
says: Hieron.
Venena non dant nisimelle circumlita: pessimum genus hominum, qui cum maxim
fallunt id agunt vt boni viri esse videntur, says Cicero, Cicero.
they give their poison covered with honey: They are the worst kind of men of
all, which when they mean most deceit, they so carry it, that they might seem
to be good men. Valerius Maximus says, Valor. Max.
that when it was related unto Diogenes, that many spoke evil of him, he
answered: Oportet sapientiam ab nisipientibus feriri: Fools must needs strike
at wisdom: Valor.
And Valerius gives the reason, Esse enim meliorem indicat quem carpit; he
plainly shows that he whom he back-biteth is a better man then himself.

The third kind of these Serpentine tongues are the counterfeit and
hipocriticall back-biters; The hipocriticall backbiter.
and those also cast forth the poison of their tongues three manner of ways,
dolendo, augendo, nominando: by counterfeit sorrow, faigning good will to their
neighbor; by increasing and amplyfying their neighbors faults; by naming him
with praise, but presently adding his vices.

First, they will faigne in words, gesture, and sighs, that they speak not
for any ill will, when they defame their neighbor, and publish his
infirmities, but that they speak charitably, when yet they are full of
impiety, envy, and malice: As, I am sorry for such a man, or such a woman, that
he would do such a thing, otherwise he were a good man, etc.

Secondly, the hipocrites will back-bite, augendo, as when they speak of any
small infirmity of their neighbor, they will in words amplify the same,
saying; There is like to grow a great inconvenience of such a man's doing, of
purpose that they might aggrauate a small offense and so make the party odious
unto others.

Thirdly, nominando, as when they will name any man with praise, but will
presently add the vices he is subject unto. This vice is directly contrary to
the law of charity, the very band of perfectness, Coloss 3.
whereby we are (if we be in Christ) coupled together in one mystical Body.
This is a manifest breach of the second Table of Gods Divine Law, and therefore
God himself in the ordering of the Commonwealth of Israel, his people,
commands, that none should go about as backbiters and slanderers among his
people. Leuit. 19.


The second thing which I promised to handle of this matter, In three respects
a grievous sin.
was how grievous a sin this is; which we may gather three manner of ways,
in regard of the generality, cruelty, and contrariety of this vice.

In regard of the contrariety it is a great and dangerous sin, The
contrariety.
for it is contrary to our good name, which of all worldly things is most
precious, as Solomon says: Prou. 22.
A good name is to be chosen above great riches: And the Wiseman: Eccl. 41.12
Have regard to thy good name, for that shall continue with thee above a
thousand treasures of Gold: And Augustine, Qui famam suam negligit sibi
crudelis est: He that neglects his good name, is cruel to himself. This
the very Poet confesses. Ovid.
Omnia si perdas, famam seruare memento,
Qua semel amissa, postea nullus eris.
Though all things else thou loose, good name keep still with thee:
Which lost, is credit lost, thou naught esteemed shall be.
And Plautus: Plaut. in Mustella.
Ego si bonam famam mihi seruasso, sat ero dives: I shall think my self rich
enough, if I retain a good name. A good name therefore is the most precious
Jewel that any man has, whether he be Prince or Subject, noble or ignoble,
of what estate soever he be: A good name is an ornament which adorneth and
beautifieth every degree and calling, but the back-biter robs and spoyleth a
man of this precious treasure, therefore is a great sinner, yea, a most
grievous thief, and therefore the back-biter is bound, by the Canon Law, to
make restitution: Quia non dimittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum,
Augustine.
because sin is not forgiven, except that which was taken away be restored.
If then the good name of a man is above all earthly treasure, he that robs
him thereof sins grievously and is bound to restitution, if he look to have
his own sins forgiven: For this perpetual bond, this vice carries with it,
that howsoever thou repentest, howsoever thou sorrowest, except thou make
restitution of thy neighbors good name thou stand still guilty before God.
And how few do we see that are so studious of their salvation, that they have
any care to restore their neighbors good name? O (brethren) in what danger now
stands the back-biter? Seeing then that this vice brings with it, tantam
malorum segetem, an occasion of so many evils: who is so wicked, who is so
prodigal of his salvation, that even gratis: that is, for no profit at all,
will fall into so many mischiefs, and carry in his tongue such poison, a
sword, sharp arrows, and death it self?

Secondly, 2 In respect of the generallity.
the greatness of this sin appears in regard of the generallity of it; for
there are many sins which though they be committed, yet not at all times, in
all places, and of all persons: But this vice excepteth no time, no place, no
person: therefore this Apostle says, That this tongue is full of deadly
poison, Chap. 3.
and more dangerous and infectiue then any poison. For the poison of the
Scorpion hurts only such as he strikes with his tail, and none other: The
Viper infecteth none but such as he biteth: The Basiliske kills none but such
as he reaches with his sight: The venomous roots, herbs, and plants, infect
none but those which either handle, smell, touch, or taste, some of them: But
the back-biters tongue, stingeth and strikes, infecteth and poysoneth, kills
and destroys, at hand and far off, at home and abroad, by sea and by land;
such as meddle not, as well as such meddle with it, friend or foe; no love so
nearly linked, no friendship so firm, no band of duty so strong, no desert so
well deserving, which the poisoned tongue of the wicked does not, or has not
molested. Here we may judge of the greatness of this sin by the generality
thereof. An evil the more general it is, the more greater and more evil it
is: But this is an evil and a general evil, therefore the more great and
dangerous.

Thirdly, as by the generality, 3 In respect of the cruelty thereof.
so this sin is much aggrauated by reason of the cruelty thereof, Summa
iniquitas est fratres detrahere, quia omnis qui detrahit homicida est: It is a
great iniquity to back-bite our brethren, because he that back-biteth is a
murderer, says a Father: for even as a murderer takes away the life of his
neighbor, so does the backbiter his good name, which to an honest man is
dearer then his life: He is also occasionaliter (as a Schooleman terms it)
homicidij causa, by way of occasion, the cause of homicide, when through his
tongue, he gives occasion to another, to kill, hate, or contemn his
neighbor; and therefore the back-biter is compared to a Lion: Ezech. 19.
He is become a Lion, he has learned to catch the prey, and has devoured men.
Gregory expounds these words of Job: Why do ye persecute me as God, and are
not satisfied with my flesh: and says: Hi sunt qui detractione alienae vitae
pascuntur, Greg. in moral. sup. Job 19.
and aliorum procul dubio carnibus saturantur: Those are they which are fed by
backbiting the life of an other, and doubtless satisfy themselves with their
flesh.

This vice makes a man a brute beast, yea worse then any wild beasts, as this
Apostle says: The whole nature of beasts and of birds and of creeping things,
I am. 3.7.8.
and of things of the sea, is tamed, and has been tamed of the nature of man,
but the tongue can no man tame, it is an unruly evil full of deadly poison:
Whereby it is concluded that backbiting is a damnable, cruel, and a general
sin, and contrary to our good name.

The very Heathen themselves, by the light of Nature, seeing how excellent a
thing it is, and of how great perfection, wisely to govern the tongue, have
commended silence as a crown of glory, and condemned an unruly tongue as a
great mischief in the world. Zeno.
Zeno being asked by certain Legates, what commendations they should relate of
him unto their King, answered; tell your King that I am a man that can keep
silence. Lycurgus.
Licurgus instituted this custom among the Lacedomonians, that when they went
to any banquet, or feast, the oldest in the company should show the door unto
the rest, saying; Per has nullus egrediatur sermo: Let not a word go out of
these doors, because meats and drinks did then inuit men to intemperancy of
speech. Valerius lib. 2. de instituend is antiq.
Valerius says, that the ancient Romans would admit none to the
administration of the Commonwealths affairs, before good trial, being first
had of his silence, and moderation of his tongue. And Antonius Florentinus has
a History of the strange silence of a certain young man of Rome called Papirius,
Anto. Flore^.
Papirius.
who being but yet a youth went with his father into the Senate house, and
heard there many secret things debated about the managing of the public
state; returning home his mother enquired of him what matters were consulted
upon in the Councel-house; who answered, that it was not lawful to reveal the
counsel of the Senators. which consulted for the good of the State Public:
When she persisted (such is the importunity of that sex) and threatened him
with correction unless he would confess all unto her, he, after the manner
of children, fearing correction; choose rather to forge this officious lie,
then to reveal the secrets of the Senators, and said; it was there proponed
whether it were expedient for a man to have two wives, or a woman to have two
husbands: when she had heard this, she ran presently to other women of her
familiars, and told them what she had heard of her son: A day after, this
mother, with many other women, came into the Senate House, and in the behalf
of all the rest, made this petition: that the decree might pass on the women's
side, that it might be enacted that one woman might have two men: At which
words the whole Senate being amassed, enquired the state of this strange
request, and when it was found that it proceeded of the forged answer of
Papirius, that he might not reveal the counsel of these grave fathers, they
had him in great estimation, loved him exceedingly, and ever after, Anthonius
Frorent.
for honors sake, gave him a place in the Senate House.

Now for the comparisons of this vice, which was the third thing I promised to
handle: I find so many vile things to which it may be compared, that I know
not with which to begin first, or with which to end: Delectus florum quippe
moratur opus. Samb.

Variety is a hinderance to what I would say:


Whereunto shall I liken this generation, Luke 7.
etc. The Back-biter is like unto an hog: for even as the filthy swine
spares not his mouth from any filthy, similia.
or unclean thing, so does not the back-biter his tongue, but polluteth it
with the filthiness of others vices. The Backbiter like an hog.
The hog, if he enter inter into a pleasant garden, and sees on the one side
sweet flowers, and on the other side a filthy dunghill, or puddle; leaves the
flowers, as taking no pleasure in them, runs to the dunghill, and thrusts
his nose therein and walloweth therein: So the back-biter, seeing on the one
side many good gifts and virtues, which are as flowers in his neighbor, and
on the other side some infirmities worthy to be reprehended, he leaves his
virtues untouched, as things wherein he has no pleasure, but has always his
insirmities in his mouth. The famous Augustine so hated a back-biter, that he
forbad him his Table, over which he wrote these verses. Quisquis amat dictis
absentum rodore vitam, Augustine.

Hanc mensam vetitam nouerit esse sibi.
Who takes delight with carping taunts, the absent wight to touch,
Let him well know this Table here, forbidden is to such.


But whereunto shall I liken this generation? They are compared unto a serpent:
Eccles. 10. The Backbiter like a serpent.
If the Serpent bite if he be not charmed (some has occulte, secretly) no
better is a Babbler: As a Serpent secretly casts his poison, so the
back-biter privily vngorgeth the poison of his heart; that is, of envy, hatred,
and infamy, Iam. 3.
the tongue is full of deadly poison. The Serpent is a prodigious creature,
which creeps, winding it self and biting secretly: so the back-biter is a
traitor, for he biteth them secretly, whom in presence he faineth to love: and
as the Serpent is terrified at the sight of a man, so the back-biter fears
when he sees him whom he back-biteth: He also goes winding like a Serpent,
when he begins with the praise of his neighbor, and ends with his
dispraise, adding ( tamen yet) which is coniunctio aduersatiua: He also eats
the earth like the Serpent, that is, has ever in his mouth that which is
earthly, as the infirmities and vices of others.

But whereunto shall I liken this generation? The Backbiter like unto an Owl.
He is like unto an Owl, whose eyes the night makes bright, and the light
makes blind: So the back-biter is sharpe-sighted to see the infirmities of
others, which are as the darkness, and obscurity, of a man's life, but in the
virtues, which are as light as the day, he is purblind, he can neither see nor
hear them.

But whereunto shall I liken this generation? He is like unto a theife, The
Backbiter like unto a Thief.
yea worse then any thief that steals garments, or any temporal goods:
Tolerabiliores sunt fures qui vestes ac alia bona diripiunt, Ambrose.
quam qui famam nostram lacerant: Thieues which steal from us our clothes, or
any other good, are more tolerable then those which do spoil us of our good
name, according to this of Solomon: A good name is to be chosen above great
riches, Prou. 22.1.
and loving favor is above silver and above gold: He then that robs a man
of his good name, hurts him more, then if he stole great riches from him, and
therefore his theft is hardly, or never, restored again.

But whereunto shall I liken this generation? He is like unto the Scarabee,
Like unto a Beetle.
which delights to feed on the ordure and dung of beasts: so he feeds, with
delight, on the infirmities of his brethren, and loves to talk of their vices.

But whereunto shall I liken this generation? Like unto the devils advocate.
He is like unto the devils Advocate, for he pleads for nothing but for the
kingdom of Satan, and, as much as in him lies, makes Gods part to be the
devils, when he says, such a one is a fornicator, drunkard, etc. which are the
pillars of the devils kingdom, etc.

Tho: Aquin. in 73. quest. Artic. 4.
we have heard how great the sin of detraction is; what is to be thought of
them that give a willing ear to detraction, is that so great a sin?

Thomas of Aquine answers: The hearer, Tribus modis se possit habere; vel vt
inducens, vt placens, vel vt tacens: may three manner of ways behave himself,
either as inducing, pleasing, or holding his peace: as inducing or provoking to
back-bite, and then his sin is greater then the others that back-biteth; the
reason is: because that sin is greater in the cause, and original, of an
evil, then in that which is derived and springs from the cause, but he that
induces and draws another to back-bite, is the cause and original of the
evil; therefore the sin is greater in him then in the back-biter: Hieron. in
Epi. ad Nepolia. Cave ne linguam aut aures habeas prurientes vt alijs detrabas.
Ber. lib. de consider. Detrabere aut detrahentem audire, quid horum da^nabilius
est nescio. Ite^. in quad. sermon. Detractor and lubens auditorvterque diabolum
portat, detractor in lingna, auditor in aure.
As if he provoke him to speak, saying; I pray thee tell me of such a man, I
will keep it secret, etc. when he cannot conceal it one hour.

Secondly, the hearer is as consenting, and pleased with the hearing of
detraction; for though he entiseth not another to back-bite, yet if he be
delighted with the hearing, for hatred he bears unto him who is back-bited,
his sin is equal with him that back-biteth. Hereof Jerome says: Beware that
thy tongue, or ears, be not inflamed with the desire of detracting, or
hearing detractions against others. And Bernard: I know not which is more
damnable, to detract, or to hear detractions. Again, The back-biter, and the
willing hearer, both carry the devil, the back-biter in his tongue, the hearer
in his ear.

Thirdly, the hearer, of backbiting, who holds his peace, and does not
testify, though he be not delighted with it; if for fear, negligence, or
verecundia quadam, through a certain shamefastness, he does not rebuke the
back-biter, such a one sins, but not so much as the back-biter.

The second tongue which makes our Religion vain before God, is Lingua
dolosa, the deceitful tongue. The malignity of this tongue consists in three
things. 1 In consortijs 2 In consilijs, 3 In iuditijs.
in 1 In fellowships. 2 In counsels. 3 In judgments.


The first is used, when outwardly men make a show of love, friendship, and
plain dealing, and under the color hereof practice all treachery and
falsehood. From this tongue (because it makes his religion vain) the Princely
Prophet prayed unto the Lord to deliver his soul: Deliver my soul (o Lord)
from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue: Psalm. 120.2 Ier. 9.4.5.
hereof the Prophet Jeremy also gives this caveat: Let every one take heed of
his neighbor, and trust you not in any brother; for every brother will use
deeeit, and every friend will deal deceitfully: And every one will deceive his
friend, and will not speak the truth, for they have taught their tongues to
speak lies, and take great pains to do wickedly. This deceit is most
practiced in contracts, barganing, buying, and selling; yea, among some which
make profession of Religion and the Gospel, whose houses are vpholded, whose
riches are increased, whose children are advanced, whose sons are made
Gentlemen, by the deceitful tongues of their fathers, and servants, in their
shops and warehouses, in false weights and scant measures made for their
advantage. But (brethren) have we thus learned Christ? Is not all our
profession vain by the falsehood of our tongues? Does not the Spirit of God
tell us; That no man oppress and defraude his brother in any matter, 1 Thessalonians.
4.6.
for the Lord is the auenger of all such things. Pro. 21.6.
Again, The gathering of treasures by a deceitful tongue, is vanity tossed to
and fro of them that seek death: He calls evil gotten goods, The robberies
of the wicked which shall destroy them. Idem ver. 7 Pro. 22.16.
Again, He that oppresses the poor to increase himself, and gives unto the
rich, shall surely come to poverty. Of this kind is all crafty and subtle
circumuention of our brethren, which, like the Fowler, makes trappes and
snares to catch the simple-meaning man: They do nothing from the heart, but all
things, miris cuniculis and maeandris (as it is in the Proverb.) Math. 24.
Like the Pharisees, which laid snares to entrap Christ in his talk. Those are
of that pestilent crew, which speak one thing in word, and carry an other
conceit in their hearts. Psalm. 62.4.
They bless with their mouths (says David) but curse with their hearts: and
the words of his mouth are softer then butter, yet war is in his heart: Psalm.
55.
And, they speak deceitfully every one to his neighbor. Similia. Ianus.
They are like Ianus, whom antiquity was wont to paint with two faces; they are
called bifrontes. They are like unto seditious Cataline, who was, Salustius.
as ( Salustius says) cuiuslibet rei simulator ac dissimulator: a notable
dissembler, and forger of any thing. They are like to the Fox (as it is in the
Fable) which deceived the Raven of his prey, by praising him, and entising him
to sing, that opening his mouth, he might let fall the flesh, which the Fox
presently snatched up and devoured it.

Secondly, deceit is committed by the tongue in counsels, hereof speaks
Solomon, Prou. 12.
The counsels of the wicked are deceitful: They counsel against God, against
justice, against equity, for love, hatred, or for their private gain: They
deceive the simple ears of Princes, and of men in authority, giving them
crafty counsel for their own advantage: And indeed, non tibi, sed sibi
consulunt, they counsel for their own profit and not for thine. To avoid
such counselors, let this of Seneca be holden good policy: Omnibus credere,
and nulli, vtrumque vitium est, sed alterum honestius vitium dixerim, alterum
tutius: It is both a vice to believe all men, and to trust no man; the first is
more honest, but the other more safe. The Religion of those men is in vain (as
the Apostle says) howsoever they profess in words and outward shows.

Thirdly, this deceitful tongue (as in many other things, so in nothing more)
shows it self then, in iuditijs, in judgments, both in the plaintiff in the
crafty contriuing of his actions, and in the defendant repelling fraud by
fraud: There is utterly a fault among you, 1. Cor. 6.7.
because you go to Law one with another: Why rather suffer ye not wrong? why
rather sustain you not harm. Seneca could tell such, even by the light of
nature, non est vitium, vitio vindicandum, we must not revenge evil with
evil. The plantife then commits injustice in offering injury, See more in
my book, entitled: The Judges, and Iuries instruction.
and so does the other in deceitful defending of himself: Know ye not that
the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of heaven? says the Apostle.
But of this, occasion is offered to speak more in the next part, which is of
the lying tongue: now I will conclude this part with setting down the
greatness of this sin that is committed by the deceitful tongue, and how
much it is to be detested, and this appears many ways.

First, by the multitude of sins which accompany it.

Secondly, by the greatness of the damage that comes thereby.

Thirdly, by the necessity of restitution.

Fourthly, by the severity of the eternal punishments.

This vice, of the deceitful tongue, is never alone, but has many other vices
joined with it: As in buying and selling; what lying, what swearing, what
promises, what sugared and sophistical words, does not the deceitful tongue
practice?

Hor.
Laudat venales qui vult extrudere merces.
He that bad wares away would shift,
To prays them most, it is his drift.
What falsehood in payments, in waights, in measures, in falsifying of wares in
substance, quantity, and quality, contrary to the express Law of God, Leu.
19.11
which says: Ye shall not steal, neither deal falsely, nor lie one to
another: Deuteronomy. 25.13.14.
And, Thou shall not have in thy bag two manner of weights, a great and a
small, nether shall thou have in thine house diverse measures, a great and a
small.

The greatness of this vice appears by the greatness of the damage that
comes thereby to the deceitful persons, because for a little temporal
gain, they loose the spiritual; for earthly goods they loose the heavenly;
for a little transitory lucre, they loose their own souls, then which loss,
what more greater and incomparable may be imagined: such neglect the Preaching
of the Word, use irreverently Gods Ministers, profane his Saboaths, and what
not? Iuuenal.
-- Quae reuerentia legum?
Quis metus aut pudor est vnquam properantis auari?
What reverence of Law? what fear or shame, in a covetous caytife, that
hasteneth to be rich? And so an other truly says: -- mortemque sequemur,
In praeda, pudeat tanto bona velle caduca.


Men for love of their prey will even follow death, but let them be ashamed,
at so dear a rate, to secke transitory things. And therefore, Verse 26.
If any among you seems religious, and refraineth not his tongue, but
deceives his own heart, this man's Religion is vain.

that he may get a few, and vile things, which yet he is bound, upon the
necessity of his salvation, to restore again? Hear what an ancient Father
says of this, Nullus excusatur a restitutione nisi propter impossibilitatem,
sed videat ne ipse causa impossibilitatis fuerit illius: No man is excused from
restitution, except it be for the impossibility thereof, but let him see least
he be the cause of this impossibility, surely he shall then be severely
punished. Let pickers, thieves, cousoners, oppressors of the poor, Advocates,
Lawyers, Judges, etc. look unto this, yea, betime, I say, let them look to
it, which live, and wax fat, with the sweat of the brows of the poor, and
maintain their pride and prodigality by others labors. Restitution.
This almighty God in his most holy Law expressly commands: Leuit. 6.5.
Or for whatsoever he has sworn falsely, he shall both restore it in the
whole sum, and shall also add the fifth part more thereto, and give it to him
to whom it pertains. Here you see that by Gods own Law a man is bound to
restore again whatsoever he has gotten by fraud, false oaths, and a
deceitful tongue: As the Lord would not then accept of his trespasse-offering,
neither will he now his trespasse-offering of repentance for his sins, without
restitution, which to many will be a very hard thing to do, and perchance
impossible. How few are there now which, with Zacheus, Luk 19.
will restore fourfold for their wrongs and injuries done to others. And
surely in many cases a simple restitution only is not sufficient, as when the
party to whom restitution is due, is damnified by usury, deceit, and
oppression, that he is constrained to sell his inheritance, or other goods, in
this case (I say) a simple restitution is not sufficient, therefore the
Scripture says, that he shall add a fifth part more. Leuit. 6 5.
Here again ye see the truth of the Apostles proposition, that a deceitful
tongue makes our religion vain.

The fourth thing, which shows the greatness of this vice of the tongue is
the severity of Gods judgments denounced against the same, Psalm. 52.2.
as; Thy tongue imagines mischief, and with lies thou cuttest like a sharp
razor that cutteth deceitfully. And again, Hab. 2.11.22.
The stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall
answer it; woe be unto him that builds a Town with blood, and erecteth a
City with iniquity. A learned Rabine of the Jews says; Rab. Kinhi.
that their forefathers were so carefully careful not to offend in craft,
fraud, and a deceitful tongue, knowing Gods severe threatenings against these
things, that they made this decree: If any had wrongfully taken a beam or a
rafter, and used it in the building of a Tower or Castle, he was to pluck
down the same again and restore that piece to the owner. And as for the
treasures of iniquity, let them plainly understand, that they put them into a
bottomless bag that can hold nothing. Is it not a just plague of God, that ill
gotten-goods never descend to the third heir? perhaps not to the second, nor
first, nor to the benefit of him, who thinks he has surest hand-fast in
them. Let us therefore (my dear brethren) better employ the tongue, this
little member, that is able to make our whole Religion vain, least it fill our
consciences so full of lying, backbiting, falsehood, unjust dealing, that there
will be no room left for the peace of God to dwell within us. D. K. Math. 12.
Let we the Kingdom and commodities of the earth alone a while, and learn
we that the Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and must be won by
force, strive we then with our tongues, hearts, and hands, to win this
spoil from him that keeps it. Let us spare no invention o^f wit, intention
of will, contention of sinews, eloquence of tongue, strength of hands, to get
this Kingdom, beg it, buy it, steal it, assault it by any means; this is all
the deceit of the tongue, all the fraud, all the oppression, that I can allow
of, out of Gods word.

The third tongue is, lingua mendax, the lying tongue: A vice as common unto
many, as words are to their mouths; in their usual talk, commerce, and
communication, it is so ordinary and familiar with them, as if their whole life
had been a Prentiship to the father of lies, to learn the faculty of lying, so
prompt and ready are they therein, as if it were the mystery of their study all
their life long. There are many reasons why this vice should be utterly
banished from among men: because we are members one of another, and members of
the same body of Christ, which is the Church, and the Head of this Body is the
Truth it self: I am the Truth (says Christ) And there was no deceit found in
his mouth. John 14.6. Esa. 53.9.
What a monster then is it that the members which live under this head should
lie one to another, and use guile and deceit? In man's body no member deceives
another, for if they did, it would tend to their own hurt and fraud; he
therefore that deceives his brother, deceives himself. It is a shameful
thing if one man should lie unto another, if one stranger unto another: But
more shameful is it for a domestical friend to lie unto a domestical friend,
a brother to a brother, a servant to his Lord. What then if a member of Christ
should lie unto a member of Christ, a Christian to a Christian, the faithful
to the faithful: o what a destable and loathsomething is this!

Though this might suffice to breed a loathsomenesse of this vice, so odious in
the mind of every good and godly Christian; yet, because this most pernicious
vice has so largely spread it self, through the malice of Satan, in these
wretched days, and many, without all fear of God, and shame of the world, do
make lying the mystery of their occupation, as though it were no sin at all:
that I may discover the deformity, and greatness, of this vice, I will proceed
further, and briefly touch these three points.

1 How many kinds there are.

2 How grievous a sin it is.

3 Concluding with certain motives against the same.

That the ignorant may learn, the careless consider, and the forgetful
remember, how great this sin is in the sight of God.

First, Aug. in lib. de mendatio ad Consen.
Augustine thus defines it: Mendacium est voluntaria orationis, falsum
dicentis, and mentis verum dictantis inaequalitas, cum studio fallendi
coniuncta: Which definition contains three things concurring in a lie. First,
to write or speak that which is false, and that against the truth that is in
the mind: For truth is an equality between the speech and the mind, Truth
what it is.
so far as the speech agreeeth with the mind: Therefore lying is an inequality
between the speech and the mind: for mentiri, is quasi contra mentem ire.
Secondly, that this is done by the rule and commanding of the will, repugning
to the mind. Thirdly, that this is done of purpose to deceive. From this triple
end of lying came this common division of a lie, into Officiosum, Three kinds
of lies.
Iocosum and Pernitiosum: the officious lie, the sporting lie, and the
pernicious lie.

The jesting, or sporting, lie, they say, is that which is framed to feed and
please the minds of the hearers with a certain delectation: This if it be
used to delight and profit any man, by some necessary doctrine, Augustine
excepteth it from lies: Such are Apologues, Fables, Parables, Tropicall
Locutions, hyperboles, etc. which no wise man ever reckoned among lies, if
there be in them no habit of lying and vanity in speaking: Therefore against
the sporting lie I thus conclude; either there is in our jests some profitable
doctrine, and then they are not lies, and therefore my purpose is not to
reprove these: or else there is in them a vain intent and purpose, and then
they are lies, and to be rejected of all good men, and left to scoffers and
vain persons.

Now for the officious lie, some commend unto us a fine, from the end or intent
thereof: First, because it profits in the external goods of fortune, and is
against no man: Secondly, that it profits also to the conservation of life
oftentimes, and hurts no man: Thirdly, that it has place also in spiritual
things, and defends sometimes from much uncleanness, which otherwise men
might fall into. But against all this I oppose, that we may not do evil that
good may come of it: if lying be an evil, as indeed it is, it ought not to be
practiced for any hope of good to ensue whatsoever; neither do this prove that
lying is in any wise lawful. The example of godly me^.
The arguments they object against this are indeed nothing, as the examples of
godly men in the old Testament, to which generally Augustine answers. First,
that many things, do there seem to be lies, which indeed are not, as that of
Abraham saying of his wife she is my sister, Genesis 12.
he said the truth according to the manner of the Hebrews, because she was
filia patrum sui, which had among them the name of parents: and that of Jacob,
saying to his father Isaac, Genesis 27.
I am thy first borne Esau: for though he were not so according to his carnal
nativity, yet was he so, according to Gods divine dispensation the right of the
first borne was to be transferred to Jacob, that the elder after the flesh
should serve the younger. Again, if they were lies, they are not approved by
the spirit of God, and therefore the piety of these holy men is to be
imitated, yet the lies they used are not to be drawn to an example to follow,
neither to be wrested ad regulam morum, to the rule of manners.

Now remains the pernicious lie, The pernicious lie
which is so filthy and hatesome a vice that it wants a patron to defend it,
even among the most wicked sort: To this pertains false-witnesse-bearing
whereby our neighbor is wronged and hurt, either in body, in goods; or defamed,
slandred, and damnifyed in his good name: The false witness that speaks lies
is abhorred of the Lord. Prou. 6.
Generally all lies and falsehood may be more aptly divided into 1 A lie in
words. 2 In manners. 3 In the things themselves.


In words, as the pernicious, officious, and jesting lie: Where I except
honestiests, hyperbolical speeches, allegories, etc. which contain vtilem
(...), a profitable moralizing upon a fable, because there is in it no intent
to deceive, neither any inequality between the speech and the mind, nor will
to speak falsely, especially if we have respect to the equality of the thing.

The lie in manners, includes all hypocrisy, dissimulation, flattery, etc.
Natura, Cicero.
frons, oculi, vultus persaepementiuntur, oration vero saepissime: Nature, the
countenance, the eye, M. Curious a noble man in Rome of singular honesty and
wise dome. Bacchus the drunken God of wine, whom they honored with beastly
ceremonies.
do oftentimes lie, but the speech most often; such go in sheep clothing,
but inwardly are ravening wolves: Against such the Son of God denounces woe
in the Gospel.

Qui Curios simulant and Bachanalia viuunt
They Curious grave would seem to be,
Yet Bacchus-like their lives we see.
The lie in substance of things contains all falsehood in buying and selling,
when naughty and corrupt things are sold and warranted for good; or else one
thing is sold to the ignorant for another, as among the Physicians are many
such, as false Aloes, false Balsamum, etc. whereby great and intolerable
errors are committed by unskillful Physicians, to the destruction of many: 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
The Lord (says the Apostle) is the aue^ger of such things.

Now let us consider how grievous a sin it is. First, How grievous a sin it
is.
he that lies speaks against God, for God is truth, and his Law is the rule
of truth; the liar therefore sins against God himself: Besides, the truth
that rests in his mind against which the liar speaks, is of the holy
Ghost, the author of all truth; to lie then, what is it else but to speak
against the truth of God graven in our hearts, and so to bend our tongue
against the holy Ghost.

2 Every lie is of the devil, who is a liar and the father thereof, John 8.
when he speaks a lie he speaks of his own: And whatsoever is of the
devil must needs be a most detestable vice; therefore a wicked spirit is
said to speak lies in the mouth of the false Prophets which seduced Ahab; 1.
Reg. 22.
therefore a certain ancient Writer, upon this place of John, the diuill is a
liar, etc. says, that whosoever is a liar does, as it were, couple himself
with the devils daughter, and has divorced himself from Verity, the
offspring of God. For God is the father of truth and verity, and a liar
honors the devil as a child does his father, who so then coupleth himself
with the child of the devil, let him look also for the dowry which he is
wont to give to his children, namely, eternal damnation: Apoc. 22.8
They shall have their portion in the Lake that burns with fire and
brimestone.

3 He that peruerteth the order constituted of God among men, he grievously
sins, and the liar does this; for the order that God has appointed is, that
by words the sense and meaning of the mind should be manifested, and therefore
words are said to be notes of these things which are contained in the mind:
but the liar says contrary to that which is in his mind, and therefore
peruerteth the order of God, and grievously sins: For this cause the Spirit
of God says: Prou. 12.
The lying lips are abomination to the Lord.

4 The liar (says an ancient Father) blasphemeth God as does the devil, for
the devil as much as in him lies, Dat esse non enti, gives an essence to
that which is not, in that he says that to be that is not, but it is only
proper to the power of God, to make to be, things that are not; the liar
therefore sacrilegiously (as much as in him lies) usurps the power of God in
affirming, and giving an essence to things which are not.

5 What is more clear then the testimony of the conscience of every man when
he lies: For there is none that lies but perceives his conscience to accuse
him as a malefactor, whereof this is a most evident testimony; because he that
lies would not be counted a liar, nor ever confess that he has lied, and why
so? because it is naturally engraffed in our minds that lying is an evil
thing, and an offense and wickedness full of shame and infamy; yea, the very
children, when they lie, do know they have done evil by the instinct of
nature, wherefore being convicted of a lie they presently blush, etc. Again,
it is a thing among all Nations, received and obserned, that a good man may
have no greater reproach done unto him, then if it be said unto him, tu
mentiris, thou lie; and what more effectual then this common judgment of
all Nations to show the filthiness of this sin, and how unworthy it is for a
Christian man? And surely not without cause, for man was created after the
image of God, and God is Truth; what then may be more unworthy for a man then
to lie, and be a liar, especially seeing that this is the property of devil,
as Christ witnesses, in the 8 of John.

Of this which I have said we may easily gather the reasons that should move
us to cast of lying, The motives.
and to deal plainly and truly with our brethren.

First, because God in his holy Law has forbidden us to lie, and commanded us
to speak the truth.

Secondly, because it is very hurtful to the liar himself, for with lying he
provoke the wrath of God against him: Psalm. 5. Prou. 6.
God shall destroy them (says David) that speaks lies: And, God hates a
lying tongue: Wherefore among other causes why the godly are said to be
received into heaven, this is not the least, Apoc. 14.
Because there was no guile found in their mouths. Again, the liar loses
his credit among all men, so that afterward no man will believe him though he
speaks the truth, Cicer. in lib. de deuina.
which Cicero notably expressed, saying: Homini mendaci ne vera quidem dicenti
credere solemus; We are not wont to believe a liar though he speak the truth:
the reason is, because. Qui semel malus semper praesumitur malus in eodem
genere mali, It is presumed that he that was once evil, is always evil, in
the same kind of evil.

Now it remains that I pray and beseech (you brethren) to whom your life and
salvation is dear, that ye carefully, considering the heap of evils that the
wicked tongue brings with it, you would call daily upon him in whom it only
lies, to govern the tongue, and say with the holy Prophet, Psalm. 141.
Set a watch, o Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips: And not
only so, but we our selves would put a bridle unto our tongue, and diligently
weigh, in the balance of our hearts, our words before we utter them, that they
hurt no man, and that our tongue destroy not our own soul, so shall it come
to pass, that with this one care we shall avoid infinite sins which are
committed with the tongue.

And so I conclude this whole discourse of the tongue, with these few short
lessons, which I would wish every good Christian to register in his heart, and
practice in the course of his life. For the beter government then of this
little member it would greatly profit to observe these four things: viz.
First, what we should speak: Secondly, the manner of our speech: Thirdly, the
time when we should speak: Fourthly, and the cause why we should speak.

For the first we are to observe this of the Apostle: Ephe. 4.29.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths, but that which is
good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers: And
this in another place he expresses more plain: But fornication, Ephe. 5.34
and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once named among you,
as it becomes Saints: neither filthiness, neither foolish talking, neither
jesting, which are things not comely, but rather giving of thanks. Even as the
Mariner does carefully avoid all dangerous places delineated in his Map, or
Charte: So the servant of God in his daily speech should warily shun the
dangerous rocks of communication discovered in the word of God, that his soul
suffer not shipwreck thereon.

2 In the manner of our speech we should be circumspect, that we speak
considerately, advisedly, without too much affectation of curious, delicate, or
exquisite words; but with gravity, mildness, sobriety, we use a Christian
simplicity and plainness in our speech, without obstinate selfe-conceite, as
they which strive to have the upper hand in whatsoever they shall speak,
whereby the conscience of many is troubled, charity and patience infringed, and
their friends offended. It is a note of a generous mind sometime to yield, and
in such contention leave the palm to another, according to the counsel of the
Wiseman: Give ear and be still, Eccl. 32. Verse 7.9.
in many things be as one that is ignorant; be as one that understands, and
yet hold thy tongue.

3 The third thing to be observed, is the fit and opportunate time of
speaking, that we speak in due time: For as the Wiseman says: Ecle. 20.5.
Some man keeps silence, and is found wife; and some holds his tongue,
because he has not to answer; and some keeps silence, waiting a convenient
time: A wise man will hold his tongue till he see opportunity, but a fool
will regard no time.

Nobile lingua bonu^ si norit tempore fari, At si non norit nobile lingua malum.
The tongue is sure a noble Good, if time to speak it knows:
If not, the tongue's a mischief great, from whence much evil flows.
4 The last thing in speech to be considered is the cause; for some will utter
wise sentences that they may be thought to be wise, and others because they
would show the acuteness of their wit and eloquence: the first is an note of
an hypocrite, the other the mark of a fool desirous of vainglory. He
therefore that would speak must not only have a care that his words be good,
but also that the end and intention be good, which is, if in our speech we
seek only the glory of God, and good of our neighbor.

If any think it hard to observe these rules, I counsel him to make his
refuge the safe port of filence, which will be a remedy to shun innumerable
sins, which otherwise men are wont to fall into through a misgouerned tongue,
as that Mirror of wisdom counsels: Pro. 17.28
A fool when he holds his peace is counted wise, and he that stops his
mouth prudent. And Bernard says, Sint verba tua rara, vera, ponderosa; rara,
contra multiloquium, vera, contra falsiloquium, ponderosa, contra vaniloquium:
Let thy words be few, true, substantial; against many words, false words,
vain words.

The third Part.
VER. 27. Pure Religion and undefiled, etc.


THE Apostle having showed negative, what Religion is not, that it cannot stand
with an unbridled and misgouerned tongue: he now describes the same
affirmative, showing what the true and pure Religion is, and that by the
properties and effects thereof; and here he makes mention but of 2 things.

1 The works of mercy toward our distressed brethren: 2 And innocence of our
own lives. The effects of true religion.
Under these by a figure called Synecdoche, comprehending all other duties of
Christianity. Now in that the Apostle says, Pure Religion and undefiled before
God even the Father, He distinguishes between the true Religion, and the
counterfeit and false Religion of hipocrites; inferring that there is a
Religion approved among hipocrites, but not with God, and a Religion that is
pure before God, and allowed of him, but not with the hipocrits of the world:
the true Religion acceptable unto God, shows it self in mercy, love, and
charity toward our brethren, and innocence and purity of our own lives: which
being wanting in hipocrites, howsoever they please themselves, and what show
soever they make to the world, yet is it not the true Religion before God: And
this much the very name of Religion implies, which comes (as Lactantius
would have it) a religando, Lact. lib. 4. cap. 25. Religion how derived.
quia per hoc pietatis vinculu^ Deo religamur and obstringimur: Of binding,
because by this band of piety, we are bound and knit to God. Again, this
Religion is called pure and undefiled, not only that it might be distinguished
from the impure superstitions of the Gentiles: But also, because it ought to be
void and sincere from all hypocrisy and dissimulation: With how many
impurites the sects of the Simonians, Nicholaytans, Carpocratians, and of the
old Gnostici, Irenaeus. Augustine.
were polluted and defiled, Irenaeus, Augustine, and other ancient Writers do
witness at large.

The first effect of true Religion is charity toward the fatherless and
widows, signifying by them all our brethren which stand in need of our help,
but especially our mercy should extend to the fatherless and widows, of who^
God seems to have the greater care, because they are exposed to most wrong,
and are destitute of the protection of their husbands and fathers, which were
wont to defend them and stand for them; and therefore in a peculiar and singular
manner, in holy Scripture, Psalm. 68
he is called, The Father of the fatherless, and Judge of the cause of the
widows. Which appellation in very deed is most convenient for the Majesty of
God; for there is a false, and there is a true, magnanimity of mind. The false
magnanimity exercises his rule and tyranny over the poor, the weak, and such
as are able to make no resistance: But the true magnanimity of mind takes
upon it the patronage and defense of the weak, the destitute, the poor, the
afflicted, which want the succors of this world: which is an especial
property of God, yea which he has engraffed in the nature of the very brute
beasts of the noblest kind and valor, as of the Lion.

Ovid.
Corpora magnanimo satis est, prostrasse Leoni.
The valiant Lions wrath does die,
To see prostrate a body lie.
And therefore the Lord is said to take especial charge of them himself: He
keeps the stranger, Psalm. 146.
he releeueth the fatherless and widow: So in his holy Law he has given a
straight charge unto men, concerning widows and fatherless: Ye shall not
trouble any widow nor fatherless child, if you vex or trouble such, Ex. 22.22
23.24.
and so he call and cry unto me, I will surely hear his cry, then shall my
wrath be kindled, and I will kill you with the sword, and your wives shall be
widows, and your children fatherless. Again, Relieve the oppressed, judge
the fatherless and defend the widow. And, Esaias 1.17.
enter not into the field of the fatherless, for he that redeemeth them is
mighty, be will defend their cause against thee. Again, Oppress not the
widow, Zach. 7.10
nor the fatherless, the stranger nor the poor: And, Ier. 22.3.
Deliver the oppressed from the hand of the oppressor, and vex not the
stranger, the fatherless, nor the widow. And again, Deuteronomy. 10.18.
The Lord does right unto the fatherless and widow, and loves the stranger,
giving him food and raiment: likewise in many other places. So then this place
commends unto us the works of mercy and love toward all men that are in
misery and distress, but chiefly toward the fatherless and widow.

To this noble virtue the Son of God, by the example of our heavenly Father,
exhorts us: Be merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful; Luke 6.36.
In which place some Writers observe a threefold mercy to be used toward our
neighbout: A threefold-mercy.
Fraternae supportationis, benignae condonationis, temporalis subuentionis: Of
brotherly supportation, of courteous condonation, or forgiving, of succoring
him with our temporal goods.

Ver. 37.
Judge not, and ye shall not be judged; condemn not and ye shall not be
condemned; The Apostle following this precept of the Lord, says; Bear ye one
another burden, Gal. 6 2.
and so fulfill the Law of Christ: Where we are forbidden to judge rashly of
our neighbor, and the things that are doubtful unto us, in what mind they
were done, to enterprete them in the better part. This Christian charity
teaches, and the Civil Lawyers have a saying: Semper in dubijs benigniora
sunt praeferenda: In things doubtful, the most friendly construction is
always to be preferred. But of this I have spoken sufficiently before.

The second is the mercy of condonation, Forgive and it shall be forgiven you.
All excuse at the day of judgment is taken from him that is unmerciful, and
hard to forgive, for it shall be done unto him as he has done unto others: To
this the blessed Apostle Saint Paul counsels, Col. 3. Forbearing one another
and forgiving one another, as Christ forgave you, even so do ye. And to this
purpose the Wiseman has a very true and notable saying: He that seeks
vengeance shall find vengeance of the Lord, Ecclus. 28, 1.2.3.4.
and he surely will keep his sins: forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he
has done unto thee, so shall thy sins be forgiven also when thou prayest:
should man bear hatred against man and desire forgiveness of the Lord? He
will show no mercy to a man that is like himself, and will he ask
forgiveness of his own sins? O let all churlish Nabals look unto this, the
kindness of whose lips is, as if Aspes should vomit, which with Philocles are
turned into bilem and salsuginem, choler and brine, toward their neighbor,
and for the least injury offered will be like Diogenes, who was called, Canis
and tuba co^uitiorum, a dog, and the trumpet of tauntes and reproaches.

The third kind is of subuention and liberality toward such as are in
necessity: there be three degrees of this perfect charity, it must consist in:
1 Cord, in heart. 2 Verbo, in word. 3 Et opere, and in deed.


This, by his own example, the Lord commends unto us, in raising the widows
son to life: Luke 7.
First, in heart he was moved with compassion toward her; then with kind
words he sought, lenire dolorem, to ease her grief, saying; weep not;
thirdly, in deed, for he restored him to life, and delivered him to his
mother: So, in heart we should be touched with compassion of an others
misery; next with mild and kind words to comfort our distressed brethren; and
thirdly (if we have ability) to succor and relieve them; and if power be
wanting in us, yet let us not omit the two former, whereby we are made
partakers of others misery. This was the affection of all the Saints of God, as
holy Job witnesses of himself: Did not I weep with him that was in trouble?
And the Apostle says: Job 30. Romans 12.15.
Rejoice with them that rejoice, weep with them that weep: And this
(brethren) shouid we do to all men, but especially toward the fatherless and
widows: For we are members one of another, neither should we despise them
because they are poor and abject, but behold Christ in them, who, as this our
Apostle says: Chap. 2.5.
Has chosen the poor of this world that they should be rich in faith, and
heirs of the Kingdom which he has promised to them that love him: And who
accepts whatsoever we do unto them as done unto himself. But who can
persuade this, in this iron age of the world, to men destitute of all sense of
humanity, which do not only not help such as are in calamity, but insult upon
them, and, by all means they may, increase their calamity; whose damnation
sure shall be great. The Philosopher could tell us: Nihil esse tam secundum
naturam, quam inuare consortem naturae: Nothing more agreeable to nature then
to show mercy.
That nothing is more natural, then to aid the consort, or companion, of our
nature. Put upon you (says the Apostle) as the elect of God, the bowels of
mercy: If servants count it a credit unto them to wear their Masters colors
and cognizance, why put we not on the bowels of mercy, which the Lord would
have to be his Ensign, and which he so highly esteems; especially this being
so excellent a note of our election? If inhumanity and cruelty be used among
the Barbarians and Infidels; if blood touches blood, if revenge be taken for
the least injury, if they devour the flesh of their brethren, what marvel is
this, seeing they wear the Ensigns, not of our Lord and Master CHRIST, but
of their Master Belial? But should this be sound among Christians? How
greatly the Lord esteems the works of mercy.
The Lord so much esteems the works of mercy and charity, and so much
detesteth cruelty toward our brethren, that at the last judgment he reputeth
the works of mercy as the fullness of all other virtues, and cruelty and
unmercifulness, to be the full complement of all other sins: Come ye
blessed (says he) for I was hungry and ye gave me meat, etc. Math. 25.
but unto the other, Go ye cursed, etc. for I was hungry, and ye gave me no
meat, etc. and the one he receives into his eternal Kingdom, and the other
he casts into eternal fire. Fulgentius upon these words of Christ, Fulgen.
Every Tree that brings not forth, etc. notes, Si sterilitas in ignem
mittitur, rapacitas quid meretur? And Rabanus upon the former place of Matthew,
Raban.
I was hungry and ye gave me no meat; Quid accipiet qui aliena tulit, si
semper ardebit qui sua non dedit? If he shall always burn which gave not of
his own, what punishment shall he have which harh taken away from others which
was not his own? I was hungry and ye gave me no meat: etc. nay, I was
hungry, and that little bread that I had thou tookest from me: I was naked,
and thou cloathest me not; nay, that simple coat that I had thou spoylest me
off. As the Prophet cried out, O ye heavens drop down righteousness, because
righteousness was banished from the earth; so may we now cry for want of love
among us, O ye heavens drop down kindness and love into our hearts, that the
unkind and churlish Nabals of our times, which are so little moved at the
afflictions of Joseph, as if they pertained to a foreign body, that they may
know that they were not borne to live to themselves, that they are Coloni, non
domini, Manurers, not Lords of the earth, and as Jerome says of the holy
Patriarchs which were rich, Hieron.
that they were Dispensatores Dei, magis quam diuites appellandi, to be termed
rather Gods Stewards, then rich-men. Indeed so well nowadaies they observe the
precept of the Gospel, D. K.
that their right hand knows not whar the left does; because neither right,
nor left, does any thing that good is. Well is it said of a Heathen, that a man
should wish his wealth to be as his coat, rather fit then too long, Concinnam
magis probo quam longam.

That the Lord might induce us the more to mercy, he lays before us the
example of our heavenly Father, surely a motive of all motives, if we have not
cauteriatam conscientiam, a conscience seared with an hot iron, past all
feeling, he is loving to the unthankful, patient toward the sinner, kind to
the unkind; he makes his Sun to arise upon the just and unjust, and his
rain is to all alike profitable; the Sun shines, the day lightneth, the
fountain watreth, the shewers bedeweth, all alike; nay, without his mercy we
cannot live, consist, and have our being, one minute of an hour: If then (my
beloved) we be the children of God, if we think it an honor unto us to be
reputed his sons, if there be in us any love of the pure and undefiled
Religion, let us follow our Fathers steps, and bear some part of his Image:
We cannot imitate him in his strength, nor in his wisdom, nor in his
miracles; only in the bowels of his pity and compassion let us be like him:
Let Tigers, Dragons, Bears, Lions, be cruel one to another; let Scithians,
Canibals, which know not God, be merciless one toward another: Even as God
has loved us, let us Christians, be merciful, gentle, kind, one toward an
other, let us not be (...), without natural affection. The merciful man's
goods are blessed and multiplied of God. A Story.
I remember a story, in the lives of the Fathers, of a certain rich man, who
as long as he was liberal to the poor and needy, his goods increased, so
that he grew very rich; but, withal, when he waxed covetous, and gave over
his wonted liberality, his goods fell away, so that at length he became poor,
and asking of an holy man the cause thereof, who answered, that as long as
these two brethren, Date, and dabitur vobis: Give, and it shall be given unto
you, dwell together in his house, they kept Gods blessings with them; but as
soon as he banished the first Date, Give ye, the other, because he cannot
dwell without his brother, is also departed and has carried away Gods
blessings with him. The noble Emperor Vespatian was so inclined to the works
of mercy and liberality, that on a time being at supper, and calling to mind
he had given nothing that day, said: Amici, diem perdidi: My friends, I have
lost a day: for he knew that at the hour of his death, he might say, as
Marcus Antonius being vanquished of Augustus, said: Haec habui quae dedi,
caetera quae his relinquo, quomodo illa habeo, quae velim nolim alijs trado?
The things which I gave I have, the rest which I leave unto others, how can I
count them mine own, seeing whether I will or nill, I must leave them unto
others.

The other effect of true Religion is innocence of our lives, to keep our
selves unspotted of the world that is, not to pollute our selves with the
filthy crimes of this world, but to keep our selves pure from the lusts of the
flesh, John 2.
the lusts of the eyes, and the pride of life. This world is wont to spot and
defile men that are plunged in the love thereof, according to those verses:
Mundus non mundus quia mundus polluit. ergo
Qui manet in mundo, quomodo mundus erit?
This world is vnpure, for why? this world it stains:
How can he clean endure, that in this world remains?


And therefore when God called Abraham to the true Religion, Genesis 17.
he gave him this charge: Walk before me, and be thou perfect. So after be
had prescribed a Law unto his people, and taught them his true Religion, he
requires holiness and integrity of life, saying; Be ye holy, Leu. 11.
for I the Lord your God am holy. So the Apostle warns us, not to fashion our
selves like unto this world. Romans 12.
And again he says: Let every one that calls upon the name of Christ
depart from iniquity. 2. Tim. 2.
O hearken unto this ye that are bond-slaues unto the pleasures of this
polluting world; Luke 8.
you that suffer the good seed of admonition to be choked with the pleasures
of this life: you who love to be the sons of Pharoahs daughter, to be the
darlings of the pleasures of Egypt, and to sit upon the knees of the Dalila of
this world, and to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, loose the
eternal felicity in the Kingdom of heaven; you that are, as the Apostle
notes you, 2. Tim. 3.4
(...) magis quam (...) lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God: As though
there were no heaven for the godly, Ferra pilae similis, nullo fulcimine nixa.
Aere sublimi tam grave pendet onus. God has hanged the earth upon nothing. Job
26.7.
nor hell for the wicked. When thou call to mind that thou treadest upon
the earth hanging like a ball in the air, and floting in the waters, is it not
evident enough unto thee that there is a God? He hangs the earth upon
nothing.

Cum te pendenti reputas insistere terrae,
Nonne vel hinc clare conspicis esse Deu^?
When thou considerest that thou tread'st on earth that hangs in air.
Do thou not clearly see by this, there is a Godhead fair.
The use we are to make of this doctrine is, The Use.
never to fall in love with this polluting world; as our intolerable
greediness plainly shows that we are too much glewed to the love of earthly
things, and have little feeling of the joys of our heavenly country, prepared
for all such as love the Lords appearing, nor yet of the sins of this
infecting world which cleave so fast unto us. A Simile showing the danger of
worldly love.
O that I could by any plainness of teaching imprint this so profitable a
doctrine in your minds. We see (beloved) in reason that the natural heat
which is within us, by external cold in the Winter kept in and augmented,
which by the heat in Summer, opening the pores, euaporateth out, and is
inwardly diminished. And verily so is it in spiritual matters, the colder we
feel the love of the world, the more the love of God is kindled in our hearts,
and the more it increases: but if we wallow in earthly delights, in the
sunshine of polluting pleasures, o how much is the love of God within cooled
and diminished in our hearts? 1. Sam. 17.39.
Even as David was not well able to go under the burden of Saules armor about
him, but when it was taken from him he courageously marched on and slew that
enemy of God, and his people, the great Goliath. So whilst we are laden with
Saules armor, that is, clogged and spotted with the weight of this defiling
world, we are altogether unapt to any Christian combat; but if we cast of
this weight, we run with alacrity as did Danid, encounter with this
spiritual Goliath, prevail with honor, and give him the foil.

The second inseparable property then, and effect of true Religion, the Apostle
teaches to be innocence of life, to keep our selves unspotted of the world:
that is, to be clear from the works of darkness, and pollutions of wicked
worldlings, to abstain from carnal lusts, and filthy pleasures, to which
profane worldlings are most prone. The Saints of God which truly embrace the
Christian and soulesa^^^g Religion, are here distinguishe^ ^^^m hipocrites, and
false-(...): They only labor to be holy and pure, both in body and mind, in
soul and spirit: in thought and we he: 2. Cor. 11.
that they may be presented blameless as chaste virgins before the Lord
Jesus. Epictetus.
Epictetus comprised all his Philosophy in these two words (...), Sustine and
Abstine, Bear, and Forbear, to suffer evil, Lactantius.
and abstain from doing evil: And Lactantius says, the rule of a godly life
consists, in Patience and Abstinence. Almighty God requires, especially of
all that profess his name, this innocence of life, that they keep themselves
unspotted of the world. So when he called Abraham from the idolatry of
Mesapotamia to his true worship and Religion, Genesis 17.
he gave him this charge: Walk before me and be thou perfect: So, when he
gathered his people into one Congregation and body polliticke he required of
them holiness, innocence, and integrity of life, as the effect and note of
true Religion, saying: Be ye holy, Leuit. 11.
for I am holy: So our Savior, the Author of Christian Religion, calls his
from the pollutions of the world, when he wills them to be as innocent as
Doves: Math. 10.
So the Apostle prescribing to them the Christian sacrifice, warns them to
take heed of worldly corruptions, and not to Fashion themselves thereunto: Romans
12.
This is also his counsel to Timothy: 2. Tim. 2.
Let every one that calls upon JESUS CHRIST depart from iniquity.

Now the spots wherewith worldlings are chiefly defiled, are Thefts, Adulteries,
and fleshly Uncleanness, Covetousness, Usury, Oppression, Drunkenness,
Pride, Envy, Contention, Ambition, Vainglory, etc. Will thou know now whether
thou be a true Professor indeed of this pure Religion, which only is able to
save thy soul? fall then into a serious examination of thy conscience, whether
thou be not defiled with adulteries and uncleanness, whether thy heart be
not set upon covetousness and oppression, stained with usury and extortion,
thy body polluted with surfeiting and drunkenness, whether thou be free from
pride and arrogance, void of envy, malice, and contention; whether thou be not
spotted with cruelty, hard-heartednes toward thy neighbor, etc. Herewith
whoseeuer is stained, his Religion (howsoever he flatter himself) is not pure
and undefiled before God, for pure Religion and undefiled before God the
Father, is to visit the fatherless and widows, etc. Examine thy conscience
whether thou be studious of the contrary virtues as chastity, te^perance,
meeknes, love, mercy, liberality, brotherly kindness, etc. wherein the true
Religion consists: which God grant unto us for his Son Jesus Christ's sake,
to whom, with the Holy Ghost, be all honor, praise, power, and Dominion, for
ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

