THE TRIAL OF true Tears.

Or the Summons to repentance; whereby the secure sinner is taught how to
escape the terrible Sentence of the Supreme Judge.

Meditated upon CHRIST'S weeping over Jerusalem, very necessary for these
present Times.

By William Est, Master of Arts, and Preacher of Gods Word.

2. Cor. 7.10. For godly sorrow causes Repentance unto salvation, not to be
repented of.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Creed, for Arthur Johnson, dwelling near the great
North door of S. Paul's Church, at the sign of the white Horse. 1613.

To the Right worshipful, the Lady Elizabeth Greynuile; all happiness in this
life, and eternal felicity in the life to come.
Having (good Madam) at the urgent importunity of some of my best Friends,
reared up the walls of this simple Edifice, as you fee, and fearing (the
weakness thereof being such) that it needed some support to keep it from
falling: At length my ambiguous thoughts seized upon your worships patronage. I
have long registered in my heart a grateful acknowledgement of your (and my
good patrones benefits extended toward me:) and wanting worthy means in
real requittance to express the same; I presumed (which is all I could) in
this dedication to manifest. Not forgetting your worthy and Right worshipful
Father Phillip Beuile, with your virtuous Mother, whose bountiful
Hospitality, charitable liberality, religious government of their Family,
plainly shows to the world, that they hold themselves, not borne unto
themselves, to live to themselves, but as good Stewards of Gods manifold
blessings, ple^tifully powered upon them, to diffuse the same to the good of
many; which (I assure you) has won the love of the rich, the prayers of the
poor, and the applause and praise of all far and near in your country. If
the reading of these my poor Labors at idle hours may yield you any content
or comfort, it is the thing I wish: yet more then I can promise, save only in
regard of the substance. Small (I confess) is the gift in regard of the
Author, but great indeed, in respect of the worthiness of the subject, which (if
no thing else) I am persuaded, will give it good acceptance with the well
inclined. These my labors I commit to your worships favorable protection:
promising that if time and industry shall bring forth more mature fruits of my
studies (by Gods assistance) hereafter, you shall also be partakers of them.

In the mean time, take (I beseech you) in good part, these my well wishings
to your welfare, and prayers to the Almighty, that he would continue his
blessings toward you in this life, and after this mortal race run out, grant
you the fruition of his heavenly kingdom.

Your Worships, in all duty devoted, W. Est.

THE TRIAL OF TRVE TEARS. OR THE SOMMONS to Repentance.
Luc. 19. verse 41.42.43.44. Luc. 19. v. 41. And when he was come near, he
beheld the city and wept for it.

42. Saying, O if thou had even known at the least in this thy day, those
things which belong unto thy peace! but now are they hid from thine eyes.

43. For the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench
about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side.

44. And shall make thee even with the ground, and thy children which are in
thee, and they shall not leave in thee a stone upon a stone, because thou
knew not the time of thy visitation.


FIrst, here is expressed the occasion.

Secondly, the impulsive causes.

That which ministered occasion to the Lord of this weeping, was the sight of
the city: verse. 41.

The causes impulsive are two: namely two evils, the one present, and the
other future.

verse. 42.

The affirmation of this blindness, he amplifieth by an antithesis of a
contrary wish or desire: when he says: Oh that thou had known at the
least in this thy day, those things which belong unto thy peace! etc.

Verse. 43. and 44.
which was the destruction of the city.

This destruction, again he excellently deliniateth by the parts thereof: and
afterward declares by the impulsive cause, what moved the Lord thereunto:
namely, their ingratitude toward the gracious visitation of God: Verse. 44.
because thou knew not the time of thy visitation.

Hosanna: save now, a word of joy, acclamation, or triumph, the Jews calsed so
the willow branches which they bare in their hands, at the feast of tabernacles.
Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in the midst of the pomp and joyful
acclamations wherewith he was received into Jerusalem, (some spreading their
garments in the way, others applauding and singing a joyful Hosanna to the
son of David) was nothing at all cheared and delighted with this solemnity,
neither took he any pleasure in the external glory and beauty of the city,
nor in their present peace, but cast the eyes of his mind, into that which
inwardly lurked: namely, their sins and abominations, Mat. 21.7
and foreseeing the severity of Gods imminent vengeance for the same, this
loving Savior in tender compassion, with his holy tears bewailed their
security, and desolation at hand.

1 First for our instruction, let us note here in this first verse. these three
things.

That it is said, he came near to* Jerusalem.

2 That, he beheld the City.

3 That he wept for it.

For the first, God in his mercy oftentimes comes near unto sinners
obstinate in their vices and wickedness, that he might irradiate and dispierce
the darkness of their minds, with the bright beams of his grace and holy
inspirations. This is it our loving God says: Behold I stand at the door and
knock, Apoc. 3.20.
If any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come in unto him, and
suppe with him* and he with me. But o wretched men and women which neglect so
great a proffered salvation, reject his divine inspirations, stop the door
of their

This obstinacy of the sinners, and injury offered to their Creator, the
Prophet bewaileth and denounces a woe against them: Zepha. 3.1. and 2. verse.
Woe to her that is filthy and polluted, to the robbing city, she heard not
the voice, she received not correction, she trusted not in the Lord, she drew
not near unto her God. He approached not so much with his bodily feet, as
with the feet of love and compassion: whereby we are taught to be tender
hearted, toward such as are in misery: yea, the rich may here learn to come
near the poor and needy, and in a sympathy and fellow-feeling of their
miseries, to relieve their necessities, if they will be true followers of
Christ.

he beheld the city: O how happy had they been if they had made use of this
the Lords beholding them: so he beheld Peter, Zacheus and Matthew, Mat. 26. Luc.
19. Mar. 9.
had mercy upon them and converted them, for salvation proceeds from this
merciful beholding of the Lord: his eyes did flow with tender love and
compassion! as contrariwise by the turning away of his face proceeds
perdition and all wretchedness: But if thou hide thy face they are troubled,
says the Prophet. Psalm 1^4.29.
We ought therefore to pray unto the Lord that he would vouchsafe to cast his
merciful eyes upon us, and say with the Princely Prophet: Psalm. 102.
Hide not thy face from me in the time of my trouble.

He wept for it: Here are laid open before Mercy and Justice, which always
go together conjunction, and hand in hand, in all his works. His Justice
appeared, in that he took so district a revenge upon that nation for their
grievous sins against him. It was his tender mercy in that he wept, and
bewailed (a sign of his true humanity) their extreme misery and final
desolation at hand for their wickedness, the fire of Gods wrath already
kindled, and the sword of his heavenly father ready drawn to strike them. His
mercy is over all his works. Psalm. 145.9.
The experience hereof we plainly see in this people: How many blessings,
graces and benefits, out of the inexhaust treasury of his love bestowed he on
them? he gave them a law, he miraculously protected them, he raised up
Prophets, Patriarks, and Apostles among them, the Messiah was promised and sent
unto them, they were his peculiar and chosen people of all nations in the
world. But see now (brethren) the severity of his justice, and with feeling
hearts learn thereby the true fear of the Lord: when they became ungrateful,
hard-hearted, disobedient, despised his word, persecuted his Prophets, polluted
themselves with all wickedness: God utterly rejected them, they find now the
heavens inclement toward them, God to neglect them, and whither soever they
turn themselves, they are exposed to the hissings, reproaches, and injuries of
all Nations. Without faith, without law, without Religion, without Prophet,
without Temple, without God, having not so much as a little space of the earth
allotted them to inhabit, and fortify themselves, being destitute of all
succor. O the severity of Gods judgment against sin: and why was all this?
Because they knew not the time of their visitation: As I shall (God willing)
unfold at large when I come to the handling of these words.

Whereby it plainly appears, that the Lord did not so much bewail the ruin
of the strong walls, the stately Towers, the gorgeous buildings, the rich
ornaments and beauty of that goodly city, (all which he foresawe should be
utterly ruinated for their sins:) their sins (I say) the cause of al
misery, which they made light of, and least thought upon, did draw these
tears from the sacred eyes of our Savior. We see sometimes a mad man, the
nearer he is to destruction, the more he laugheth and sporteth: but his dear
friends, knowing the danger he is in, weep and bewail him the more. This
frantic city when it was nearest to spoil and utter destruction, most
laughed and rejoiced, but Christ sheddeth compassionate tears for them, which
he would not have done, if they had lamented and mourned for their own sins.

I here observe, Obser. and doctrine.
if Christ the true estimator of things did bewail the sins of others, how
much more ought every true feeling Christian heart wish with holy Jeremy: Ier.
9.1.
Oh that mine head were full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears,
that I might weep day and night, for the maimes and wounds that sin has
made in my soul, whereby I have provoked the wrath of my loving God, and stand
in danger of eternal damnation. If the Israelites in the captivity of Babell
sat and wept by the rivers side, Psalm. 137.
when they remembered Sion their beloved country, so that neither the pleasant
rivers, nor the melodious chirping birds, or any other worldly delight, might
cheer up their drooping spirits: How much greater matter of sorrow is
ministered unto all impenitent sinners, if they would but call to mind their
infinite and grievous sins whereby they have kindled the fire of Gods wrath
against them, and are holden under the miserable captivity of Satan, Exiles;
Not from the Earthly Jerusalem, The wretched estate or impenitent sinners.
but from the Heavenly: not builded with insensible, but with living stones: by
the hand of the omnipotent God. This blessed Country of Gods elect, from which
(though all Infidells, Atheists, and wicked livers are banished) yet can it
suffer no detriment, nor ever be destroyed: against which, neither Chaldean,
Babilonian, The happy security in the heavenly Country
nor Persian, nor all the wicked rabble are able to cast a darte, or shoot an
Arrow, where is heard no sound of Hostility, no crackling of Armor, but the
inhabitants shall rejoice in most secure peace and pleasure for evermore.

Shall the Son of God himself weep, foreseeing the extreme misery that
sin brings upon the wicked, and shall the heart of Man (whom this only
concerns) be so hard and insensible, as not to shead one tear of contrition
for his sins?

Oh that we would consider the grieuousnes of sin, and the plagues which God
has in store for the same, we would then tremble and fear, and seek by
repentance to be reconciled unto God; we would then chose rather to be an other
Heraclitus in weeping and lamenting for our sins, Heraclitus.
then Democritus, Democritus.
in vain laughter and rejoicing in our sins.

Oh that men would remember, and with a feeling heart consider the torments
that God has reserved for the wicked; I then persuade my self that vain
delights would have no place in your hearts. Surely (beloved,) when in the
secret silence of my soul I meditate hereupon, A wonder-how a wicked man ca^
be merry.
I muse with my self, and think it to be a wonder of all wonders, to see an
Adulterer, Blasphemer, etc. to laugh, sing, and sport, being in that state
wherein nothing but eternal damnation is to be expected, without speedy
repentance. If Dionisius the Tyrant of Siracusa, could take no delight in his
glory, stately palace, purple Robes, Dionisius the Tyrant of Siracusa.
costly fare, etc: because (as he showed Damocles his flatterer) he stood ever
in fear of the Sword. How is it possible yt a wicked man or woman can carry a
serene countenance or a light heart, Damocles his flatterer.
having so many swords from Heaven drawn against them?

This may well be called (according to the Greek Adage) Bardonios yelos, the
laughter of a mad man: Ajax.
or, Aianteos yelos, Ajax his deadly laughter. But truly it is to be lamented,
yea, with a Torrent of tears to be bewailed, that the subject of our sorrow
is commonly the loss of temporal things. Many bewail the loss of the
Creature, but few of the Creator of all.

One lamenteth the loss of his transitory goods, Genesis 27.
like profane Esau for his birthright: Another sorroweth at the loss of his
Honor, Fame, and worldly credit: as Saul, who mourned not so much for his
transgression, vain tears
(in disobeying the voice of the Lord, the cause of all his miseries) as for
the love of his worldly honor and reputation: and therefore said to Samuel,
Honor me I pray thee, before the Elders of my people, 1. Sam. 15 30.
and before Israel. But all this sorrow is vain and unprofitable: For though
we power out tears in never so great abundance for the loss of Parents,
Children, Friends, or Riches, are they to any purpose at all? The true and
profitable use of tears
But when (through sin we have lost God) if we seek him by the faithful
tears of Repentance, we may find him again. This is the only end to which
all our sorrow is to be directed.

Tell me, if any having sore Eyes, Similies to show the vanity of sorrow for
worldly accidents.
should have a precious and approved water, that would cure all diseases of
the eyes, and should, neglecting his Eyes, wash his Feet with the same: were
he not justly to be reputed a madman? So the tears of Repentance, as an
wholesome Medicine, serve only for the ruptures of sin: which being bestowed
upon any worldly thing, Simile. Lactant. d^ ira Dei. cap. 13.
are altogether vain, and of no effect. Even as the ashes of a burnt Viper,
are a present remedy against the venomous biting of a Viper: So the sorrow
that proceeds of sin, is a remedy against the punishment of sin past, and
a Cautele against iterating of sin.

If we highly esteem of the Waters of Herbs and Flowers, which are approved
for the curing of diverse diseases, and wounds of the body: why do we not more
esteem of the Tears of contrition, more precious then any Balsamum, for the
curing of the Wounds and Ulcers of the soul?

Even as when an house is on fire, they that would quench it, have their
refuge unto the waters: Simile.
So when the flames of wicked desires are kindled in the soul, the tears of
Repentance are a sovereign water for the quenching of the same. Even as when a
dark Clowd falls down into Rain, the Sky becomes clear: So a sinful
soul, the cloud of sin (through Repentance being dissolved into Tears)
becomes the more bright and clear both to know God, and it self.

This profitable sorrow, upon the considerations of their sins, was well
known to the Saints of God, as it appears by the frequent use thereof, which
in David flo^ed, with so plentiful a stream, that he said I cause my Bed
every night to swim, Psalm. 6.6.
and water my Couche with my Tears.

Again, Psalm. 42.3
My Tears have been my meat Day and Night.

Oh that God would lighten our minds with the beams of his holy spirit, that
we might see the filthiness of sin, and the danger of the sinner: As a
wayfaring man, that in a darksome night rests his weary limbs in a Cave full
of Serpents, and sweetly takes his rest mistrusting no danger: if one should
come in with a Torche burning, that he might see the hideous filthy Serpents
hissing and crawling about him, he would presently start up, and take small
delight to stay in that place: So (if God of his mercy,) would inlighten our
hearts with the beams of his Grace, that we might see the filthy and ugly face
of sin, we would not endure the filthiness thereof.

In that our Savior wept in the midst of the Honors, Joy, and applause of
the Contempt of vain delights. Pro. 14.13.
which are always mixed with sorrow, and shall (in short time, be turned
into mourning) Extrema gaudij Luctus occupat: The end of that mirth is
heaviness. Miscentur tristia laetis. For what else are the vain pleasures,
honors, and delights of the World? but as one says, Spuma, Fumus, Somnium: A
Froth, The pleasures of this life are but a foam, a smoke, a dream.
Smoke, a dream. A froth or fume, Quia inflat, because it puffs up: a smoke,
Quia excaecat, because it makes blind: a dream, Quia euanescit: because it
quickly vanishes away.

Here we have in the Son of God himself, A medicine against the love of the
world.
both an example and an effectual medicine against the love of the world, and
the pomp and glory thereof, which our common adversary labors by all
means to incite and kindle in our hearts: For he knows well, that when we are
once blinded with this love, there is nothing else to be required; then is
there a Door opened for him to do what he will.

And surely it is wonderful to see the subtilty of this Iugling Impostor: for
though the glory of the World be most frail, fleeting, and short, deceitful,
and momentany: Yet this pernicious Painter so disguiseth it with delightsome
and Artificial colors, that men doubt not to undergo all extreamities, to
leave no sin unpracticed, that they may obtain worldly glory.

Here the Devil seems to me, to be like an Excellent Mathematician, which
through skill of his Art Perspectiue, draws certain lines in a Table, with
such proportion and cunning, that it seems to be the truth of the thing it
self: and if thou ^ooke through his Geometrical Instrument (called Dioptra,
The devil like a cunning Mathematician.
) thou will suppose that there are most beautiful forms and figures of ye
whole World, when in very deed there ^s nothing else but simple and bare
Lines: Such is the craft of this ancient Serpent.

For when the glory of this World is a thing so vain and vanishing, he
delinea^eth, and painteth it, with such disguises and shadows unto the Eyes of
worldlings, that ^t seems most amiable and pleasant unto them, that being
carried away with the desires thereof, they should loose their own souls, and
vilely esteem of whatsoever GOD has promised to his faithful Servants.

We need not search far for examples: behold the great honor the world here
gave to Christ, and we shall see the fallacy ^hereof, which S. Bernard well
observed, S. Bernard
ha^dling this place, Quis sperare debeat in in^erto gloriae temporalis, etc.
Who would now ^rust in the uncertainty of worldly glory, when he sees in him
who never did sin, the Creator of Time, the framer of the whole Fabric of
this World, so great an Exaltation, and yet to follow such an Humiliation? For
in the same City, of the same people, and at the same time; Now to be honored
with such acclamations, and divine praises: And a little while after, to be
laden with Reproaches, Torments, and deputed among the wicked: This is the end
of transitory glory: So far S. Bernard.

Oh how soon had they changed their voices? What a difference is there
betwixt this, Luke 19.38.
Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord, Hosannah in the highest:
And this, a few days after, Away with him, Crucifi^ him. Now the King of
Israel: And a little while after, We have no King but Caesar: What a
difference was there between the green branches of the Palm, and Olive
Trees, and shortly after, Thorns, Scourges, and the Cross? Whom now they
honored with their Garments spredde in the way: A few days after, they
dispoyled him of his own Garments. To Day the Son of God: To morrow, A
wicked man, less worthy of life then Barabas, a Thief, a Murderer? who would
now trust this deceitful world?

This is the love and friendship of the world (as one wisely meditateth: The
love of this world.
) The rich man has many friends, although in truth, riches have them and not
the man: As the ass that carried the Egiptian Goddess, had many bowed knees,
yet not to the beast, but to the burden: for separate the riches from the
person, and thou shall see friendship leave the man, and follow that which was
ever her object: while he may command, and can either give or control, he
has attendance and proffer of love at all hands: but which of these dare
acknowledge him when he is going into prison for debt? Then these waspes which
make such music about this Gally-pot, show plainly that they came for the
honey that was in it. This is the misery of the wealthy, that they cannot
know their friends; whereas those that love the poor man, loves him for
himself. He that would choose a true friend, must search out one that is
neither covetous nor ambitious: for such a one loves but himself in thee. And
if it be very rare to find any not infected with these qualities, the best way
is, to entertain all, and to trust few.

May we not justly reprove the folly of greedy worldlings, with these words
of the Prophet, Esa. 55.
Wherefore do ye lay out silver, and What would you say of that man, who in the
time of famine, when for want of food he is even hunger-starued, The folly of
worldlings.
and having a little money left, should bestow the same upon a plume of
feathers to wear in his hatte? And is not this the foolishnes of the lovers of
the world, which when their souls are even starued, destitute of all virtues
and spiritual sustenance, spends their wits, time, and labor, in plotting
and plodding, lying and cogging, shifting and shuffeling, catching and hunting
by all ungodly means, after the glory, riches and dignities of this world,
and when all is done, what is it but as it were the pursuing of a feather yea,
Pro. 23.5.
a thing of nothing as wise Solomon says Will thou cast thine eyes, upon it
which is nothing? for riches takes her to her wings, as an Eagle, and flies
into the heaven. What is this else but to weaue the Spiders web, as the
Prophet truly terms it? Isai. 59. ve. 4. and 5.
they conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity. They hatch Cockatrice
eggs, and weaue the Spider web: Such as is the conception, such must needs
be the birth.

The conception of sin, The conception and birth of sin.
is here called mischief: or as some translations have sorrow. For sin
indeed when it is conceived in the soul, is but mischief and sorrow.
Pleasures seem pleasant unto the sinner whiles he conceiueth them, and how
much the more bitter they are indeed, so much the more pleasant they appear at
the first: but when the end comes which in short time finisheth all these
pleasures, then there is found nothing else but sorrows, gall, bitterness and
miseries: They hatch the Cockatrice eggs: from whence comes forth the
Regulus or Cockatrice, The nature of the Cockatrice.
the most venomous Serpent of all the rest: for whomsoever he stingeth, he
falls into a sweet sleep, and seems for a while to feel no pain, but
rather a pleasure: in the mean time the poison diffusing it self into all the
body, with horrible torment he ends his life. So the delights and pleasures
of the world do at once inficere, and interficere, infect, and destroy: the
poison is pleasant, but the end is death. Next he says, They weaue the
Spiders web.

Which serves to no purpose, there can no garment be made thereof, with what
labor and diligence does the spider even euiserate her self to finish her
work, and to what purpose is all this? to catch a fly: but before she has
had any fruit of her labor, comes a maid with her broom, sweepeth down
the web, and kills the Spider. Here ye see elegantly expressed, the labor,
exercises, and desires of the sinner, in which he spends himself, and
consumes his life, and all is but a Spiders web. What cogitations does the
worldling reuolue in his mind, what means does he devise that he may enjoy
his pleasures and delights? How many labors and sweates do his riches? How
many anxieties and cares do his delights? How many troubles and vexations do
his pleasures bring with them? But to what end do they weaue these perplexed
webbes* but to catch flies? Covetous men hunt after flies.
Nay oftentimes the reward of their labors when their web is finished, is
less then a fly: for death is at hand, that diligent scopatrix Gods
hand-maide, which sweepeth them and their webbes away, before they have reaped
any fruit of their labor and toil, and so they pass to judgment, to render
an account before the just Judge, for their wicked lives and unjust dealing.

But suppose the things of this world were solid, certain and constant, yet
what can the goods thereof profit us in the time of our greatest necessity, at
the hour of death, and time of giving account? What profit, I say, then will
those Idols bring us, which all our life long we have worshipped? as are all
these things, in which we repose and place our hope and felicity. Then but too
late the vanity and deceit of all those things which we so much esteem will
appear.

The covetous man (as one pithily writes) is like a Spider, as in this, The
covetous man like a Spider.
that he does nothing else but lay his nets to catch every fly, gaping only
for a booty of gain; So yet more, in that whiles he makes nets for these
flies, he consumes his own bowels: So that which is his life, is his death.
If there be any Creature miserable it is he; and yet he is least to be pitied,
because he makes himself miserable. Such as he is I will account him: and will
therefore sweep down his webbes, and hate his poison.

Thirdly, by this example of Christ, we are taught to bewail the sins of
others, and to have a feeling of their miseries. The offenses then of our
brethren are not to be iested at, but to be lamented, if we be Christians
indeed: which not only the example of our Savior in this place, but also of
all holy men and Saints of God may teach us. We read that Moses and the
people, Numb. 25.6.
wept before the door of the tabernacle for the sins of their brethren and
children, wherewith they had offended the Lord: So the Apostle, bewailed many
that had sinned, 2. Cor. 12. verse. vlt. Phil. 3 18. and 19.
and had not repented of the uncleanness, and fornication, and wantonness,
which they had committed. And again: He wept for them that were enemies of the
Cross of Christ, whose end is damnation, whose God is their belly, etc. And
again, he says: Act. 20.31. Jeremy. 9. Job. 29.
That he ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears.

The like we read of Jeremy, Job, and the rest of Gods children of David, Mine
eyes gush out with rivers of waters, because they keep not thy law. But o
good God, (I speak it with compunction of heart) how many are there now found,
which take no greater delight then to cause others to sin, and to hear of
the infirmities of their neighbors. Of this sort are they which (as the very
agents for the devil) take pleasure to make their brother sin in drunkenness,
and make themselves merry therewith: but let such know, Heb. 2.15.
that this woe denounced by the Prophet pertains to them: Woe be unto him
that gives his neighbor drink, and makes him drunken, etc.

Fourthly, here we have a notable testimony Mercy, and Justice: an excellent
mirror for Magistrates, that if in Justice they be compelled to punish a
malefactor, yet in the midst of Justice, mercy and clemency should shine
forth: which here appears in this sweet Savior, who though in short time
after he was to inflict, most horrible plagues, and final destruction upon
this incorrigible and sinful nation, yet he shed most merciful and
compassionate tears for their transgressions: for otherwise Justice loses
suumesse, the property of Justice, and is converted into tyranny, if it be
done with delight, and be not tempered with mercy. Marcus Marcellus.
Memorable was the fact of Marcus Marcellus, who being now ready to invade and
repunge the gallant city of Siracusa, gate him up into a high Tower to behold
the event of the battle, Aug. lib. 1. de ciui dei.
and when he beheld the Soldiers valiantly encountering on both sides, the
crackling of the glittering armor besprinkled with blood, the horrible clamor
of those which were slain, the fire flaming up into the skies, the terrible
noise of the falling of the stately buildings of that glorious city; he burst
forth into tears, though the victory went on his side, considering the
misery they were in, and that he was enforced to sack so ancient a city.

The ancient Romans (for in later time they were more corrupt) shall rise in
judgment against all cruel and merciles Magistrates, which are touched with
no Christian commiseration: Tit. Flam.
Titus Flam: amongst them, was put out of his office and disgraded, for that he
caused a man which was before condemned to be hanged in his Parlour* a man's
life is not a matter to be played with, or iested at.

Sulpitius.
Contrariwise, Sulpitius was greatly praised among them, who never judged any
unadvisedly, nor took pleasure in the just execution of Judgment, but his
tears were often seen to trickle from his eyes, when he pronounced sentence
of death upon any.

Pars Secunda.
O that thou had even known at the least in this thy day, those things
which belong unto thy peace! etc.
HEre our Savior amplifieth the affirmation The Analisis.
of this blindness of the people (which drew) these tears from the
compassionate Savior of the world) by an elegant antithesis of the contratie
wish or desire: O if thou had even known, etc. These words express a
passion proceeding of sorrow, which if it be vehement, is wont to interrupt and
cut off some words which should make up and finish the speech: This figure is
usual among the Rhetoritians, and is called in Greek Aposiopesis, Aposiopesis.
where something is left out, which must be understood for the perfecting of
the speech. As Quos ego, Aeneid. 1.
sed mot os praestat componere fluctus, again: quanquam osi solitae quicquam
virtutis adesset. And: Aeneid. 11.
O mihi praetentos referat si Iuppiter annos. So here: O if thou had even
known etc. is to be understood, how happy and blessed had thou been? O
Jerusalem, if thou had known the things that belong unto thy true peace,
as thou art wholly intent, to this supposed, false and transitory peace, which
now makes thee secure, o then how happy had thou been, thou would then
foresee thy imminent destruction for thy sins, and betake thee to repentance
and tears, whereas now thou reioycest; that thou might indeed procure thy
true peace and safety. O if thou had known: to wit, the ruin which
ha^geth over thy head, or me thy Redeemer, who am come so graciously to visit
thee, thou would then weep and bewail thy grievous sins wherewith thou
have incensed the wrath of God against thee, whereas now thou flatterest thy
self with vain joy, as if all things went well with thee.

By the word [ peace] among the Hebrews is signified, not one singular good,
but all good things which ye Son of God brought with him into the world: for at
his coming, the cateracts of heaven were opened, and a plentiful shower of
all graces powered down on the earth, the first fruits thereof the Lord first
offered most graciously unto ^he people of the Jews, to whom he was ^romised,
whom he sought to illuminate ^ith his doctrine, to confirm in the faith ^ith
his miracles, to kindle their love with ^is benefits, to erect them in the hope
of ^mmortalitie with his merits, with the ex^mples of his virtues to allure
them to ^ollow him, with the majesty of his pre^ence to grace them, and lastly
to advance them into his heavenly kingdom. These ^re the things which they
ought to have ^cknowledged, the want whereof the Lord ^ere bewaileth.

First, in that above all things the Lord Obser.
and their supine oblivion of the time to come, by reason of their present
peace and prosperity, which Christ here deploreth in the Jews, which being
blinded with the peace, glory and abundance of their temporal and present
prosperity, never thought upon the future evils, and miseries, which for their
sins were shortly to be inflicted upon them. For when the secure sinner shall
say, peace and safety: then shall sudden destruction come upon him, 1. These.
5.
as travail upon a woman with child, and he shall not escape. For as
oftentimes sudden travail comes upon a woman with child: Simile.
So Gods vengeance falls suddenly upon the sinner in his deep oblivion of
the time to come, when they will not know the things that pertain to their
true peace. And so God is wont tarditatem, vindictae grauitate compensare,
Valor.
to recompense his slownes, with the grieuousnes of his vengeance.

Grego.
Well says S. Gregory upon this place, the perverse soul being wholly intent
to things present, and resolved in earthly pleasures, abscondit sibi mala
sequentia, hides from himself the dangers following, and refuses to foresee
the evils to come, least they should disturb his present mirth: but whiles he
walloweth in worldly delights, what does he else but, clausis oculis ad ignem
vadere? go blindfolde to hell fire? says he. Least this forgetfulness should
possess our minds, the Apostle counsaileth, 1. Cor. 7.30.
that they that rejoice, should be as if they rejoiced not: that is, as
Gregory expounds it, praesentis temporis it a agenda laetitia, vt amaritudo
sequent is iudicij nunquam recedat a memoria. The mirth and pleasure of this
present time are so to be passed, that the bitterness of the future judgment,
never depart from our minds.

In thy good estate remember adversity, Eccle. 11. A Simile, showing the
vanity of worldly delights.
says the wise man. But it happens to the sinner concerning his worldly
delights, as it does unto a traveler, who to find some shelter from the heat
of the sun rests himself under the shadow of a tree, and by reason of
wearines, falls into a sound sleep, until the sun in his course, going
about the shadow departs, and when he awaketh, he finds himself parched
with the Sun rays, his body sweating and inflamed, his head a king, and
perhaps his body arrested with a continual fever. So the lovers of the world,
while they catch at the vanishing shadows thereof, as honors, riches,
pleasures, and think to repose their rest in them, in the mean time the
course of their life being suddenly run out, Psalm. 76.5.
when these viri diuitiarum dormierunt somnum suum, rich men have slept their
sleep, even in death they find they were deluded with mere shows, and
shadows without substance, and for these momentaine pleasures to be plunged in
the infernal flames, for ever to be tormented. Note.
Man being in honor has no understanding, he will not know the things which
belong unto his true peace, even like the fagiuated beasts, which are to day
in the pasture, to morrow in the shambles. O that we would learn to know the
things that pertain to our true peace. Christ leaves God his Father, heaven
his country, the Angels his people, to dwell with us, but we scarce allow
him the stable, there is no room for him in the Inn. Pride has taken the
chiefest place in the heart: malice and envy the next in the mind: lust has
possession of the eyes, lying and swearing of the tongue, gluttony of the
taste, theft and murder of the hands, and covetousness of our thoughts.

When the Assizes are at hand, and the Judge coming, how circumspect are we
that our trialls may pass on our side? What instructing of our counsel?
seeing of our Lawyers? informing of the quest? but Christ is at hand, his day
is nigh, his seat prepared. O then that we did know the things that pertain
unto our peace at that day, o that we would see and prevent the future danger.
Man's corrupt nature is commonly most careless, when he should be most careful:
and the wicked most secure, when they are most in danger: most negligent, when
they should be most provident.

The day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night: 1. These. 5.3. 2. Pet.
3.10.
therefore the Greek word Cleptesfur, is derived Apo tou caloptein, of hiding
or covering, or Cleptein, to take away by stealth, he comes in the dark
where no body sees, he treads upon wool, when no body hears, he watches an
hour which no body knows. If the good man of the house had known at what
hour, the thief would come, Luc. 12.
he would surely watch, says our Savior; but we know that Christ's day will
come, and yet keep no ward: careful of our goods, careless of our souls. Our
bodies are houses, our souls our true goods, our senses the doors and
windows, the locks, the word and prayer, the devil is a thief, man is the
Householder: death is a thief, his coming is uncertain, be watchful and
wise, be always prepared, after death comes the judgment. O beloved, Hebr.
9.
let us foresee this danger, take heed of the fools Motto, had I wist, least
we say too late, O that we had known the things which belonged unto our peace.

Ieri. Thren* 1.9.
Holy Jeremy bewayling the calamity of his people says, Her filthiness is in
her skirts, she remembered not her last end, and therefore she came down
wonderfully.

This [beloued] is the fatal disease of all sinners, and their wretched
illusion, they forget their end, they take sin by the head, and not by the
tail, they consider the beginning of their pleasure, which shows them a
fair face; but they think not of the end which concludes the Catastrophe in
extreme misery. And what (I pray you) is this world, which so blinds us
that we never think on the future time, and refuse to know the things that
pertain in this our day, unto our peace? surely it may be compared unto an
hollow nut, Poma virent Sodomis cinerem dant carptaque fumum.
or the Apples of Sodom, which have nothing within but a filthy worm and
rottennes: look into the world, and you shall find nothing but vanities;
pleasures are but forerunners of destruction; this life is a channel, the
sweet Rivers do always run and end in the salt sea and bitter waters:
breue est quod delectat, aeternum quod excruciat, short pleasures, long pain:
this is the end of the world and worldlings: a golden head, Dan. 2.
but earthen feet, like Nabuchadonezers Image, vain joys end with mourning,
as Herod's joy was consumed of worms; Act. 12.
Princes Palaces are but earth, their gold but the filth of the earth, their
silks but the dongue of worms, riches are runa-waies, favor deceitful,
beauty vanity, Pro. 31. Job. 7.
and corruption our mother: And shall this deceitful world make us forget the
things which belong unto our true peace? O that we did know at the least in
this our day, the things that belong unto our peace!

As Jacob when he was borne, Genesis 25.
held Esau by the heel: So the godly considers sin by the end thereof. O
that they were wise, then would they understand this, they would consider their
latter end, says holy Moses. Deuteronomy. 32.
But the present plenty of all things, and the flattering face of the world,
hides Gods judgment from men's eyes. Even as certain rich young men, but
inexpert in worldly things, Simile.
in their travel takes up their Inn, and seeing themselves chearefully
received and entertained of their Host, prodigally wast and consume all their
money, until their purses being peniles, and exhasted of al, they perceive the
countenance of their Host to be changed, their entertainment grudged,
attendance denied, and themselves enforced to depart, carrying nothing with
them, but shame, reproach and poverty: So the lovers of this world, being
lulled a sleep with pleasures and worldly prosperity, and being ignorant of
the solid and heavenly good things, spend all the vigor of their minds, and
cogitations, their spiritual substance, in these vanities, and when all is
spent, they are sent out of the world, sorrowful, naked, laden with sin,
having nothing left but hell and Judgment. O then that men were so wise to
know, in this their day, the things that belong unto their peace.

It is worthy the noting, that Christ calls all the pleasures of this life
but one day: Even in this thy day. For the wicked have but their day, but Gods
Justice has many days: and therefore he says afterward, For the days will
come upon thee: that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and
therefore he said unto the Jews, Verse. 43. Luc. 22.53. Simile.
this is your very hour: Even as the fire according unto the nature of the
subject on which it works, endures either a short or a longer time, as that
which is made with firm O^e continues long, and that which feeds upon
straw quickly goes out: so the joys, pleasures and honors of this life,
because the matter thereof, is fluid, caduce, and frail, soon vanishes away,
but that which is fixed on the soliditie of virtue and godliness, endures for
ever.

Pliny reports, Plini. lib. 8 cap. 22. not. hist.
that there is a kind of wolf called Lupus ceruarius, which is of this
nature, that being never so hungry, and having hardly found his preye, if he
looks back and espieth some other preye, he forgetteh his hunger, and the
meat he has present before him, and follows after that which is uncertain.

Quaeritat incertam (tanta est obliuio) praedom. Forgetting still his present
pray.
Uncertain hopes he seeks always.
So obtuse and dull is his memory. Like unto him are they, which being
delighted with the present pleasures of this life, they altogether forget their
first love, and the doctrine of heavenly things which they had learned, and
pursue vain and uncertain pleasures.

We have here a most sweet and comfortable testimony of the inspeakeable love
Ezekiel. 18.
and mercy of God, who is so far off from willing the death of a sinner, but
rather that he convert and line: that he does not only lament their imminent
destruction, and wish the conuertion of the wicked, but patiently expects
their amendment. 2. Pet. 3.
He is patient toward us, and would have no man to perish, but would have all
men to come to repentance: for the Lord is patient, Exodus 34.6. and. 7.
slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth, Reserving mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin: not that he hates not
iniquity, but that he awaites our amendment. Forty days he gave space to
Niniuie, to Nabuch^donezer twelve months, three years to the barraine
figtree, Dan. 4. Luc. 13. Genesis 6.
an hundred years to the old world, and forty years to Jerusalem, before
this destruction fell upon them; but how long has he expected us? Romans 2.4.
and shall we still despise his long sufferance which leads us to repentance?
We are long in building an house, but quick in pulling it down; deus cum
struit, velociter struit.

But God is quick in building up, and slow in pulling down: he sets up in
power, Chriso. ser. 50. de paen.
but destroys in mercy. He would not drown the world before Noah preached,
nor burn Sodom, before Lot exhorted: he will warn Egypt by Moses, the Jews
by Jeremy, and Jerusalem by CHRIST and his Apostles, and that with weeping
before he punishes. O love! to send us his son: O mercy! to stay us falling:
O patience! to attend our returning, desiring our repentance.

The use of all this is: The use.
that seeing the bountifulnes, and long sufferance of God leads us to
repentance, Romans 2.
that we abuse not this goodness of the Lorld, but betime provide for our peace,
by taking hold of repentance. O let us not be slack herein. In futurum enim
nostra distulimus, says Senica, we leave all for hereafter. It is to be feared
the devil will plead prescription, we are so slack in chalenging our
inheritance. Cadit asinus and est qui subleuat, perit anima and non est qui
recogitat. The ass falls into the ditch, Ber.
and we carefully pull him out, but the soul perishes and we never regard it.
Teshuba the Hebrew, Metanoia, the Greek, resipiscentia the latin: conversion,
the English, are Synonimies: All teach us, that repentance is a turning from
sin. Metanoen conuerti, Ferus.
to be turned. The Metaphor is borrowed from a Traveler, who wandering out of
his way, and being admonished, turns again into his right way. Auersion, a
turning out of the way, is, when one forsakes God and serves Satan;
Reuersion, is, when a man leaves sin, and returns to God by repentance. Sin
then, is, per auia errare, to wander through by ways: repentance is, Adviam
regiam redire; To return into the right way again. The prodigal son, went
out of the way, when he wandered from his father, but found again the right
way, when he returned to his father. Sin, is Anoia, folly and madness.
Metanoia repentance, is a change unto wisdom. The sinner whiles he continues
in his wickedness, does as it were, look without eyes, hears without ears,
and understands without his heart; but the penitent does Meta, put them on
again, and does nothing without them. The word recipiscentia, as it were
resapere, or post factu^ sapere, teaches us, that sin is a madness, and to
repent, is to wax wise after folly, to come to his right wits again.

The true repentant, takes hold of Gods promise, and doubts not of
forgiveness: fides ambiguum non habet* Faith admits no doubt. Ber.
Faith cannot be doubtful: the faithful, deferres not repentance, nor
returns as a dog to his vomit. The Serpent that has cast off her skin,
leaves it behind her, and resumes the same no more. The bird that has escaped
from the snare of the fowler, will afterward be the more wary of the net.
Cant. 5.3.
And the spouse of Christ makes this resolution, That she has put off her
coat: how then should she put it on? she has washed her feet, how should she
defile them?

It is as impossible for fire to burn in the water, as the truly penitent to
wallowe in wickedness Our sins (brethren) do daily recrucifie Christ, and are no
better then treasons. Impenitent Satan cannot be saved, and they that seek
not pardon shall not find it: no repentance, no confession; No confession, no
sorrow; No sorrow, no turning; no turning, no salvation. Christ is the door
of heaven, he opens, if we believe: and we shall enter, if we repent. Faith and
repentance go coniunctim, and hand in hand: Faith reconciles, repentance
reformes: Faith receives the promises, repentance renues the man: the penitent
only are partakers of the blessings. All the vialls of Gods wrath shall be
powered down, all his plagues shall light on the impenite^t, to the utter
perdition of body and soul, began here in the person attained, proceeding on
the conscience convicted, and consumnate on the party condemned for ever to
endure. Here are Alastores of Alastein tormentors for Nero: I. H.
Plutoes horses for Oedipus, an evil spirit for Saul, and a gnawing conscience
for Achitophell. Heu quantum misero poenae men's conscia donat.

Lucan.
O with what pain and griping smart,
A guilty conscience wounds the heart.
O beloved, if Jerusalem had repented in that her day, she had then known the
things that pertained to her peace, then would the Savior have rejoiced, and
not have uttered this sorrowful Threnodiam, whiles they sang Hosanna: O if
thou had known the things that pertain unto thy peace.

Repentance the sanctuary of the soul.
Let us therefore (good brethren) linger no delays, but betime fly to
repentance, the sanctuary of the soul: take heed least sin pass through
his gradation, and so get an habit. Least while custom grows, man fades,
grace absenteth, sin presents, the heart is hardened, and man obdurate: so
that now God is contemned, his threatening rejected: heaven cannot win him,
nor hell scarre him: joys cannot allure him, nor torments affright him. This
is Satan's ladder of perdition: sin steppeth from temptation, to thinking:
from thinking, to liking: from liking, to yielding: from yielding, to acting:
from acting to custom: from custom, to hardness of heart: from hardness of
heart, to a reprobate mind, full of unrighteousness, fornication, covetousness,
envy, murder, backbiting etc. As a learned Divine excellently observes.

I would here have ended, Iacobus Ian^ensit.
but I cannot forget an observation of an ancient Schooleman, upon these words,
in this thy day. He calls this their day, wherein the Savior of the world,
offered them so lovingly his grace, and salvation, their true, and eternal
peace: which if they had embraced, then had not the Romans sacked their city.

Here observe, Obs.
that the day of this life is given us, to make provision for our true and
eternal peace: but there is an other day, wherein Christ will come in
judgment, severely to punish the contempt and abuse of his proffered grace and
salvation: in this our day, which we have so unkindly rejected. These two days
are diligently to be pondered and thought upon in our minds, the one of these
days is Gods day, the other (if so I may term it) is man's day, because he
abuses the benefit of this time of grace, not to the will of God, but to
serve his own pleasures and vanities. In this day, the wicked will serve their
own lusts, and do as they please: now may Zedekiah persecute the Lords
Prophet, Ier. 3.7.
and cast him into a Dungeon. But in the day of Gods Justice, Zedekiah shall be
taken, Ier. 39.7. Note.
deprived of his kingdom, and his eyes thrust out. Betwixt the godly and the
wicked this is the difference; all the days of a godly man's life, is the day
of God, for he uses it to Gods glory, and works the work of the Lord.

But the wicked makes it his own day, for he abuses the whole time of his
life, to pleasure lust, gluttony, etc and why? Because these things are hidden
from thine eyes. The cause of all evil.
Here is now the cause of all evil, the wicked securely wallowe in their
sins, abuse Gods patience, grow daily worse and worse, and become more
obdurate in their sins, because, Gods judgments for sin, and his imminent
vengeance is hidden from their eyes, Amos 6.3.
as the Prophet says: They put far from them the evil day, and approach to
the seat of iniquity. Eccle. 8.
This reason also Solomon gives: Because sentence against an evil work is
not executed speedily, therefore the hearts of the children of men are fully
set to do evil. But let us (my dear brethren) betime remember the evil day,
and know the things that pertain unto our peace; Seek the Lord while he may
be found, Esa. 55.
call upon him while he is nigh.

The time was when Esau had a birthright, Dives pleasure, Jerusalem peace,
Mat. 25.
and the foolish Virgins might have entered. Now is the time that peace is
offered, repentance preached, and heaven gates are opened, The time will come,
(if we despise the patience of the Lord) that we shall pray with Dives and not
be heard: weep with Esau, and not be pitied: knock with the five Virgins,
and the door not opened. The Storke, the Crane, the Turtle, the Swallow, know
their appointed time. And shall we be more ignorant in the things, Ier. 8.
that pertain to our peace, then the very fowls? A traveler being being
told of a Lion in the way, will stay his journey: a blind man having notice
of a Serpent in the path, will refrain his walking. Satan is a roaring Lion,
and shall we go forward in ungodliness? sin is a stinging Serpent, and shall
we go on still in wickedness?

O then, while this our day lasts, while Christ's hands are opened, and the
door of mercy not shut, let us ask, and he will give us: let us go to him,
and he will save us: in futuro salum remuneratio, Aug.
and condemnatio, after this life there is either reward or punishment:
salvation to the godly, destruction to the wicked.

Thus much for the first impulsive cause of Christ's weeping over Jerusalem,
Namely, the present evil which he saw among them, which concerned their
minds, and was the cause of all their misery: the blindness of their minds,
because they would not know, Verse. 42.
in this their day, those things which belonged unto their peace. The other (as
I said before) was the future evil which pertained unto their bodies; The
second impulsive cause of Christ's weeping.
Namely, their final destruction, by famine, fire, and sword, which our
Savior foresawe to be at hand, for their grievous sins committed against God
and his ministers. And lastly, against the son of God himself.

The Analysis.
Which destruction he excellently delineateth by the parts thereof. For the
days shall come upon thee, Verse. 43. and 44.
that thine enemies shall cast (...) trench about thee, and compass thee
round, and keep thee in on every side. Lastly, he declares the same by the
impulsive cause which moved the Lord thereunto, name^y their ingratitude
toward the gracious visitation of God, because thou know not the time of
thy visitation.

There was never any Nation under the sun, whose misery, calamity, and
destruction was so great and horrible, Josephus lib. 6. and 7. de bello
Iudeorum. Egesippus lib. 5. cap. 10.
as this of the Jewish Nation, as Josephus himself being a Jew and in the
city at that very time, and therefore testis oculatus, an eye witness of all
their miseries, does affirm.

And also Egesippus, who lived in the Apostles time, has committed to writing,
and to this very day the wrath of God pursues them, as their miserable
dispertion and persecution through the whole world does manifest, in the time
of the siege the famine was so great, that dogs, cattes, and mise, were
eaten, yea one devoured an others vomit, and (which I tremble to speak) women
did kill, dress, and greedily devour, their own children, the extremity of
famine utterly abolishing all motherly compassion and nature: eleven hundred
thousand perished by famine, sword, and pestilence, and ninety seven thousand,
after the destruction of the city, were carried away into miserable
captivity. Was ever the like masacrie heard of since the universal flood
wherein the whole world, ( Noah and his company only excepted) perished by
water? What a fearful example of his justice, hatred, and severity against
sin, did God show in this horrible vastation of that city? But how great
also was his piety and mercy, in that so long before he foretold and
bewailed, with bitter tears, this memorable desolation? We read that Christ
wept for three causes, and at three several times.





our sins, When we are most secure in our sins, then have we greatest
cause to weep. Ioh. 11.
little thinking upon Gods vengeance, as did the Jews at this time.

At three sundry times also we read that he wept.

1 First at the raising up of Lazarus, where he bewailed man's incredulity, and
conscience dead in sin, which custom has brought to such an obstinate
habit, that neither his threatenings may awake, nor his sweet promises rowse
them up out of this deadly lethargy.

2 Secondly, upon the Cross, where with strong crying and tears, Heb. 5.7.
he bewailed the diseases of man's soul, which needed so great a cure.

3 And thirdly, here over Jerusalem, a little before his passion, where he
bewailed not so much his imminent death, as the future desolation of that
Nation. Which he plainly signified unto the woman that bewailed and lamented
him, when he said: Luc. 23.
Ye daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves and for
your children. For behold the days will come, when men shall say, blessed are
the barraine and the wombs that never bare, and the paps that never gave suck.
Which words no doubt the woman uttered at the siege of the city, when the
famine was so great, that casting off the sense of nature, they killed and
devoured their own children.

But as here we may behold the severity of Gods justice, and the poisoned
nature of sin; So in this his vengeance we may see the sparkles of his mercy
to shine forth: for he gave to this sinful city, forty years space of
repentance, that they might bewail their sins which had so kindled the wrath
of God against them, in which space also he showed many strange signs and
wonders among them, (as Josephus reports who lived in those days,) that by
putting them in mind that the fire of his wrath was kindled, and his sword
ready drawn, to strike them, he might call them to repentance: for it was
full forty years, or as some say, forty two after his assention, before
Vespatians the Emperor of Rome, Vespatianus. Titus his son.
and his son Titus, the executioners of Gods judgment for their sins,
utterly ruinated the walls, sacked the city, and brought that Nation to
final desolation. And so this merciful Lord did temper the rigor of his
Justice, with the sweetness of his mercy, that to such as would return from
their wickedness, he gave space of repentance. So before he sent the flood, this
loving God, for the space of one hundred years patiently expected their
amendment So before he gave Jerusalem and the Temple into the hands of the
Chaldaeans to be spoiled, he sent his Prophet Jeremy, a man sanctified from
his mothers womb, by whom he offered them peace, and excited them to
repentance for the space of many years, unless they would run in their
sins to their utter ruin and destruction. But they were so far off from
being reclaimed by so many admonitions, that they cast the Prophet into prison,
persisted in their wickedness, until they brought the heavy wrath of God upon
their heads. For so it is recorded in the sacred history: 2. Chron. 36.15.16
and 17.
Therefore the Lord God of their fathers, sent to them by his messengers rising
early and sending: For he had compassion on his people, and on his habitation.
But they mocked the messengers of God, despised his words, and misused his
Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, and till there
was no remedy. For he brought upon them the King of the Chaldeans, who slew
their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary, and spared
neither young man, nor Virgin, ancient, nor aged?

O that we would ever have before our eyes these examples of Gods hatred of
sin, and the severity of his Judgment against wicked men: Surely it would
much profit us to the planting of that true fear of God in our hearts, and be
an effectual medicine against the dangerous security, and vain presumption
of this loose and corrupt age, especially to repress the false and deceitful
hope of many wicked men, which running out the whole race of their life, in all
kind of leaude and licentious living, obstinately contemning Gods word, and
despising his Messengers, and yet they presume on Gods mercy and favor, and
suppose that all things shall succeed well with them; not considering, that in
God there is not only mercy in store for the penitent sinner, but also Justice
to restrain the insolency of wicked men. Was the Lord then a severe revenger
of all impiety, and is he now changed? does he now wink at our wickedness? No,
no, he is still the same, and in him is no change, as he says by his Prophet.
Mal. 3.6.
I am the Lord, I change not. How much better were it for such to hearken to
the wholesome counsel of the wise man: Say not thou the mercy of God is
great, Eccle. 5.6
he will forgive my manifold sins: for mercy and wrath come from him, and
his indignation comes down upon sinners. This dangerous sickness, I will
labor (God willing) in what I purpose to speak more upon this text, to cure:
for I am verily persuaded, that the number is almost infinite, of them that
being deluded with this deceitful hope, do rush headlong into eternal
torments; Neither is there any Inginne of that old cankered Serpent more
frequent, or more to be feared.

And for the performance hereof, I think no way more effectual, then by
setting down some examples of Gods horrible Judgments inflicted upon wicked
men, which being attentively considered, we may understand, Gods hatred of sin,
that thereby the fear of God being entertained in our hearts, we may grow into
a serious detestation of sin, the cause of all misery in this life, and
rewarded with eternal torments in the life to come. And to pass over the
three fearful torments, mentioned by S. Peter, of the Angels that had
sinned, 2. Pet. 2.2.4.5.6.
and were cast down into hell, and delivered into chains of darkness, Job.
4.18. Jude 6. Genesis 7. Genesis 19.24.25.
to be kept unto condemnation. Of the old world, of the ungodly which perished
in the flood: Of Sodom and Gomorah, which were turned into ashes, and made an
example, unto them which should after live ungodly.

What a judgment I pray you, was that wherewith God, after he had wasted all
Egypt with so many plagues? Lastly, drowned Pharaoh with his great host in the
red Sea, Exodus 14.27.28.
so that there was not one left alive to carry news what was become of the
rest?

What a Judgment was that which a little while after God inflicted upon his
own people, Exodus 32.28.
when they worshipped the golden Calfe, for which sin there perished at one
instant three thousand men?

What a Judgment was that, which the Lord laid upon the Israelites, for
committing whoredom with the daughters of Moab, For which there died twenty
and four thousand of the plague? Number. 25.9.


But leaving now, for brevity sake, these punishments common to many, let us
consider how severely God punished King David for committing adultery with the
wife of Vri^^* though he were a man entirely beloved of God, yet he winked not
at his wickedness, but sent the Prophet Nathan unto him with this message; 2.
Sam 12. verse. 9.10.11. and 12.
Wherefore have thou despised the commandment of the Lord, to do evil in
his sight? thou have killed Vriah the Hittitie with the sword, and have taken
his wife to be thy wife, and have slain him with the sword of the Children of
Ammon. Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thy house, because thou
have des^ised me, and taken the wife of Vriah the Hittite to be thy wife. Thus
says the Lord; Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own
house, and will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thine
neighbor, and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of this sun: For thou
did it secretly; but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the
sun: and though the Lord upon his peccaui and unfeigned repentance, did put
away his sin; So that he did not die, 2 Samuel 12.13.
yet to show his hatred of sin to all posterities, what severe chastisements
and tragical crosses all his life long did God inflict? but how great and
extraordinary was his repentance that followed this sinful fact, Psalm. 51.
he himself witnesses: So that his whole life afterward seemed too little
for repentance, that he might be reconciled unto God, and restored into his
favor. How did he bewail his great offenses, desiring God that he would
forgive his sins, and renew in him his holy spirit, promising that he would
not be unmindful of so great a grace showed upon him? And how vehement was his
sorrow, he expresses: I am bowed and crooked very sore, Psalm. 38.6.8.9.
I go mourning all the day. I am weakened and sore broken. I roar for very
grief of my heart. Lord I power my whole desire before thee, and my sighing is
not hid from thee. Again, how great was that sorrow, Psalm. 6*6.
when he says: I fainted in my mourning. I cause my bed every night to
swim, and water my couch with my tears.

Therefore for the few nights which he spent in filthy and sinful pleasure;
he passed the rest of his time in bitter weeping, sighing and mourning. And his
bed which he had polluted with unlawful lust, he afterward washed with a
large and plentiful flood of tears. And what could be more to express his
serious and earnest repentance? Notwithstanding this repentance, let them with
a feeling heart consider what followed, which sport and ^est at this sin, and
term it but a trick of youth, a natural inclination, etc.

Though King David were highly beloved of God, as a man after his own heart,
yet the Lord would not so lightly pass over his sins, but by his
chastisements and afflictions, would make him a memorable example to all
licentious livers to the worlds end.

For first the children (the fruit of his adultery) was stricken with sickness
and died.

2. 2. Sam. 12.
His daughter Thamar was incestuously defiled by her own brother Ammon.

3. Ammon for his incest, 2. Sam. 13.
was slain by Absolon.

4. Absolon raised war upon him, (ambitiously aspiring after his fathers
kingdom, and conspiring against him) defiled his concubines, and came to a
woeful destruction. 2, Sam. 15.
And therefore for defiling the one wife of Vriah, his ten concubines were
polluted, and defiled, not by a stranger, but by his own son: not in secret,
but in the open view of all Israel; according as the Prophet Nathan foretold:
For thou did it secretly, 2. Sam. 16.
but I will do this thing before all Israel.

If God so grievously afflicted King David, a man after his own heart, for the
sin of adultery, and that after so great sorrow and contrition of heart for
his offenses, Merciful God, in what state do they stand, which make no
conscience of this sin? yea jest at it, so far off are they from sorrowing
with holy David* But let such by these examples, consider the fearful estate
they are in, and Gods heavy wrath hanging over their heads, that (if they be
not altogether given over to a reprobate sense) they may betimes betake
themselves to amendment of life, labor by David's example, by serious and
unfeigned repentance to be reconciled unto God, that they may come out of the
snares of the Devil, and escape the eternal torments prepared for them: Hebr.
10.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

Now (brethren) these things are examples unto us (as the Apostle says) That
we should not lust after evil things as they lusted. For whatsoever things are
written aforetime; are written for our learning. 1. Cor. 10.


Romans 15.4^
These indeed, are manifest examples of Gods great hatred, and vengeance against
all impiety and wicked men: but these temporal punishments are light, yea but
a shadow, being compared to the eternal torments in the life to come: these
chiefly afflict the body, but the other shall seize upon body and soul.

These are but temporary, and prefined within the limits of this short life:
the other eternal, which never shall find end or limit. If then this
vastation of Jerusalem, foreseen so long before, did draw tears from our
loving Lord, with what tears of contrition should we bewail our sins, which
will in the end (without repentance) plunge us in eternal torments, whereof
all other affliction is but an Image or shadow? For so the Apostle Peter
lays before us the destruction of Sodom and Gomorah, as an example of the
eternal punishments prepared for these which hereafter should live ungodly. 2.
Pet. 2.4.


There the damned shall spiritually suffer all these things which the Lord here
bewaileth, but after a diverse manner of torment.

There all the rabble of the wicked shall be trenched about with their enemies
[the Diuells] so that they shall have no evasion to escape out of their hands.
There shall be famine, sword and pestilence, that is, diverse kinds of torments
proceeding from the order of Gods Justice according to the condition of every
sin. And it may perhaps have probability, which some think, that there shall
be diverse kinds of torments, Varieties of torments.
for diverse kinds of sins: as namely, other torments for the proud, other for
the covetous, other for the leacher, other for the envious, etc.

So that the proud and high minded, shall there be dejected and cast down full
low: the covetous shall there be pined with extreme penury of all things.
There the envious in rage shall rent and tear their own bowels. There the
lecher for the short pleasure of his unclean flesh, shall be tormented with
most bitter tortures. There the greedy glutton, who made his belly his God,
shall with the rich glutton be tormented with most cruel hunger and thirst,
and be denied one drop of cold water to cool his tongue. Luc. 16.
And whereas the Lord says of that sinful city: there shall not be left one
stone upon an other, which shall not be thrown down. This calamity also
shall not there be wanting, Luc. 19.44.
when there shall be no sense, no member of the body left without his torment:
for even as the wicked have given their members, as weapons of unrighteousness,
unto sin: So the order of Gods justice, Romans 6.13.
requires that no member should be free from his proper and deserved
punishment. So the unchaste eyes, so the ears which lay open to detractions and
slanders; So the deceitful tongue, which uttered so many lies, and falsehoods,
sparing neither the same of widdowe, wife, virgin, or any other; so the body
which was effeminate and weakened with so many pleasures and delights, shall
there receive their several torments, according to the quality of the
offense. Where that shall be fulfilled which the spirit of God says: In as
much as she glorified her self and lived in pleasure, Reu. 18.7.
so much give ye to her torment and sorrow: and for every member upon which
the fabric of man's body, (as an edifice built with stones) consists, shall
receive worthy and peculiar punishment.

If then Gods temporal Judgments in this life, which manifest his hatred of
all iniquity, should breed in us a detestation of sin, how much more should
the consideration of his eternal punishments (whereof the other as I said are
but a shadow,) be an effectual remedy against al ungodliness, and plant the
filial and healthful fear of God in our hearts? This is it which the Lord
himself requires of us.

Mat. ^0.^8.
Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but
rather fear him which is able to destroy both body and soul in hell.

What hope is then left for those forlorn wretches environed with so many
torments? what will they do: whither will they fly? what counsel will they
take? will they fly to the remedy of repentance? but now the time of
repentance is past, and the day of vengeance is come; will they then seek for
shelter at Gods mercy, which is the only refuge and solace in all miseries?
but this life only is the time of mercy and pardon, but then is the time of
wrath and judgment.

Let us not (beloved) suffer the day of this life which God in his mercy has
lent us, to seek peace, pardon, and reconsiliation, unprofitably to slip
away, least the day of wrath, vengeance, and irreuocable destruction surprise
us at unawares: The day of this life is the time of Gods gracious visitation,
Luc. 1.37.
allotted us, to serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our
life, says holy Zachariah: not only omnibus diebus, all the days; but
omnibus diebus nostris, (says a writer) all our days: for the time of this
mortal life is given unto us to serve the Lord in all holy conversation,
making provision for the life eternal; for death will shortly arrest us, when
there shall be no more place, nor time of repentance: therefore says our
Savior; The night comes when none can work. Ioh 9.4. 2. Cor. 6.2
Behold now is the accepted time, behold now is the day of salvation.

But to return again to the words of the text? why did God inflict this
horrible punishment upon Jerusalem and the whole Nation of the Jews? The Lord
himself gives the reason: because thou knew not the time of thy
visitation. The Lord in his mercy did many ways visit the^, both by
prosperity and adversity, as in part I have before discoursed. And lastly,
Luc. 1.17.
he visited them from an high, by sending to them his only son JESUS CHRIST,
who brought with him all good things, by which he illuminated them that sat in
darkness and in the shadow of death, and freely offered them his graces and
salvation. Which inestimable benefits, they were so far off from
acknowledging, that they rejected and crucified the Author of so great a
salvation, as their forefathers persecuted all the Prophets before them.

It may seem strange (will some say) that in the midst of this public joy and
applause of the people, CHRIST wept at his coming to Jerusalem, which at any
other time we never read that he did, though he was many times before in the
city: the cause hereof is easily to be given. The Lord came at this time most
lovingly to visit this city, and to perform all things which the Prophets
foretold of him, to consummate whatsoever was promised of the Messiah, and to
manifest his infinite love to the posterity of Abraham: yea toward all men,
being now ready to give his life a ransom for the sins of the whole world.

This merciful visitation they would in no wise know, wherefore there was
nothing more to be expected, but the severity of Gods wrath and judgments to
fall upon them which before he had threatened. ^h. 8.21. Luc. 17.22.
As, I go my way and ye shall seek me, and you shall die in your sins. And,
The days will come, that you shall desire to see one of the days of the son
of man, and ye shall not see it. And again; O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which
killest the Prophets, Mat. 23.37.
and stonest them which were sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered
thy Children together, as the hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and
ye would not: behold your habitation shall be left unto you desolate. Again:
Ye daughters of Jerusalem, Luc. 23.28.
weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for your children: for
behold, the days will come, when men shall say, blessed are the barraine, and
the womb that never bare, and the pappes that never gave suck.

All these evils were at hand, yea even at the door, punishment could not
long be deferred, seeing Gods gracious visitation was contemned. This did
CHRIST foresee as if it were present, namely, that Jerusalem should come with
that whole Nation into utter desolation: without environed with the enemy:
within, afflicted with seditions and factions, that so many thousands should
perish with the sword, famine, and pestilence, that the remnant should be
scattered abroad through the whole world, sold, and be made a spectacle unto
all Nations, this their misery, this pitiful Savior knew to be at hand,
and bewailed the same.

Two necessary observations to be considered.
This offers to our view two necessary observations, to be seriously
considered of all true feeling Christian hearts:

First, how fearfully God is wont to punish



Ingratitude.
Surely with spiritual blindness, a most terrible and grievous plague: and what
is that blindness? The most fearful of all the rest, when for our sins God
takes the light of his grace and holy spirit from us, and gives us not
understanding hearts, A most grievous punishment.
that we might know the time of our visitation, and the things which pertain
to our peace. When men cannot foresee, nor see in time, neither good nor evil,
happiness, nor misery. Their good they see not before it be lost and gone,
their evils they foresee not, before they fall upon them, and light on their
heads, to their irreuocable destruction, so that they cannot shun or avoid
them: and is not this a plague of all plagues? What more unhappy then when a
man has many good things, and yet sees them not, nor knows them, much less
can convert them to his use and profit? what more fearful, then when all
evils, destructions and miseries, hangs over our heads, yea even at the
door, and yet we see them not, nor will know them that we might escape them?
And so was it with the people of the Jews, (as it is always with wicked men)
they had CHRIST the Son of God, and Savior among them, and with him all
goodness, eternal salvation, and God himself, yet they did not see him, they
would not know him, they would not believe in him, before Christ with the
kingdom of God and all goodness departed from them, and all miseries
overwhelmed them, wars, famine, sword and pestilence, which utterly destroyed
the city and whole Nation; Josephus
as Josephus who was present, at that time in the city during the siege
reports, that one million perished with the sword, and famine, and after the
sacking of that goodly city (which was so ruinated and laid waste, that there
was not left one stone upon an other, so that all that beheld it, even to this
day, may say: O quam periere ruinae?

How are the ruins ruinated? there were sold for slaves by the Romans,
97000. which were dispersed and scattered into all Nations. So severely did God
punish this Nation for their incredulity and ingratitude, with blindness, that
they could not enjoy the graces and favors which God offered them, nor escape
his punishments denounced against them. Heb* 10.31.
So fearful a thing is it to fall into the hands of the living God. O how
horrible a punishment is this Porosis Cardhias obduration, hardness of heart, and
blindness, when God takes away his grace and light from men, which they refuse,
and wlll not walk therein, and gives them over to Satan to be blinded, who
so darkeneth their cogitations, (as the Apostle speaks of the Gentiles) that
being past feeling, Ephesians. 4.18.19.
they give themselves to work all uncleanness, even with greedines. And the
cause of this Analgesias and loss of feeling, the Apostle teaches to be
obstinacy, and perseverance in sin against conscience, so that at length
they begin obducere callum, to grow to hardness of heart, that as if their
conscience were seared with a hot iron, they are touched with no sense and
feeling of their sins any more, nay the wickedness they commit against the
first or second table, they fear not to jest at, and defend, as if it were
well done, calling good evil, and evil good. And this is the extremest
degree to perdition, and may well be called, not only the most grievous of all
sins, but also the cause of all sins, Romans 11.8
and a punishment of sin in this life.

This the Apostle calls; Spiritum Catanozeos, Spirit of slumber, eyes that
they should not see, and ears that they should not hear. O fearful estate.

And from whence is so great blindness in the world at this day among such as
profess christianity, that whoredoms, murders, theft, periuries, horrible
swearing and blasphemies, usury and oppression, fraud, deceit, and
undermining one of an other, and all other sins against conscience, are daily
practiced without shame or any feeling at all? Surely these are manifest signs
of Gods wrath, pursuing us for our ingratitude and contempt of his graces,
giving us over as incorrigible, unto the power of Satan and hardness of heart.
And is not this a miserable blindness, that these sins have brought us to the
very brincke of the pit of destruction, and without repentance must needs cast
us shortly therein, and yet we will not see it, that we might avoid the
danger, nor the snares the devil lays before us, that we might escape them,
but run on still in our wickedness, to our irreuocable ruin, refusing to know,
Romans 2.4.5.
in this our day, the things which pertain unto our peace: but, after the
hardness of our heart that cannot repent, heap still unto our selves wrath,
against the day of wrath. Surely, it is to be feared, that the Lords
controversy, which he has with this land, is so great as that he had with
that sinful Nation, because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God
in the Land, by swearing and lying, stealing, Hos. 4.12.
and whoring, they break forth, and blood touches blood. The Lord for his
infinite mercy sake lighten the darkness of our

Secondly, we are here taught, from whence wars, famine, scarcity of all
things, the sword and strange diseases, pestilence and all evils in the world
spring and proceed: namely, for our ingratitude toward God, because we will
not know the time of our visitation, nor the things that pertain to our true
peace. This gracious visitation began when the son of God took our flesh
upon him, and was borne in the world: through the tender mercy of our God, Luc.
1.78.
whereby the day spring from an high has visited us, says holy Zachariah:
which benefit was so great, that all the wit of men and Angels is not able to
express it sufficiently, and this loving visitation as yet endures, he
cease not still to visit us: but how little do we consider thereof? what
thankfulness have we showed? how little are we bettered thereby? how small is
our care to serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life?
yet to this very end our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ visited us, says his
Apostle, Tit. 2.14.
who gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of good works. No
marvel then that we have had so many years of dearth, unseasonable weather,
horrible tempests, shipwrackes, pestilence, strange diseases, etc. God has but
now begun, he does in fatherly affection but shake the rod over our heads*
our sins are the cause, which except we remove, the effects will not cease,
patientia laesa fit furor, except he see amendment, his long patience shall be
converted into the fury of his wrath. Let then Jerusalem and the people of the
Jews, be a warning unto us. Happy is he whom other men's harms can cause to
beware.

The use.
The use is, that we apply these things unto our selves, and learn to be wise
by the punishments of others.

A long time now has the Gospel been purely preached unto us, but with what
fruit? How few of us do acknowledge as we ought, this gracious visitation of
the Lord? Where is our obedience, reverence, and thankefulnes due unto Gods
holy word? where is our zeal and love we owe unto Gods ministers? where is our
reformation of life? How many scoffers are there among us? How many are there
which think themselves, in the arrogancy of their spirit, to be wiser then
their teachers? How many are there which come rather as critical carpers and
censurers of the Preacher, then fruitful hearers? What contempt and neglect of
the holy exercise of public prayer, the chiefest duty of a true Christian, to
which God has made so many sweet promises, and so earnestly commands? How
many are there which hold that the whole duty of a Christian consists in
hearing only, without any care to convert their hearing into knowledge, and
their knowledge, into action? How many swinish Epicures are there to be found
de grege porci, which live rather like hogs then Christians? Shall we think
that God, the just revenger of all impiety, will ever be silent at these and
many other sins, which sorrow of heart forbids me to utter? No, no, God
will not be mocked, he is the same, he changes not. Let us therefore yet at
length acknowledge the time of our visitation, and let us consider the season,
that it is now time that we should rise from sleep, Romans 13.11.12.13. verse.
for now is our salvation nearer then when we believed, the night is passed,
the day is at hand, let us cast away the works of darkness, and put upon us
the armor of light, so that we walk honestly as in the day, not in gluttony
and drunkenness, strife and envying.

Here again, is seriously to be considered, that Christ mentions two days
or times, Two days.
but very unlike to each other.

The first is the time of grace, The time o^ grace, the time of wrath.
wherein we live; The other the time of wrath and judgment. To the first time,
which is the time present wherein we live, our Savior gives, three names: he
calls it the time of our visitation, the day of peace, or which is given us
to provide for our peace: And our day. It is called the time of visitation,
because God in his only beloved son, of his infinite mercy and love has
visited us. It is called the day of peace, because in it Christ has with his
own precious blood reconciled us unto God, and because we should therein seek
forth things that pertain unto our true peace. He calls it our day, because
our gracious God has allotted this time for repentance, 2. Pet. 1.10.
that we might give all diligence to make our calling and election sure, to
serve the Lord in righteousness and holiness, to lay up treasures in heaven, to
labor by repentance to be truly reconciled unto God, to make provision for
the eternal day in the life to come, which never shall have end. He calls
this in the singular number a day, because the time of this life is short, but
a moment, a vapor, smoke, a dream, Job. 14.
a thought, a thing of nothing, which should move us (because the time is
short) to work the more earnestly in the work of the Lord, to walk the more
warily in the way toward heaven, Phil. 2.15.
that we may be blameless and pure as the son of God, when we shall appear
before him, to labor to adorn our souls with virtues, to take heed, Mar.
13.33.
watch, and pray, for we know not when the time is: After the Apostles
counsel, to forget that which is behind, and speedily to endeavor our selves
unto that which is before, Phil. 3.13.14.
and follow hard toward the mark for the price of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus.

Least we fall into the other day, The day of wrath and Judgment.
which is the day of Judgment, the day of wrath, which shall be no more called
our day, but the day of the Lord, a day of trouble and heaviness, a day of
destruction and desolation, Zepan. 1.15. Joel. 2.11.
a day of obscurity and darkness, this day of the Lord is great and terrible,
who may abide it?

This day, the Lord expresses in the plural number [ for the days shall come
upon thee] because the punishments shall be great and without end. This day the
Lord has ordained for them which contemn this present acceptable time of
grace, the day of salvation, the time of his gracious visitation, and refuses
to know, in this their day, the things that pertain unto their peace.

There is none so wicked, No man so wicked but has his day.
but the loving God, who wills not the death of a sinner, gives him his day,
if he had the grace to know it.

Thou biting Usurer, thou beastly whoremonger, thou blody murderer, thou
prowling thief, thou cruel oppressor, thou covetous Caitiffe, thou swinish
Epicure, thou that live in envy, malice, etc.

O consider, in time I say consider, that the merciful GOD gives thee a day:
The day of this life, to provide, by Repentance, for thy peace, whenever the
Lord by his Preachers out of his holy Word, or by his holy motions, Divine
inspirations, stings of conscience, etc. knocks at the door of thy heart;
Think then that this is thy day. Oh slip not this occasion: Let not this
time unfruitfully pass away: Open to this sweet Guest, least for thy contempt
of his gracious Visitation, thou fall into the days of his fearful Wrath and
terible indignation. 2. Cor. 26.
Behold now is the accepted time, behold now is the day of salvation.

But leaving the Jews in their infidelity and hardness of heart, Let us come
unto our selves, (brethren) whom the Lord is wont many times to visit.

Psalm. 106.4.
He visits us, when by his benefits he exciteth us to love him. Visit us
(says the prophet) with thy salvation. He visits us, when he sends unto
us, teachers and ministers of his word, to show us the way of Eternal
felicity. So when he raised up the widows Son from Death, the people
glorified GOD, saying, A great Prophet is raised up among us, and God has
visited his People, to whom he sent such a Prophet and teacher of Righteousness.

He visits us, being secure, careless, and nothing bettered by his Word and
benefits, when he chastises us with calamities, crosses and plagues, to the
intent he may recall us into the way of Righteousness: Of this Visitation in
the person of God, speaks the princely Prophet; Psalm. 89.30.
But if his Children forsake my Law, and walk not in my Judgments: if they
break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments: then will I visit their
transgressions with the Rod, and their inquities with Scourges.

Sometimes he visiteteth us by his preachers, which are his Ambassadors, to
deliver his message unto us: Sometimes by giving us good Motions and holy
Inspirations: Sometime by the examples of others, that beholding before our
Eyes their punishments, we should be the more wary how we fall into sin. For
so the Lord says by his Prophet Jeremy: Ier. 3.8.
When I saw how that by all occasions, rebellious Israel had played the harlot,
I cast her away, and gave her a bill of diuorsement, yet her rebellious sister
Judah was not afraid, but played the harlot also. And thus the Lord grievously
threatens by his Prophet, that Judah would not beware by an others harm, and
acknowledge Gods visitation in her sisters punishment, as it were seeing fire
in her next neighbors roof, according to the proverb:

Tunc tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet. Horatius.
When fired is thy neighbors wall,
Thou know thy danger is not small.
So that there is no wicked man, but one time or other has a time of
visitation, as Jerusalem had her time of visitation by Christ's doctrine,
examples and miracles: so there is no sinner, at whose heart God sometime does
not knock, though they do not all alike receive his visitation.

After this manner the Lord is wont to visit his people, to whose voice and
gracious visitation, many give so deaf an ear, that they are neither won by
his benefits, mollified by his admonitions, moved by his inward inspirations,
nor by his plagues and punishments will be reduced into the way of
righteousness. Continual custom in sin, has converted nature into so
obstinate an habit, vt callos in anima contrax erint.

(As the proverb is) their very hearts are so hard as brawne, altogether
insensible in their wickedness. That strong armed man which besieges the fort
of their hearts, diligently labors to stop every passage, that the light
of Gods holy spirit cannot pierce into them.

The nature and might of that enemy, is mistically shadowed out by God
himself, in the description of the monster Leuiathan, his scales are like
strong shieldes, Job. 41.16
and are sure sealed, one is set to an other, that no wind may come between
them. Such as this old Sepent is, such are his children whom he possesses: he
fortifieth the hold of their heart, as it were with hard scales, that no
spiritual artillery may penetrate the same; lay before them Gods threatenings
for sin, the terrors of hell for the reprobate, the joys of heaven for the
penitent, etc. They are no more moved quam si parieti loqueris, then if thou
spakest to the Wall, as if Hell and Death had already laid hold and seized
upon them.

The Book of God, assures us that the cause of their captivity heretofore,
was the contempt of Gods Word and Prophets, when all the people were
miserably carried away into Babell; 2. Chron. 36.16.
But they mocked the Messengers of the Lord, and contemned his Words, and
misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people,
and till there was no remedy.

And the Son of God says here, That the cause of their woeful and final
destruction, whereof I have spoken, was also, because they refused to know the
time of their visitation: and therefore persecuted his messengers. And lastly,
the Son of God himself, which he bewailed; O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which
killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often
would I have gathered thy children together, Luc. 13.34.
as the Hen gathers her brood under her wings, and ye would not.

But (o good God) if we compare the sins of England at this day, with the
sins of the Jews, how can we choose but fear and tremble? Considering that
not Jerusalem only, but also England, is plunged in as deep oblivion of the
Time of her Visitation, as ever that sinful City was.

Surely (Beloved,) grief of heart wills me to sit still in silence, and wish
with holy Jeremy, that my Head were full of water, and mine eyes a Fountain
of Tears, that I might weep Day and Night for the sins of this Land: Yet
sith Zeal enforces me to speak, I had rather use the words of a zealous
Preacher, M. G. W. in a ser. at Paul's cross. An. 1609. fol. 26.
uttered before the greatest Auditorie in this Land to this purpose, then
insist upon mine own herein. The Word of God is a reproach unto men, they
have no delight in it. And this want of delight in the Message, makes the
Messengers to be despised.

Are not Gods Cryers reckoned but as Cassandraes prophesies? His Ambassadors,
worse then Justinians Orators? Yea, no better then the Filthe and Offscowring
of all things unto this Day? 1. Cor. 4.13.


Every cursed Tobiah and Samballat, is envying at our Spiritual buildings:
Every scoffing Michol, Nehem. 4.1.
makes a jest of our preaching: Every sacrilegious Ammonite, is clipping of
our garments: Every presumptuous Chorah and Abiram, ^. Sam. 10
is carping at our preferment. Number. 16.
It is reported in Ecclesiastical histories, that at what time Constantine
that worthy Patron of the Church, had invested the poor distressed Ministers
with temporal patrimonies, one was heard to say: Hodie venenum cecidit in
ecclesiam. But now the Miscreants of this age have found a remedy for that
disease, and have given us tryacle enough to purge out all this poison, which
has never ceased until it has extracted almost bowels and all. What the
Palmer-worme Papist with his Impropriations; and after him the Grasshopper
Athiest with his prescriptions; and after him, the Cankerworme Patron, with his
reseruations; And last of all, the Caterpiller Cormorant with his illusions;
The Patrimony of the Church like Pharaoes goodly kine, has been devoured by
ill favored, lean, and hungry Nunscions, and made like the desce^t of
Nabuchadnezzars Image, Dan. 2.31.
from gold to silver, from silver to brass, from brass to iron, from iron to
claye. Hence it is that the word of God is no more regarded, because the
Messengers thereof are so much contemned, and the cause of all this is our
ingratitude, because we will not know the time of our visitation.

If he smote with so dreadful a judgment Ananiah and Saphyrah his wife (says
a worthy and a reverend Father of our Church) for withholding but part of the
Church maintenance which by themselves was given, will he endure for ever, them
that take what they never gave? No, no, Act. 5.
and that shall they know, when peradventure it will be too late to be sorry
for it. Did these men see what my self have seen, and diverse yet living,
which can witness the same as well as I, what twitching torments of a wounded
conscience, what hellish gripes of dispairing fear, never to see the face of
God, but to perish for ever with cast awaies, some have had for detaining but a
small portion of such maintenance which now is thought the best cheat that can
be caught, happily it would, nay surely it would, except hell and death had
already taken possession, abate the lust, and assuage the longing that they
have to devour the encouragements of learning, that yet remain unspoiled in
this land. But what they have not seen in others, they may feel in themselves
too soon, and sharp, if nothing will persuade them. Thou art dead O Sunanite,
that intreatedst thy husband to build for the Prophet a chamber and to furnish
it; but thy memory is blessed with God and man, and a witness shall thou be in
the day of judgment, against pullers down of the houses built by men and
women of devotion and piety, 2. Kings. 4.16.
for the Prophets and children of the Prophets. I speak nothing at this time
for breuities sake, of adultery, and whoredom, swearing, and forswearing,
drunkenness and riot, oppression and cruelty, fraud and deceit in buying and
selling, which are so common in this land; The Lord be merciful unto us, and
give us grace betime by unfeigned repentance, to auert the heavy wrath of God
hanging over our heads.

In that which I have said (brethren) we may behold the fruit that springs
from this poisoned root of sin, and what is the reward thereof, how hatesome
all wickedness is in the fight of God, which caused him to pluck up his people
whom he had planted, to cast even down to hell, them whom he had advanced,
above all other Nations, and lifted up to heaven. This should work in us a
detestation of sin, yea by all means to fly from sin as from a Serpent,
Eccle. 21.2.
which is the cause of all misery in this life, and of eternal torments in
the life to come; from sin (I say) an evil so full of loss and damage,
Sin is full of loss, shame, sorrow, and bitterness.
so full of shame and confusion, so full of sorrow and bitterness, full of
loss and damage, because it separateth from God the Sovereign good Your
sins have separated between you and your God. Esa. 59
As the widow and fatherles are exposed to all wrong and oppression, because
there are few that will stand in their defense, Similes.
even as a ship wanting a stern, Mast, and Governor, is tossed with the
tempest, and at last dashed on the rocks: so the wretched soul, destitute
through sin, of Gods grace, favor, and protection, is laid open to the
waves of temptations, and tossed with the tempests of the devil, world, and
flesh, and finally suffers horrible shipwreck.

Sin is also full of shame and confusion: Qui male agit odit lucem, he that
evil does hates the light. Ioh. 3.
Sin and shame be brothers of one birth. Old father Adam teaches, Genesis 3.
who as soon as he had sinned, sought to hide himself from God, Simile.
and covered himself with Fig Tree leaves, even as they which have vlcerous
and filthy bodies, seek by all means to hide the same, and would not have
their disease known: so al wicked livers, though happily they are not ashamed
at their sinful actions, to be wicked, yet they blush to be reputed wicked.
Diogenes on a time seeing a young man in a Tavern running into an inner room,
for that he was ashamed to be seen, called unto him; Quo interius fugeris, hoc
magis eris in popina, the more thou runnest inward, the farther thou art in the
Tavern. So a wicked man, the more he seeks to hide himself* within
himself, so much the more is he the same that he is.

Augustine: Aug. cons. lib. 1. cap. 12.
Voluisti domine and vere sic est, vt paena sibi sit omnis animus inordinatus:
Thou would Lord, have it so, (and indeed so it is) that every inordinate
mind should be a torment unto it self. Know and behold, (says Jeremy in
the person of God) that it is an evil and a bitter thing, that thou have
forsaken the Lord thy God, Ier. 12.19.
and that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord God of Hosts. As Job in all
his miseries, never wanted a Messenger that would bring him evil tidings: So
in every sin, an evil messenger is ever at hand, which wounds and teareth
the conscience. Simile.
Sin then is like an Harlot, of whom that mirror of wisdom speaks: Pro.
5.3.
Whosoever Lips drop like an honey comb, but her end is bitter as Wormwood, her
feet go down to death, and her steps take hold on Hell. Sin is like an
itching Ulcer, Sin like an itching Ulcer.
which feels a little pleasure whiles it is rubbed, but at last it smarteth
the more, Simile.
and fretteth the Flesh. Sin is like poisoned Wine, which seems pleasant to
the taste, but the poison kills in the end.

This gnawing of conscience, an inseparable companion of sin, the Lord
threatens unto the wiced: Leu. 16.17.36. verse.
Ye shall fly when none pursues you. Again, The sound of a Leaf shaken,
shall chase them away. Can any thing be spoken more significantly, to express
the terrors of a guilty conscience? This plainly proves if there were nothing
else* how full of bitterness and sorrow sin is: yet in many other respects,
the evils that proceed of sin may be considred, because it brings eternal
punishment; because it weakeneth the powers of the soul; because our desires
are accompanied with infinite cares, and troubles: because it only makes a
separation between God and man: it caused the son of God to descend from
heaven, to be made man, and to suffer the ignominious death of the Cross,
because the heinous enormitie of sin, was such, that it could be expiated by
no other means but by the blood of the only begotten son of God. Timon.
Timon that Misanthropos, and hater of men, being asked why he so hated all
men, answered, Merito improbos odi; reliquos autem quia improbos non oderunt. I
hate wicked men and that worthily, and the rest I hate, because they do not
hate wicked men. Publius. Mimus.
It was also a saying of Publius Mimus: Tolerabilior est qui mori iubet, quam
qui male viuere. He is more tolerable that commands us to die, then he that
wills us to live wickedly. Here ye see that the very Heathen by the light of
nature, saw and taught the horror and filthiness of sin, and shall doubtless
rise in judgment to our condemnation: which beside the instinct of nature,
have also the light of Gods word, yet make small conscience of many sins
which they so detested.

The use (brethren) of all that I have said is, The use.
that laying before our eyes Gods extreme hatred of sin, manifested in this
woeful ruin and destruction of the people of the Jews, whom he made a
fearful example of his wrath to all posterities, that we would at length
learn to be wise by others harms, walk more warily, take heed how we offend
so great and terrible a God, beware of security in our sins, and betime
betake our selves to repentance: for these judgments of God, do not only
pertain unto them, but much more unto us, which by CHRIST the Messiah have
received far greater benefits then they did: For as much as the Gospel
excels the law, so far our benefits exceed theirs. This being so, what
remains, but that we should hearke^ to the Apostles counsel: Heb. 2.12.
Wherefore we ought diligently to give heed to the things which we have heard,
least at any time we should let them slip, for if the word spoken by Angels
was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience, received a just
recompense of reward, how shall we escape which neglect so great salvation? For
if the abuse of Gods benefits and their ingratitude brought upon this people
so heavy a destruction: what should not we fear of God the same Judge, which
have received far greater benefits, and yet are bettered nothing thereby:
but still remain unthankful? What should we fear do I say? Do we not see
the same calamity and vastation to have fallen upon the greatest part of all
Christendom at this day?

Once in the flourishing state of the Roman Empire, the Christian religion was
extended almost through the whole world, but at this day, how small a portion
is left, the barbarous Turk for our sins still enchroaching upon us? Do we
not here plainly see, the same God, in the same cause, to have begun the same
judgment among us? what cause then have we to hearken to this admonishion of
the Apostle, Romans 11.17.20.21. Noli altum. sapere.
though some of the branches be broken off, and thou being a wild olive tree,
wast graft in for them: be not high minded, for if God spared not the natural
branches, take heed least he spare not thee.

The Jews once were the natural branches; the legitimate children of God: we
were strangers to the testament: they were the natural branches of the Olive,
we were but graffes: if then God dealt so severely with the natural branches,
when they sinned against him: what should we look for which are fallen into
the like sins? surely, we may justly fear greater punishments. For so says
the Lord by his Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 25.29.
For lo I begin to plague a city where my name is called upon, and should you
go free? ye shall not go quit, says the Lord of hosts. And for the beating
down of security, let us consider that this misery fell upon Jerusalem when
they were most secure in their sins; for when they thought that the heavens
had buried in oblivion, the blood of the Prophets, and the cruel death of the
son of God, then when they least surmised, God raised up the whole power of
the Romans, under the conduct of Vespatian and Hadrian, which utterly
subverted the City Jerusalem, with fifty other fenced Cities, Vide Dione
Cassi in vita Hadriani.
and eight hundred fourscore and five walled Towns of the kingdom of Judea,
in which they left scarce one foot of the wall standing. Gods vengeance was
never so near the rich man, as when he was most secure; and vaunted to
himself, when he said to his soul; Soul, thou have much goods laid up in
store for many years: live at ease, eat, drink, Luc. 12.19.
and be merry. Scarce had he uttered, or conceived in mind this thought,
before he heard this voice: O fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul
from thee, whose then shall those things be which thou have provided?

Let us therefore (beloved) having always these examples before our eyes,
begin yet at last to be wise by others harms, and this present opportunity of
repentance which God in his mercy has lent us, let us not suffer unfruitfully
to pass away, let us never forget this saying of our Lord: The Night comes
when none can work: but while the day of salvation lasts, Ioh. 9.4.
while the Judge himself most lovingly calls us, and offers his free grace
and mercy unto us, fly chearefully unto him in serious repentance, studying to
serve him, in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. Which God
grant for his infinite mercy sake, to whom with the Son and the holy Ghost,
three persons in one most glorious Trinity, one God in unity, might, and
Majesty, be all praise, power and dominion, now and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by Thomas Creed, for Arthur Johnson, dwelling near the great
North door of S. Paul's Church, at the sign of the white Horse. 1613.


