THE BLACK DEVIL OR THE APOSTATE.

TOGETHER With

The WOLF Worrying the LAMBS. AND

The SPIRITVALL NAVIGATOR, BOUND

For the Holy Land. In three Sermons.

By THOMAS ADAMS.

Ierem. 13, 23.

Can the Black-Moore change his skin? Or the Leopard his spots? Then may ye
also do good, that are accustomed to do evil.

Bern. Sent.

Quid prosunt lecta and intellecta, nisi teipsum legas and intelligas?

LONDON, Printed by William Iaggard, 1615.

TO THE HONOrable Gentleman, Sir Charles Morrison, Knight Baronet.
WOrthy Sir, I have been bold, upon better acquaintance with your virtues then
with your self, to send a short Treatise to your view. I know whose judgment
it must pass, yet am feare-lesse: not in any arrogant stupidity of my own
weakness; but in a confident presumption of your goodness; a weighty habit,
not parallel but transcendent to your Greatness. Perhaps Nature has taught
you, that to be Generous is to be virtuous: but I am sure, wisdom has
perfected natural disposition in you; and given you not only an excellent
theoricall discourse, but an actual reducing of those things into practice;
which are better then you shall find here. Though you have happier
Contemplations of your own, yet accept these, as the slender presents of a
poor man given to the rich. Weak I confess it: for how should the child be
strong, begot in the fathers weakness! It has the more need of your
Protection; and knows the better to express it self and the Author ever
ready at

Your Honorable command to do you service, Tho: Adams.

To the Reader.
REader, this Book stands at the mercy of thy capacity for thy censure.
Perhaps thou will judge it done for oppositions sake; the Black Devil to the
White: perhaps for imitation; perhaps for affectation. Thou may for me causes
enough in thy imagination to produce it, yet miss the right. It was to show
thy self, and all other perusers, the blackness of Sin; and among the rest,
of Apostacy. Would you not behold Impiety in the true colors: you may for
bear. If you would, look here, and detest it. If you will take out a good
lesson, and hate to do it; neither you nor I shall have cause to repent our
labors. Once we must give account, what we have heard, and seen, and done;
when the pleasures of Sin, like old surfets, shall give a bitter reluctancie
in the stomach of the conscience; and we are going to Gods cold earth.
Learn we now to prevent the doing of that, which we shall one day be sorry to
have done. There is no man living, but shall repent of his wickedness, either
on earth, or in hell. Read and be instructed. If you find just fau^ts here,
I submit my weakness to your censure. In omnibus meis scriptis, non modo pium
Lectorem, sed liberum correctorem Aug in Prooem. Lib. 3. de Trin.
desidero. But to those Censurers, Qui vel non intelligendo reprehendunt, vel
reprehendendo non intelligunt, Idem co^tra Fa^stum, Lib. 22. Cap. 34.
I wish either a more sound understanding, or more sober affection.

Criminor, amplector; tibi sunt communia, lector.

But as he that commends himself, is not approved, but whom the Lord
commends. So if 2 Cor. 10, 18
the Lord approve, I pass not for man's judgment. If you snib me for writing
so frequently, and not confining my self to the Pulpit; I answer, (besides
that I will not neglect this to do that) Quo liceat libris, non licet ire mihi.
My Books may be admitted, where I cannot come. If you say, there are books
too many: I answer; restrain them to this quality, and Abundans cautela non
nocet. Farewell, be satisfied, be blessed.

Wingraue, July 7. THO. ADAMS.

THE BLACK DEVIL OR The APOSTATE.
Math. cap. 12. ver. 43. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he
walks through dry places, seeking rest, and finds none.

44. Then he says, I will return into my house, from whence I came out. And
when he is come, he finds it empty, swept, and garnished.

45. Then goes he, and takes with himself seven other spirits more wicked
then himself; and they enter in, and dwell there. And the last state of that
man is worse then the first. Even so shall it be also unto this wicked
generation.


OUR Saviors manifold and manifest Miracles, which he wrought among and upon
the Jews, were requited with a blasphemous interpretation; that they were done
in the power of Beelzebub. Which having disproued by invincible arguments, he
concludes against them in this Parable. When the unclean spirit etc. This is
clearly manifest in the application. Even so shall it be also unto this wicked
generation.

A double occasion gives us the hand of direction to this Speech. Either it
has a reference to the Man dispossessed of the dumb and blind Devil. ver.
22. Or intends a conviction of the contumelious blasphemies of the Jews.
Perhaps it may be referred to the former, but certainly is directed to the
latter. It may serve for both: so two gappes be stopped with one bush: two
sores covered with one plaster.

1 It might serve for a charge to the cured, to prevent recidiuation. He was
dumb; behold he speaks: he was blind; behold he sees: he was possessed, behold
he is enfranchised. He has recovered his eyes, his tongue, his heart; he is
rid of the Devil. Now he that is quit of so bad a Guest, shall septuple his
own woes by his re-entertainment. Such a caution did the same* physician give
another of his Patients. John 5. Behold, thou art made whole: sin no more, John
5. 14.
least a worse thing come unto thee. It is well for thee, that the unclean
spirit is gone, but it will be worse with thee then ever, if he gets in again.

2. He that did speak life, and to the life, does especially mean it to the
Jews, with an indubitate appropriation. Cast your eyes upon the Text, and your
minds upon the renegant Jews; and observe how diametrally they look one upon
another; running together without alienation, till they come to the end.

1. The unclean spirit, the power of sin, was cast out of the Jews, by
Moses law; and God had great stir about it. He was feign to speak early and
late, and attend them all the day long, with outstretched Esaias. 65. 2.
hands. Till he appeals to censure. What could have been done more to my
Vineyard? Esaias. 5. 4,


2. At last he is out; and then like a discontented Guest, hindered of his old
Lodging, and destitute of so warm a bed, he walks through dry places,
revisites the Heathen. But finding them as strongly his own, as the
infrangible chains of wickedness could make them; he disdaines rest, like an
Ingrosser, in his own Lordship; so long as there are other purchases to be
made abroad. Or perhaps the Arc of salvation is now brought to the Gentiles,
and then the Dagon, Dragon of hell must needs be packing. A new King, the true
King beginning his Reign in the Conscience, deposes, deiecteth, eiecteth that
usurping Tyrant. There is no remedy: out he must.

3. The Prince of the Air thus discovered, and discomfited by the Sun of
Righteousness, breaking through the gross and foggy Clouds of Ignorance and
Impiety, wherein the Gentile world was wrapped: What does he? but re-salutes
his former habitation. He liked the old seat well, and will venture a fall, but
recover it.

4. Thither he flies; and lo, how fit he finds it for his entertain! The
heart of the Jews is empty of Faith; swept with the beesome of Hypocrisy, a
iusticiary, imaginary, false-conceited righteousness; and garnished with a few
broken traditions and ceremonies; suppellectile complements in stead of
substantial graces.

5. Glad of this, he recollects his forces: takes with him seven other
spirits, a greater dominion of sin, then he was erst armed with all: more
wicked then himself; as if he would make invincible provision, and prevention
of any future dispossession.

6. He enters in with his crew; not purposing to be as a Guest, but a Tenant;
not a Tenant, but a Landlord; not a Landlord, but a King, a Commander, a
Tyrant: till at last he may presume of an indubitate right. As Usurpers that
come to a Kingdom by a violent or litigious title, are at first so modest and
dainty, that they sign not their Graunts, Edicts, and such public Acts in
their own particular and singular names, but require the conscription, and
evident consent of their Counsel. But once established by succession, and
vnriual'd by opposition, they grow peremptorily confident in their own right
and power, and in their most tyrannous acts dare sign, Test meipso. So Satan
at first erection of his Kingdom in the Jews, conscious of his unjust title,
was content to admit the help of fond Ceremonies, Tales, Traditions, etc. to
make for him against Christ, whose Kingdom he usurps. This he condiscended
to out of a mannerly couzenage, and for the more subtle insinuation into the
Jewish hearts. But now established in his Throne and confirmed in his title, by
their hard-hartednes, and wilful obstinacy in rejecting their Messiah; he is
bold to sign all his oppositions to the Gospel with a Test meipso.

7. Hereupon their latter end becomes worse then their beginning. A stronger
delusion has taken hold of them, and that in the just judgment of the wise
Ordinatour of all things. For this cause God shall send them strong delusion,
that they should believe a lie: 2 These. 2. 11. 12.
that all they might be damned, who be^eeued not the truth, but had pleasure
in unrighteousness. For if He that despised Moses law, dyed without mercy,
under two or three Witnesses: then verse 29. Of how Heb. 10 28.
much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot
(not the Servant, but) the Son of God: and has counted the blood (not of
Bulls and Goats, but) of the Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, (whereby he
shall now be condemned) an unholy thing: and has done despite to the Spirit
(not of bondage, but) of grace. His beginning was far better, or at least
less bad, then his end shall be.

The Occasion was so material, that it has led me further, then either my
purpose or your patience would willingly have allowed me. What soever is
written, is written either for our instruction, or destruction: to convert us,
if we embrace it; to convince us, if we despise it. Let this consideration
quicken your attention, enliuen your meditation, encourage your obedience. You
demand viu^m vocem: it is then a Living voice, when it is a voice of life to
the believing hearers. Otherwise there is vox mortifera, a voice that brings
death to disobeyers. The word that I have spoken, says Christ, shall judge
you in the last day.

The White Devil, the Hypocrite has been formerly discovered, and the
sky-colourd veil of his dissimulation pulled off. I am to present to your view
and detestation a sinner of a contrary color, swarthy rebellion, and besmeared
Profanesse: an Apostate falling into the clutches of eight unclean spirits.
Needs must he be foul, that has so many foul devils in him. Mary Magdalen
had but seven, and they were cast out: this has gotten one more, to make his
soul the blacker, and they keep in. If Hypocrisy there, were justly called
the White Devil; Apostacy here may as justly be termed the Black Devil. In
the former was a white skin of profession drawn over an vlcerous corpse: here
hyde and carcass, hand and heart, shadow and substance, seeming and being,
outward profession and inward intention, are black, foul, detestable.
Therefore we will call him the Apostate, or black Devil.

This Text dwells on two persons, Man and Satan! Alas! it goes ill, when Man
and the Devil come so near together: weak man; and his infest, professed
enemy. Wherein we will (metaphorically) compare Man to a Fort, and the Devil
to a Captain.

1 Man to a Fort. Not that he is like stupid and dead walls, without sense,
without science; of no ability, either to offend his adversary, or to defend
himself: but a living Tower, that has sense, reason, understanding, will,
affections: which give him means to open a voluntary door to this Captayns
entrance. For a seipso est quod peccator aperiat Satanae, a Deo, quod Deo. It
is of God that a sinner opens his heart to God; of himself, that he opens to
Satan.

2 The Devil to a Captain; a strong, impious, impetuous, imperious Captain;
violent in invasion, tyrannous in obsession: a rampant Lion, that scorns
either competition, or superiority.

The material circumstances concerning both Fort and Captain, hold and
holder, place and person, may be generally reduced to these three. The unclean
Spirits Egresse; forsaking the Hold, wherein we have his Vnroosting: wherein
observe the Person going out Manner Measure of Vnresting, or disconteut, which
appears in his Travel. He Walks. Trial. In dry places. Trouble. Seeking
rest. Event. Finds none.



Regresse; striving for a reentry into ye he lost; considered Intentiuely;
wherinare regardable his Resolution. I will. Revolution. Return. Descript. of
his seat. House Affection to the same place, My house, whence I came out.

Inventiuely. For he finds in it Clearness. It is empty. Cleanness. Swept.
Trimnesse. Garnished.



Ingresse; which consists in his fortifying the Hold; manifested by his
Associates; for he increases his troops, who are describd by their Nature.
Spirits. Number. Seven. Measure of Malice, more Wicked.

Assault; to the repossessing of the place; testified by their Invasion. They
enter. Inhabitation. Dwell. Cohabitation. They dwell there together.







The Conclusion and Application shut up all. 1. The Conclusion: The last state
of that man is worse then the first. 2. The Application: Even so shall it be
also unto this wicked generation. You see, I have ventured on a long journey;
and have but a short time allowed me to go it. My observations in my travel
shall be the shorter, and I hope not the less sound. So the breuity shall make
some amends for the number.

I am to begin with the unclean spirits departure. When the unclean spirit is
gone out of a man. It is well that he is gone, if he would never return.
Valedicamus in adagio: Si sat procul, sat been. Let us speed him hence with
the Proverb: Far enough, and good enough. Let not such a guest come, till he
be sent for. But alas! he will never be far enough off: no not even now,
whiles God is sowing the seed of Life, will this Enemy forbear to sow tares.
He runs about the seats, like a Pick-purse; and if he sees a rouing eye, he
presents objects of Lust: if a drowsy head, he rocks him asleep, and gives him
a nappe, just the length of the Sermon: if he spies a Covetous man, he
transports his soul to his counting house; and leaves nothing before the
Preacher, but a mind-lesse trunk.

Well; gone he is out of this Man; and we must therein consider 2. things. 1.
His vnroosting. 2. His vnresting. In his vnroosting or departure, we have
justly obseruable these 3 circumstances. 1. The Person. 2. The Manner 3. The
Measure of his Going out.

The Person
Is described according to his Nature. Condition, He is by Nature a Spirit, by
Condition or quality, unclean.

1. By Nature
He is a Spirit. I will not trouble you with the diverse acception of this
word, Spirit. There is a Divine, Humane, Angelical, Diabolical Spirit: yet are
not these all. Let every thing that has breath, praise the Lord: that is, that
has a Spirit. It is observed, Psalm. las^last v
that when this Article, The, is prefixed to Spirit; and no attribute
subioyned, that may denominate or distinguish it; it is meant of the third
Person in Romans 8, 26.
Trinity, the holy Ghost. Romans 8. The Spirit helps our infirmities, etc. So
Ierom notes on the fourth of Mat. 4.
Matthew. ver. 1. Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the Wilderness, to
be tempted of the Devil. Here the adiunct gives sufficient distinction. As 1.
Sam. 16. The Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an 1 Samuel 16, 14.
evil spirit from the Lord troubled him. This was an evil and unclean spirit.

This makes against the Sadduces and Atheists, that Acts 23, 8.
deny the subsistence of spirits; or imagine them to be only qualities of the
mind: affirming, that good Angels are but good motions, and bad Angels nothing
else but bad motions. They may as well call the wind but imaginarium quiddam,
sickness but a fantasy, and death it self but a mere conceit. They shall
find, that there are spirits created for vengeance, and in the day of their
wrath, when God shall bid them strike, they will lay on sure strokes; essential
and subsisting natures. Hellfire is no fable; Devils are not nominals, but
reals; not imaginary qualities, but afflicting spirits: here the tempters to
sin, hereafter the tormenters for sin. Qui non credent, sentient. They
that will not believe Gods words, shall feel their wounds. The Devil has a
special Medicine for Atheysme.

2. By Quality
He is Unclean; and that in regard of his Condition. Perdition.

Condition or property in himself: Perdition, which he does work upon others;
for he labors to infect man, that he may make him, both in wickedness, and
wretchedness, like himself.

1. Unclean, in respect of his own Condition. The Devil was by creation
good. God made him an Angel of light; he made himself an Angel of darkness.
Genesis 1. 31.
God saw every thing that he had made: and behold, it was very good. If every
parcel of the Creators workmanship was perfect; without denial those Angels
which once stood before his face, and attended the hests of the Lord of hosts,
were principally perfect. Therefore the devil, as he is a creature, is good:
according to S. Augustine. Ipsius Diaboli natura, De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 19. cap.
13.
in quantum natura est, non est mala. The nature of the devil, insomuch as it
is a nature, is not evil. But John. 8. When he speaks a lie, he speaks of
his John 8, 14.
own. He derived his nature from God, but the deprivation of it from himself.
He was good by generation, is evil by degeneration. In that he is Evil, or
Devil, he may thank himfelfe for it. A Spirit of Gods, unclean of his own
making. Quod spiritus, a Deo est: quod impurus, a seipso.

2. Unclean, by his operation and effects.

His labor and delight is to make man as unclean, as himself. He strives to
make Judas his heart foul with covetousness, Absalons with treason, Gehesis
with bribes, Cains with murder, Ieroboams with Idolatry, nay even David's with
adultery. God is Purity: and Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see
Math. 5. 8.
God. But a soul soyld and foyld with lust, drunkenness, swearing, hypocrisy,
avarice, is an unclean habitacle for an unclean spirit: a foul evil, for a
foul devil. Every sin is unclean; but there is one sin called uncleanness:
as if it were more immediately derived from the Devil, and more naturally
pleasing him. Hereby God is robbed of that he bought with so dear a price,
and the member of Christ 1 Cor. 6. 15.
is made the member of an Harlot. It is continually joined with fornication,
adultery, whore-hunting. Ephesians. 5. 3. 5. Colos. 3. 5. Saint Paul reasons
against this sin, by an argument drawn ab absurdo; to couple that body to an
Harlot, which should mystically be united to Christ. Not unlike that of the
Poet:

Humano capiti ceruicem iungere equinam. And Horat.
howsoever this debauched age, with a monstrous impudence, will call it either
no sin, or peccadillo, a little sin; yet it has that power and effect, to
make men as like to the Devil, as an unclean body may be to an unclean
spirit. Call it what you will, blanch it with apologies, candy it with natures
delights, parget it with concealments; uncleanness is uncleanness still, and like
the Devil. Unless (as in the Legend of Saint Anthony; that when his Host set
him a Toade on the table, and told him, it was Sedul.
written in the Gospel, De omni quod tibi aponitur, comedes: Thou shall eat of
such things as are set before thee: he with the sign of the Cross made it a
Capon ready roasted.) you can metamorphose Satan's poisons, Toades and Serpents,
feculent and banefull sins, into nutrimentall virtues, wash the Black-mores
skin white, and make leprosies fair and sound; the sin of uncleanness will
make you like this unclean spirit.

Let all this teach us, not to hate the essence, but the works of the Devil.
His nature, abstractiuely considered, is good; but as he is wicked, and a
prouoker to wickedness, hate him. In regard of his excellent knowledge
gathered by long observation, and comprehension of the seminary virtues, he is
called Demon. 2. For his envy, emnity, Satan. 3. For his command, Beelzebub.
4. For his power, the strong man. 5. Lastly, for his pollution, an unclean
spirit. Continually Devil, because he strives continually to Do evil. As these
prauities show themselves in him by domination, and denomination, hate him. So
do all: so say all. An obstinate sinner returns an honest reproof, with I
defy the Devil: I will shield my self from Satan as well as my admonisher:
the foul fiend shall have no power over me. Yet still deafes himself to the
cry of his own Conscience, that he may live the more licentiously. But
alas! Satan is not such a babe to be outfaced with a word of defiance. He can
bear a few invectiues, so he may be sure of the soul: like an Usurer, that
can endure to be raild on, so his money comes trolling in. Let the fox have
his prey, though with curses. But it is a lamentable course to defy a Lion,
yet run into his clutches. Be not unclean, and be secure.

The manner. (...).
Is gone: which is rather a form of speaking with us, then a form of his
going out. Yet howsoever a Spirit or man leaves the place of his former
residence, whether willingly or on compulsion, when he is out, it is said of
him, he is gone. Here then is offered to our consideration, the manner of the
Devils departure.

Satan goes not out of an inhabited heart willingly. Where they had local and
substantial possession, you read in the Gospel that Christ was said to cast
them out. And among other places, most pregnantly in the 11. of Luke ver. 14.
to the justification Luke 11. 14.
and clearing of this phrase, Jesus was casting out a Devil, and it was dumb.
And when the Devil was gone out, the dumb spoke. He was gone out, he was cast
out: the one expounds the other. So that this gone out, is rather a passive
then an active speech: he never went out with his good will: he frets to be
dislodged of his chamber. That Legion of devils in one poor Gadaren. Mark. 5.
held it no less Mark 5. (...).
then a torment, to be be cast out of man. I adjure thee by God, that thou
torment me not. And art thou come Math. 8. 29.
hither to torment us before the time? When the King of Heaven, and controller
of Hell, cast the dumb and deaf spirit out of the Child of a believing
Father, Mark. 9. The spirit cried, and rent him Mark. 9. ^6.
sore, and came out of him, and he was as one dead; insomuch that many said,
He is dead. As when a writ of eiection comes to a bad Tenant, that he sees he
must out, he fires the house about his ears.

So long as he may foment our corrupt affections, and give us complacency and
selfe-satisfaction in his vicious obedience; till he make us not subjects but
slaves, and rather Res then Personas, as the Lawyers speak; he gives to every
one a Dormi-secure. But when we begin to suspect his right, to try his title,
and to go to law to cast him out, and to bustle against him: the sculking fox
is turned to an Ox, and puts forth his goring horns of tyrranny.

When thou beginst to sue him, 1. He will plead prescription. Meum est, meum
erit, quia meum fuit. It is mine, it shall be mine, because it has been mine.
Custom in sin is a shrewd argument against repentance. Turpius cijcitur,
quam non admittitur hospes. A Guest is with better manners not admitted, then
eiected. 2. If that will not serve, he goes to it in plain force. He does not
say as Jacob to Laban, These twenty years have I served thee, etc. but these
many years have I commanded thee; and do thou now shake off my service?
degenerate, rebel, and refuse allegiance? As Rabshaceh in the Embassage of
Senacherib to Hezekiah. Now on whom do thou trust, that thou rebellest
against me? Who shall deliver thee out of my Esaias 36. 5.
hands? 3. If we answer with that threatened King; The Lord of Hoasts shall
deliver us; at whose Name the Senacherib of infernal Babylon does tremble: so
that he must depart; he will not go out without terror; but tear and afflict
the heart, in the parting and desertion of our old delights.

Hence we may infer, that there is a power superior to Satan, that must
expel him, or he will not depart. The uncircumcised Philistine insults, till
David come. The strong man armed keeps his Luke. 11. 21.
Palace, and his goods in peace: Luke. 11. until the stronger man, even the
strength of Israel comes against him. It is he that is able to pluck out Satan
by head and shoulders. This is he alone, that can help either the corporally
or spiritually possessed.

The Kings of England and France (as if it were a mark and impression of
divine power in them) do cure a disease by touch. And I have read it reported
(though but reported) that the Kings of Spain help demoniacke and possessed
persons. These are but coroporall cures. The Pope challenges a faculty to cure
spiritual impotencies, leprosies, and possessions. Alas! it is not in his
power, though in his pride, and super arrogant glory. Indeed when our anguished
souls have bathed themselves in the river of Jordan, (An Angel of mercy having
stirred the waters) in our penitential tears, in our Saviors blood, on the
Cross, in the Sacrament: it is all, if the Pope (and yet not he more then the
meanest Minister, did he not monopolize men's sins by reseruations) may
pronounce, who is dispossessed of the power of Satan, who not. But to cast out
the Devils pregnant, and regnant tyranny, whether substantial or spiritual; to
rescue a miserable man out of the enchanted walls of Babylon; to set the foot
of a weak Christian on the neck of that Leuiathan, to give him insultation
and triumph over Aspes, Lions Dragons; is the singular and incommunicable work
of God.

Christ throws Satan out per ictum per dictum, by his Word, by his Sword: the
power and operation of his Spirit in the Preaching of the Gospel. He breaks
his head, He breaks his neck with a Scriptum est. Hence, The weapons of our
warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of 2 Cor.
10. 4. 5
strong holds: casting down every high thing, that exa^teth it se^fe against
the knowledge of God, etc. Were his Hold stronger then the seauen-fold walls
of Babylon, and his exaltation as high, as ever the imagination of
Nebuchadnezzer mounted his own worth: this shall batter and bring him down.
The Esaias. 14.
Word casts him out, the Sacraments hold him out: that drives him forth, and
these keep him from coming in.

The Measure.
It must necessarily and punctually be examined how this unclean spirit may
be said to be cast out. This two ways, in regard of the two sorts of persons
out of whom he is cast. He is so thrown out of the Godly, as never to
return in again: so out of the Wicked, that indeed he remains in still.
Consider we then, in what measure the Devil departs out of this Apostate. Let
us divide this into 6. circumstances, and the Quotient will give us the sum
of our desires.

1. Satan is so far gone out, as the mind is enlightened. This the Apostle
grants incident to an Apostate. Hebr. 6. That he may be enlightened, taste of
Hebr. 6. 4,
the heavenly gift, be made partaker of the Holy Ghost, taste of the good
word of God, and the powers of the world to come, yet fall away, never to be
renewed again by repentance. This is that Divines call Historica fides; a
floting notion in the brain, a general transient apprehension of Gods revealed
truth: which shows it self in a dexterity of wit, and volubility of speech: a
fire in the brain, not able to warm the heart. It has power to inform their
judgments, not to reform their lives.

Now so far as this illumination, swimming, nimble, and discursiue knowledge
is let in; so far is Satan said to be cast out. There is, says Solomon,
Eccle. 1. 18. 1. Cor. 8. 1.
Scientia contristans: and says Paul, Scientia conflans. There is a knowledge
that makes sorrowful, that makes proud. God in all knowledge regards not so
much the quantity, as the substance. There may be more light in a Reprobate,
then in a sanctified soul, but not so good light. I speak not to vilify
knowledge, but to rectify it. Otherwise, you know, the greater punishment
belongs to him, that knows Go as will, and does it not. Oftentimes the more
shallow in knowledge, the more bungerly in wickedness: when a quick and
sharp wit without grace, is like a headstrong Horse without a bridle.
Neither is this Knowledge in a Reprobate gratia vana, sed euanescens: not a
vain, but a vanishing grace. They walk in the light. Ioh. 12. They rejoice of
the light. Ioh. 5. Yet is not the light in John 12. 35. John. 5. 35. Mal. 4. 2.
Esaias. 60. 20.
them. They have not the Sun of righteousness risen in their hearts. Mala.
4. For this Sun can never set. Bona non been nouit.

2. Satan is so far gone out of the wicked, as they have admitted some
probable beginnings of conversion. This is but a flash of hypocrisy, no true
heat of zeal. When the most flinty heart shall be hit against the steel of
Gods judgments, it will strike fire: but those sparkles are too weak to
kindle the true warmth of grace; the fuel is so green, the affections so
vicious, whereon it works. Peccaui was David's voice after his sinful
Arithmeticke: Judas his voice after his abhorred treason. Vox eadem, non
poenitentia: talis sonus, non sinus. The same voice or sound, not the same
heart or penitence. Esau wept having lost the blessing: Peter wept having
denied his Master: nether wept without bitterness. Similes lachrymae, non
animae. The like tears, not the like Consciences. Iron and steel heat in the
fire, are pliable to the fashioning hammer: let them be cold, and they resume
their former hardness. The heat of a sudden judgment, striking (like
thunder) the companion of thy side; a secret wipe of the Sword of the Spirit,
dividing the marrow and the bones, in an effectual Sermon; a stitch in the
flesh like the messenger of death; may a little thaw and melt the hard metal
of an ungodly heart. But let the fire cease, and give him leave to be cold
again, and he becomes harder then ever before. Nil facile quamuis non tueare,
perit.

3. Satan is so far said to be gone out, as he lies hidden, like mudde and
slime under a thick snow. The Devil may be within the grate, though he
thrust not out his apparent horns. Or say, he be walked abroad, yet he
returns home at night: and in the mean time, like a mistrustfull Churl,
locks the door after him; sparres up the heart with security, that his
treasure be not stolen. Thus as a snaile, he gathers up himself into his
shell and house of the heart, when he fears discovery, and puts not forth his
horns. Sometimes he plays not in the Sun actually, but borroughes deep in
the affections. The fox keeps his den close, when he knows that Gods
hunts-men be abroad to seek him. He knows that oftentimes armis pollentior
astus, his fraud is beyond his force: that he is pestilentior art quam mart:
that he poisons more mortally melle quam fell: that he may do as much hurt
in a mask of white, as in his own black habit: that he may spoil more
Lambs in a Sheepe-skin, then appearing as a wolf. He is content to yield to a
show of holiness, that he may work the more mischief. It is sufficient for
him if he may, though (not turbare yet turpare) not disquiet, yet dishonest the
soul of man. Now so far as this touch of religion enters, is this unclean
Spirit said gone out.

4. Satan may be said cast out, in the opinion of the party, in whom he
resides. Every one presumes, there is no Devil within him. The proud has no
Lucifer, the Covetous no Mammon, the Idolater no Melchom, the Adulterer no
unclean spirit. Let me catechize thee. I did promise in my Baptism, to for
sake the Devil. What? do thou stay there? Nay: and al his works. Alas!
be not so supine and careless. Vbi opera, ibi operans. Where the works are,
there is the worke-maister. Thou art asleep Sampson, whiles these Philistines
are upon thee, are within thee. The ague is not gone, though the fit be over.
Whilst thou slu^brest in thy waftage, the vessel goes on still. Satan is not
out, though thou conceitest him gone: and so as it is in our phrase, he is gone
in conceit.

5. This unclean spirit may seem gone in the opinion of the Church. Sometime
the Devil is gone from a man in his own judgment, not the worlds: sometimes
in the worlds judgment, not his own. The Church had a good estimation of
Judas, as conformable to the outward duties of obedience, and the rather
because Christ trusted him with the stewardship: but God and his own
conscience knew him a thief. The Devil will not always be hunted by the sent,
or followed by the print of his steps. The world shall not ever have him in
palpable view and full cry; by reason of his notorious and gross impieties. If
he can but now and then shoot in an instigation to some wickedness, it serves
his turn. He does not every day sally out of his fort, and charge his enemies
in the face; but watches opportunity, when his excursions may do most
mischief. The Devil may be within, though he stand not at door to be seen.

6. Lastly Satan is said so far to be gone out, as there is an interruption in
the sovereignty of sin for a season. The floods of iniquity are not so
^iolent, as if they were kept within the dam by shutting down the sluice. The
Dromedary, the ungodly, runs not so madly, whiles that infernal rider
forbeares their sides with his spur.

As he is said to come in, when he was in before: because there comes in a
more forcible and stronger illusion of Satan, the^ the heart erst suffered. Lu.
22. It is said, that Satan entered into Judas before the Passover: Luke 22. 3.
yet we cannot think that Gods Spirit was in him before: but only now a
greater power of Satan got in; that like a ripe tumor would be no longer hid
within the thin skin of hypocrisy. Corruption now gets eruption, and the
rancorous ulcer of wickedness bursts forth.

So of the contrary, Satan is said to go out, when he still holds in; but like a
bird in the net, that hangs by one claw. Nero is still in Rome, though he
remittes taxations, and forbeares massacres for a season. The love of
drunkenness may be in the heart, though there be a day when the Tavern is
avoided. Be the Adulterer asleep, he is an adulterer still. What master so
cruel, but sometimes lets his slave rest? Certa quiescendi tempor a fata
dabunt. The Devil is not continually impelling or compelling his servants to
public and notorious iniquities. Sometimes he supends his tyranny, and sits
close in the heart, banketting on the lusts which he finds there, and sends
not abroad for new cates. The tempestuous wind eftsoone lies still: the most
robustious and malignant force of wickedness bates of the usual violence, and
breaks not forth into the same show of malice without some intermission. So
far as this suspense, remission, and interruption of sin extends, so far
is Satan said to be gone out.

You see the Measure. Only give me leave, to set you down two short rules,
as two reflecting perspectiues; wherein you may behold, whether this unclean
spirit be truly, or hypocritically cast out of your hearts.

1. So far is Satan cast out, as sin is cast out. The tenure, whereby
Satan holds any Lorshippe in the heart, is sin: He that would overthrow his
title, must labor an eiection of wickedness. Piety in the heart, purity in
the life, are true testimonies of the Devils exile. Satan fights against us
with 2. weapons. 1. That he found in us. 2. That he brings upon us. That he
found in us, is flesh and blood: that he brings upon us, is death. By this
latter he could not have hurt us, except we had given him the former: and so
reached him a weapon to pierce our own hearts. In what measure sin rules or
is ruled: Satan is held in or eiected.

2. The discontinuing of some sins, and retaining others gives no comfort or
argument of Satan's departure. If he be truly gone, there comes in his place a
perfect detestation, and resolute opposition against all sin. It is in vain
to cast out Satan by avoiding avarice, when thou letst him in by a wastfull
prodigality: to admit him by hypocrisy, whom thou throwest out by profanesse.
This is to put the Devil out at the porch, and let him in again at the
posterne. But one Rimmon is too much for Naaman, one Delilah for Sampson, one
Herodias for Herod: one exorbitant delight reserved, resolved, persisted in, is
enough for Satan, too much for the sinner.

I say not, leave all sin, but love no sin. How impossible is the former,
the latter how necessary! It is the content and complacency in sin, that
holds in the Devil. What is it for a rich man to brag he is no thief? or a
beggar to clear himself from bribery? or for an old man to forbear the
Stews? or for a credulous Papist, that thinks to deserve heaven by works, to
add a mite to an Hospital? but whiles he powers a little ointment on Christ's
feet by charity, by opinion of merit he throws the box at his head. What is
it to abstain from those sins, whereunto thou art not tempted? But
repentance renounceth all dead works: and obedience strives to walk in all
Gods ways. In omnibus sine exceptione, etsi non in omnibus cum impletione.
None of all must be excepted, though none of all fulfilled. If the Devil be
truly cast out, there is a full resoution in the heart against all manner of
sin.

Thus much of his vnroosting or throwing out: for his vnresting, perplexednes,
and discontent, observe in it four circumstances. His Travel, Trial, Trouble,
Event. 1. For his travel, he walks. 2. For his trial, in dry places. 3. For
his trouble, he seeks rest. 4. For the event, he finds none.

Travel. He walks.
The Devil is no idle spirit, but a walker; a vagrant, runnagate walker, like
Caine, that cannot rest in a place. I have heard of Travelers, that have seen
many parts of the world; but never any perpetual Peripateticke, or universal
walker, but Satan: who has trauell'd all coasts and corners of the earth; and
would of heaven too, if he might be admitted. He is not like S. Georges
statue, ever on horseback, and never riding: but as if he were Knight Martial
of the whole world, he is ever walking. His motion is circular, and his
unwearied steps know no rest: he has a large and endless circuit. His
walk is a siege, that goes about the Fort, to find the weakest place, and
easiest for battery. He walks about, as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour. 1. Pet. 5, 8.
As in other things he is a Serpent; so especially in his walks; for his whole
course is serpentine. All his walks are after, against, about man. His walks
are the Circumference, and Man the Center. The motive cause, and maine
intention of his journey, is to win man.

A strange Pilgrim, that makes not an end of his journey, till there be an
end of Time. He has been in heaven, in Paradise, in the earth, in the sea,
and in hell, and yet has not done walking. Some there are, that will go from
Rome to England, to make Proselytes: but the Devil will go from one end of the
world to the other, and walk from Pole to Pole, til he has put a girdle about
the loins of the earth; to make a man the child of hell, like himself. And in
all his travel, like fame, and a mutinous rebel, vires acquirit eundo, he
still enlarges his own Dition. It was a true answer that the father of lies
made to Truth it self. Job. 2. I come from going to and fro in the earth, and
from walking up and down Job. 2. 2.
in it.

He walks any way, to spill any man, by any means. He is at hand to Saul,
he meets Judas in Forsan crit. minime quo credit gurgite p^s.
the face, and he backs Peter. He walks like an errant Post between the
Adulterer and his Harlot: between the proud Gallant and his Parasite: between
the ambitions and his Intelligencer: between the Usurer and the Broker:
between the Thief and receiver: between the greedy Advocate and the
contentious Client: between the sacrilegious Patron and the Simoniacal Priest:
betwixt the Innes and the Hall: betwixt the Exchange and the warehouse.

Where can a man bestow himself, that the devil cannot walk to him? Art thou
in thy private Chamber? There can Satan find thee; as he did Eve in Paradise,
Christ in the Desert. If in any place; he has there most power and
opportunity. Two are better then one. For if either fall, or be prevailed
Eccle. 4. 9.
against, the other will lift up, or rescue him. But Va soli. Woe to him that
is alone: for if he miscarry, there is none to help him. The melancholy man,
that loves to be sequestered from society, and lives an Hermitical, solitary
life, is most exposed to Satan's assaults. Company is good; especially if the
companions be good: as being a means to hinder Satan from so violent working
upon our affections. The Philosophers were wont to say: He that lived alone,
was either a God, or a Devil. Yet solitariness is not so evil, as evil
company. It is better to bustle with one Devil in a close chamber, then with
many Devils in a riotous Tavern.

Art thou in the Court? Satan walks thither too: and will fit Rehoboam with
flatterers, Ahab with liar, Ad multas ^upa tendit oues. praedetur vt vnam.
Pharaoh with Sorcerers, Belshazzer with cups, Solomon with Concubines. Art
thou in the Market? He is ready with oaths, with cozenages. Nay; art thou in
the Temple? Thither he dares travel too: and pervert the eyes with shows, the
ears with sounds, the thoughts with fancies, the senses with sleep.
Wheresoever, whenever, howsoever thou art busied, he walks to thee with his
temptations: and like a nimble, voluble shopkeeper interrupts with a what
lack you? He has a ship ready for Jonas, a witch for Saul, a wedge for Achan,
a rope for Judas. A booty stands ready for the thief, a pawn for the broker,
a morgage for the merchant, a monopoly for the Courtier, an harlot for the
adulterer.

As he walks through the streets, there he throws a short measure, a false
balance into a Trades-mans shop. He steps into a drinking house, and
kindles a quarrel. He shoulders to the bar, and pops in a forged evidence,
a counterfeit seal. He dares enter the schools, and commence schisms and
contentions: nay, climb up into the pulp it, and broach sects and divisions.
He travels no ground, but like a stinking fogge, or a dying oppressor, he
leaves an ill sent behind him. This is he that makes men serve God
percunctorily, perfunctorily: to go slowly to it, to sit idly at it.

Whither, where can we walk, and not behold Satan's walks: and see the prints
of his feet as plain, as if his steps were set in snow, or like the Priests of
Bell, in ashes: that we may say, the devil has been here? He that shall
travel the lower Provinces, and in some parts thereof see the Cities ruinated,
habitations spoiled, forts battered, Temples demolished, fields untilled: will
say, Sure the enemy has been here. He that with observing and weeping eyes
beholdes, not our Temples, but the piety in them dissolved; not our Cities,
but the Citizens perverted; not our houses, but their inahbitants defaced with
iniquity; not our fields, but our hearts lying untilled: our Lawyers turned
truth defrauders, our Citizens usurers, our Landlords oppressors, our Gentlemen
rioters, our Patrons Simonists; would surely say, this is Satan's walk: the
devil has been here. Let this fasten on our souls 2. instructions.

1 To keep out of Satan's walks. Though he visits all places, and his
inquisition be stricter then the Spanish. (for that catches none but
Protestants, the Papists escape) yet he frequenteth some more then other.
Perhaps he may find thee in the Temple, as he took Judas at the Communion:
but carry a faithful and upright heart, and then though he walks thither to
thee, he shall walk to hell without thee. When thou art for company, choose the
best: if they mourn, mourn with them: if they be merry, refuse not mirth with
them; so it be honest, ad societatem, not ad satietatem. When thou art alone,
read, pray, meditate; that either God may talk to thee, or thou to God. So
with Scipio, thou shall be least alone, when most alone. The guard of Angels
shall be about thee; and the fellowshippe of the Holy Ghost within thee: and
let Satan wa^ke whither he will, thou art (like Enoch) walking with God. Genesis
5. 24.


2 Since Satan is so walking and busy a spirit, let this teach us not to be
idle. Indeed, be not too busy in other men's matters: nor too lazy in thine
own. Shall we know, that the enemy walks, waits, watches to destroy us;
and shall we not look to our selves? He sowes tares in the field of our
hearts, whilst we sleep: let us awake, and pluck them up, lest they choke
the good seed of our graces. It is not allowed us to sit still: we must be
walking. Eye to thy seeing, ear to thy hearing, hand to thy working, foot to
thy walking. Up, and 1. Kings 19, 7.
eat, Elias, arise O Christian, thou have sit too long, having so great a
journey to go. The Servants in the Law were commanded to eat the Passover
Exodus 12, 11.
with their shoes on: and Saint Paul charge the Sons in the Gospel
(perhaps not without some Ephesians. 6, 15.
allusion to that) to stand with their feet shod with the preparation of the
Gospel of peace. When a man is standing, it is said, he will be walking.
Astronomers have numbered the miles twixt earth and Heaven, as if they had
climbed up thither by Ladders, to be 900. thousand. But without doubt
Christianity is a great journey: and he that considers the way and distance
betwixt mortality and immortality, corruption and glory, must needs conclude,
it is high time to be walking. Vita breuis, ars longa. Life is short, and this
skill not soon learnt. We cannot begin this iourny too early: we have sitten
too long; it is full time, we were trauelling^. Otherwise a walking Devil shall
condemn a slothful Man.

Trial. Through dry places.
The discontented Devil cast out of man, seeks about for a new lodging; and
finds all places dry, he esteems every place, but in Man's heart, ^irkesome
and unpleasant, as a dry, barren, and heathy Wilderness. Now, as when a man
has long lived in a fertile Valley, abounding: with delightful fruits, and
necessary comforts; the grounds standing thick with corn, and a pleasant
river running along, to glad his heart with a welcome moisture: it cannot be
other, then a diseasing, displeasing change, to be banished into a mountanous
desert, where the scorching Sun burns up the grass, and withers the fruit;
or the vnhindred force of the wind finds a bleake object to work upon; where
the veins of blood, the springs of water rise not, run not, to madefie the
earth, and cherish her plants. Such is Satan's case and cause of perplexity. The
wicked heart was his delighted Orchyard, where the fruits of disobedience,
oaths, lies, blasphemies, oppressions, coussenages, contentions; drunken,
proud, covetous actions and habites made him fat. For as God has his Vineyard,
the Devil has his Orchyard. The fruits that God expects and delights to
gather, are the good grapes of obedience. Satan's desire is wicked and wretched
effects. These he either found ready, or made ready in the heart of man. Whence
displaced, sedibus, aedibus, he is mad for anger, and accounts all places dry.

He finds no rest in dry places. Perhaps the Devil loves the low Countries,
and wet ground. In a moderate, temperate, dry brain, he finds no footing: but
in the soul of the swilling drunkard, as a foggy and fenny ground, he
obtaines some residence. Abstemious moderation, and temperate satisfaction of
nature is too dry a place, for so hot a spirit as hell fire has made him, to
quench his malicious thirst: but in those that are filled with wine, and strong
drinks, suauiter, molliter acquiescit. When the Son of God threw a Legion out
of one poor man, Mark 5, 12.
they beg earnestly to be allowed entrance into the Swine. Of all creatures
void of reason, it is observed of those, that they will swill till they swel,
drink till they burst. If Circe's Cup (or if you will, the Vintners, the
Victuallers) has transformed man into a drunken hog, this is a moist place
that Satan affects. If the head be well tippled, he gets in; and makes the eyes
wanton, the tongue blasphemous, the hands ready to stabbe, the throat an open
Sepulcher to devour.

I deny not, but Paul may meet his friend at the Market of Appium, and drink
with his friends Acts 18, 15.
at the three Tauernes. Honest necessities must be relieved. And for this
purpose were Tauernes first erected; for the necessary refection of travelers
and strangers. Neither laws divine nor national condemn their use, but their
abuse. Yet Ecclus. 26. A victualler shall not be freed from sin. You will say
it is Apocryphal; and I fear, a man of that profession Ecclus. 26, 30
is Apocryphal too; who will not sell riot for money; and wink at those, that
fill their brains, to empty their purses. Wine is a good creature, to cheer
man's heart: and Paul allows it to Timothy for his stomachs sake. But those
that drink wine, not to help the stomach, but to surfeit it; not for
wholesome and medicinal respects, but with inebriatiue delight, or on some
victorious intent, to overthrow the company: these are moist places fit for
Satan.

Trouble. Seeking rest.
But is he in any hope to find it? Does he not carry his hell about him? Can
he get out of the curse and malediction of God? There is no rest to him
passiuely, actiuely. 1. Passiuely; the unappeased anger of Almighty God
persecutes him, and denies him rest. 2. Actiuely; he gives himself no rest in
tempting and tormenting man. God persecutes him: he persecutes man. Thus
through a voluntary and enforced motion, et volenter, et violenter, he seeks
rest, but he finds none.

The Devils malice to mankind is so great, that he cannot rest without their
ruin. He begun with the first Parents, and will not end but with the end of
the world; til he has tempted, or at least attempted the last man, that ever
their generations shall produce. Hereon it is noted, that the Angels sinning
were never restored, because they offended without temptation, merely of
malice, being created pure and excellent spirits. But man fell from God, and was
again redeemed to God, because he was seduced of another. Quanto fragilior in
natura, tanto facilior ad veniam. The weaker in nature, Albin.
and so more apt to fall; the more easy to be lifted up again. But the
Devil fell so fully, so fowly, being sole actor in his own fault, sole author
in his own fall, that he is never to be restored: so never obtaines rest. Yet
he imagines to himself a kind of rest, when he is quietly possessed of man's
heart. As a malicious man acquiescit vindict is: so when the Devil has
wrought man's woe, and brought him to hell, it is a rest unto him. But his rest
is man's unrest: his melody our malady. His blustering tempest is not laid, till
he has split the vessel our Body; and drowned the Passenger, our Soul.

His first and chief aim is to destroy the soul and to deface that more
excellent part of man, that is nearer to the character and divine impression of
Gods image. If the soul be coming, he is sure the body will follow. 2. If he
cannot reach the spirit, then have at the flesh. Let Joseph look for the
stocks, Peter for the layle, David for exile, Job for botches. 3. If the
restraining power of heaven interdicts him the body, then he sets upon the
estate: like Joseph's mistrisse, that missing the person, catches the garment:
or the savage Bear, which prevented of the blood and bones, falls a tearing
the clothes, that fell from them. The birds of the air, fishes of the sea,
beasts of the earth shall pay for it. Every thing, which belongs to man's health
and comfort, shall feel his tyranny. If Jobs person be forbidden the extent of
his malice, yet he will have a fling at his Oxen, Asses, Sheep, Camels. Job
1. Mar. 5. 10. 12.
When that Legion must leave the Possessed, they beg (not to be sent away
out of the Country) but to be admitted into the Herd. The Inhabitants are
freed, then woe to their swine. Rather hogs then nothing. He will play at
small game, rather then sit out. As that bloody Tyrant banished from
extending his cruelty to men, must be still a killing, though (it be) but
worms. He seeks rest.

Event or success. But he finds none.
So soon as ever this unclean spirit is thrown out of man, that he begins to
serve God, Satan rages worse then ever: and till he can overthrow the
beginnings of grace in us with a second peruersion, he finds no rest. We
cannot so soon please God, but we displease the Devil. Whiles Paul was a
Pharise, no man in greater credit: but become a professor and Preacher of the
Gospel, none more exposed to dangers and contumelies. If we (do but) look
toward Jerusalem; as Christ, because his face was as though he would go to
Jerusalem, might not be Luk 9, 53.
received of the Samaritans: or if we purpose to heaven, as Pau^ to
Thessalonica, Satan will offer to hinder 1 Thessalonians. 2. 18. Luk^. 22. 31.
our pass. The Devil desires to winnow Peter, not Judas. The more faithful
servants of God we be, the more does Satan bruise us with the flaile, or grate
us with the fan.

The thief does not break into an empty cottage, but into some furnishd
house, or full Granar; where the fatness of the booty is a fitness to his
desires. This unclean. spirit finds no rest in an Atheist, Usurer, Drunkard,
Swearer, etc. He knows, a canker has overrun their consciences already:
and that they are as sure, as temptation can make them. No Prince makes war
with his own tractable subjects. Gloria pugnantes vincere mayor erit. Ovid.
Judith. 11. 1.

Holofernes tells Judith: Fear not in thine heart: for I never hurt any, that
was willing to serve Nebuchadonozer the King of all the earth. So the devil; I
never use to harm any, that are content to serve me, the King of all the
world. What need he tempt them that tempt themselves? The fowler shoots at
birds that be wild, not at Doves and yard-fowls, (...) plagas nullo ^us agent^
cadit. Act. 8. 3.
tame, and in his own keeping.

Many stood by the fire, Act. 28. yet the Viper leapes upon none of their
hands, but Paul's. This viper of ^ll labors to sting the best men: reprobates
he has poisoned enough already. The dog barks at strangers, not at
domestical servants, or daily-visitant friends. This mad Cerberus bites not
those that have given him a soppe, their affections and souls: but flies at
the throat of such only, as deny him the fealty of love and obedience, and
abandon his regiment. Whiles the Israe ites were in Egypt and Pharaoh had some
service of the^, he does but oppress them with burdens, and such slavish
impositions: but when they are departed from his territories, and have
extricated themselves from his bondage, he comes after them with fire and
sword: and nothing but their blood and death can appease him. Swear, swagger,
covet, cousen, dissemble, defraud, give the devil homage and allegiance; and
his tyranny will be content with the supportation of these burdens: but rebel,
revolt, renounce his sovereignty, and then nothing but fire and fury will flash
from him: and, except in thy ruin, he finds no rest.

Thus much for the unclean spirits vnroosting and vnresting; his relinquishing
the Hold, and his demeanor after it; and therein generally for his Egresse.
His Regresse is the next act of this Tragedy; his striving for a re-entry in
the Fort he has lost. Which consists, 1. in his Inte^sien, what he purposes.
2. In the Invention, what he finds. His Access and Success is presented in
these Scenes His Intention or project dwells upon, 1. a ^esolution. 2. a
Revolution. 3. a Description of his Scare. 4. Affection to the same house,
whence he came out.

1. His Resolution. I will.
V^lo, est vox aut pertinacis, aut potent is; non petent is. I will, is the
voice, (not of a beggar, but) either of one powerful or peremptory. Good in
the Almighty, saucy in a subordinate power; without some reservation, or
exception made to the supreme providence. Will you Satan! It is too bold, and
presumptuous a voice. Ask leave, Satan: for you are chained to your clogge,
and cannot stir, but limitata potestate. Behemoth is tied in a teddar; and
that tryumphant Lamb holds the roaring Lion in an infrangible cord: and says
to him, as to the sea; Here will I stay the insultation of thy proud waves.
Job. 38. 11.
Will you know, what makes the devil thus bold? A double confidence, 1. in his
own strength. 2. in man's weakness.

1. In his own strength. Therefore he says not, Conabor reuerti, but
reuertar; quasi nihil obstiterit. As if he had that power, which was prophesied
of Cyrus: that gates of brass and bars of Iron should be broken open before
him. Or as it is fained of the Esaias. 45, 2.
Pope in the year of Iubile, that he comes to the gate of S. Peter's church in
Rome, and there having knocked with his silver hammer, the gate presently falls
down before him. Perhaps he means to Hieroglyphicke unto us, what wondrous
engines silver tools are in Rome, and what strange feats they work; till
coelumsit vaenale Deusque. And not only to present the person of Peter, heavens
Porter as they call him, and to manifest the liberty of Purgatory-ghosts, given
by virtue of Papal Indulgences.

This is the Devils strength, whereof he is so confident; and it is helped by
his Subtlety. His subtlety shows it self in his temptations. Which to
discover is one special intention in all Sermons. Mine shall but cut of a lap
of his garment. He tempts either

1. Inuisibly; by stirring secret motions, and internal prouocations in the
heart. So he wrought upon Judas by covetousness, upon Simon Magus by ambition,
upon Esau by profanesse. Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his
own lust, and Iam. 1, 14.
entised. This is that operative possession, whereby the Prince of the power of
the air, now^worketh in the Ephesians. 2. 2.
children of disobedience. Innumerable are these invisible subtleties.

2. Or visibly; by external apparitions and shapes, presented to the bodies
eye, either essential, or delusiue. This he does 3. ways.

1. By taking to himself an airy body, fashioning it to what form he
pleases. As the good Angels did by Gods dispensation, according to the opinion
of Divines, when they did cate meat with Abraham. Genesis 18. 8.
Thus he appeared to Saul in the shape of Samuel, 1 Samuel 28. The King said to
the witch, What 1. Sam. 28, 14.
form is he of? and she said, An old man comes up, and he is covered with a
Mantle. Which was a feigned proportion, that by Gods permission, Satan had
taken to delude Saul. So it is said, that he often appeared in the days of
Ignorance.

2. By entering into the corpse of some dead body, making it speak and walk as
he pleases: which is not denied by Divines, but the Devil by Gods sufferance
may do; but with two prouiso's. 1. This must be the body of a reprobate, that
he assumes: for the godly sleep in peace. Esaias. 57. God gives him a Nolito
tangeremeos, saepeviuos, semper moreuos. Esaias. ^7. 2.
Touch not mine, either living, or dead. 2. If it be a reprobate corpse, yet he
can appear in it no longer, then naturally he can preserve it from corrupting.
But that Satan can keep a carcass from putrefying, further then nature
permits, it is generally and truly denied. And even these black shadows,
(blessed be God) in this Sunshine of the Gospel, are abolished.

3. By entering into the body of some living thing. So the Devils in the
possessed, spoke audibly, and Math. 8.
gave a loud acknowledgement of Christ. So Satan entered the body of a living
Serpent, when he tempted Genesis 3. 1. 2. Cor. 11, 3.
and seduced the woman. But of all shapes, which he assumeth, he has best
liking to the likeness of man; and delights in a humane resemblance. Of all
habites this best pleases him: in a kind of affecting pride, thereby to be as
like to God, as possibly he may. This is Satan's first presumption; a
strongly-opinion'd trust in his own strength.

2. In ma^s weakness; who, as he is never strong of himself, so at some
times, and in some places weaker then other. And therefore like wise Captains
in Towns of garrison, he had need to fortify that place with most men and
munition, with best spiritual arms and armor, where either the enemies
Ordinance, his temptations have made a breach; or we are naturally weakest. Our
frailty gives the Devil a presumptuous confidence of intrusion. Hence he says
(not fortasse, but proul dubio) I will return. He thinks we are too weak, to
turn him away without his errand, when he comes with a picture of lust, a bag
of gold, a staff of office and promotion. When he says to the auarous, I will
make thee rich: to the tyrant, I will make thee dreadful: to the wanton, I will
make thee merry: to the wastfull, I will make thee beloved: to the idle, I will
give thee ease. Not only Achan, Gehesi, Saul, and Judas have been to weak for
these encounters: but even Noah, Lot, David, Solomon, and Peter have bowed at
these tempests.

This he could not do, but by working on our ready and inclinable affections.
As a cunning artificer, that can produce greater effects, upon matter
conveniently disposed thereunto, then nature could have done alone. When the
Devil and our corrupt flesh meet, they engender a generation of sins. As his
Sons the Magitians of Egypt could make living creatures, by applying and
suggesting passive things to active, which would never have met but by their
mediation. Or as the Statuary can make an Image, which the timber and axe could
never have effected without him. So the wicked would never produce such
tetricall and horrible effects, but by the Devils adding his heat to theirs,
and by a prodigious coupling of his instigation and their lusts.

Thus weak he thinks us, and not seldom finds us. The natural man goes forth
to fight with a mighty Giant, in a monomachy or duel: the Second he brings
with him is the world: the natural man's Second is the Flesh. He prepares to
fight with a professed enemy, and calls out for his assistant, a private and
close foe. He is weakly backd, that has a traitor for his guard. To arm his
presumption with policy, he seriously observes, which way the current of every
man's humor runs: knowing by long experience, what will most easily draw men
to sin.

As physicians, when they would know the state of the sick, and the nature of
their disease, first enquire Decubitum, the time of the Patients lying down,
and yielding himself to his layre. But because this observation holds not
alike in all men, but some walk longer before they betake themselves to their
bed, then others, therefore they more especially reckon ab actionibus laesis,
that is, when their appetite, digestion, and other faculties faild in the
performance of their offices. And lastly. finding the course of Nature in the
diseased, which way it works; accordingly minister their physic, as that
calls, Come and help me.

Such a course takes this malignant Physician for the death of the soul;
observing first when a delight in any sin cast us down: and then, when the
faculties of our souls forbore their functions, in hungring after
righteousness, or digesting the word of truth: and lastly, when he has
found, which way our natural inclination is given, and the grain of our
affections runs, he labors to help us forward into the practical custom of
that wickedness. As a cunning Fisher, using that bait, which he knows most
congruent to the nature and appetite of that fish he would strike. Thus he
urges the Choleric to anger: the Melancholy to distrust, despair, and to
lay violent hands on themselves: the Sanguine to immoderate mirth: the
Phlegmatic to drowsines in Christian offices; and to the deferring of
obedience: assuring him, that it is time enough to repent, betwixt that and
doomesday.

Since he is so bold with us, what should we do, but be as bold with him? Iam.
4. Resist the Devil, and he will fly from you. He is a Lion to those that
fly Iam 4. 7.
him, a fly to those that stand him. Audacius insistit Bern.
a tergo, quam resistit in faciem. Take in thy hand the Sword of the Spirit:
fling a Scriptum est at his head. Take up some of David's stones out of Gods
holy brook, his holy book, and slay that daring Philistine in the forehead.
This is the weapon, wherewith our Savior Christ encountered and beat him. Let
us follow the same Captain with the same arms. Let us not fear. Malus miles,
qui Impertorem gemens sequitur. He is a cowardly souldior, that follows his
General groaning. Thou ghost not alone to this combat: Christ went before
thee, goes with thee. How can thou not march courageously, cum Dux sit
socius; when thy Captain is thy companion! He has taught us this war both
by precept and practice. Blessed be the Lord our strength, Psalm. 144. 1.
which teaches our hands to war, and our fingers to fight. Cuius munimur
auxilio, mouemur exemplo. We are guided, we are guarded; by his presidency, by
his precedence. So Augustine. Ideo tenta^ est Aug in Psalm 90
Christus, ^e vincere^ur a tent^ore Christianus. Christ endured tentation, that
tentation might not overcome Christians. He says no other to thee, then
Ahimelech to his soldiers: What you have seen me Judge 9. 48.
do, make have, and do as I have done. This is our strong comfort. For in
that h^ himself has suffered and was tempted, he is able to succor them that
are tempted. Hebr. 1. 18.


2. His Revolution. Return.
The Devil being never permitted to pry into Gods secret book of
Predestination: and so not knowing, who is elect, who reprobate; hopes still to
return into any house, whence he has bin eiected. And accordingly, in many,
too many he preuailes. If Satan be totally thrown out, in vain he expects
returning; especially to get any dominion in the lost fort. But we read, that
a man may know the truth, and yet forsake it: be enlightened, nay 2. Pet. 2. 21.
He br. 6. 6.
taste of the powers of the world to come: nay be said (in some respects)
sanctified, yet crucify Christ again. Heb. 10. 26.
To these will Satan return, with as strong a power as ever.

Now he returns, 1. either by unright receiving of Gods blessings; like good
wine put into a polluted or broken vessel. 2. or by vnreuerent use of them;
imagining themselves rather Dominos the^ Dispersatores. 3. or by defiling them
with hypocrisy: so true gold is alchym'd over with a false sophistication. 4.
or by mixing them with lusts, and much-made of sins: and this permistion is
like good meat put into a vicious stomach: where there is a confusion of pure
food and crudities, to the destruction, not conservation of health.

Hence infer. Though Satan be gone, yet expect his (...). He has his Terms
and Returns, as well as vacations. And by this thou may i^ judge, whether this
unclean sprit be truly or bypocritically cast out. If he does not return, he
was never gone. If he strive not to come in, he is in already. A secure heart
may suppose him expelled, that still lies close in the house. If by perpetual
assaults he strives for entrance, then be sure, he is tuely gone out. Even his
oppositions shall afford thee comfort; his war give thee peace. And if he be
gone, keep him at staves end: seeing thou art rid of so ill a Tenant, let him
never come in again.

3. The Description of his seat. Into my house.

Satan calls this reprobates heart, his House: and so it is. 1. not by creation:
for so every man is Gods house. 1. Cor. 3. Know ye not that ye are the Temple
1. Co. 3. 16.
of God, and that the spirit of God dwells in you? 2. not by adaption. Cant.
5. Open to me, my Sister, etc. Cant. 5. 2. Revel. 3. 20.
says Christ. And Revel. 3. 1st and at the door and knock, etc. But upon our
reiection of GOD, and Gods desertion of us, the heart becomes satan's house. For
it is either a seat of sanctity, or a Cage of unclean birds: a chapel for
Jesus, or a den for devils: for where Christ is not by his pure spirit, Satan
is by his foul spirit.

So the malicious heart is a house for the spirit of e^uy: the th^en for the
spirit of ebriety: the proud for the spirit of pride: the vnehaste for the
spirit of uncleanness: the vsi^r for the spirit of Covetousness. They may
flatter themselves; Est Deus in^, agitante calescimus (...): that God is in
them: but the inmate and residentiary of their hearts is that unclean vulture.
They may be rich in worldly wealth, and have sumptuous houses, and fair
parlours, like Eglon, but themselves are foul parlours for Satan. How
lamentable is it, to see Owls and ^ctes, Iim and Zijm, impiety, impenitency,
and rebellion, dwelling in that mansion, which the Lord of Hosts built for
himself.

Heu domus antiqua, quam dispari dominar is domino! Oh ancient house, how ill
art thou governed where Covetousness is the Hall; for there is no room for
charity in her old place. Oppression the Kitchen, where the lives and livings
of poor men are dressed for rich men's tables: Pride is the Parlor, which is
hung with ostentation and selfe-flattery. Wantonness is the Chamber, where
concupiscence sits and hatcheth an innumerable brood of lusts. Malice is the
Chimny, which ever smoaks, and sometimes flames out revenge. Security is the
Bed, whereon Satan lull's himself: and Impenitency keeps the gate; that no
admission be given to admonition; nor any thing let in to disquiet the Devils
house. Oh, the mercy of God! Shall we let in our enemies, and keep out our
friends? Must Satan be advanced into Gods throne? Shall pride shut the door
against the Lord of all mercy and comfort; who yet has promised to dwell in
the humble and contrite soul? For shame let us cast Satan out, and keep him
out. Though he flatter with the voice of the Hiena at the door, and give
blandiloquous proffers; yet Ianuaf^llaci non sit apert^ vir^.


4. His affection to the same place. Whence I came out.

Experienced delight sharpens desire; whereas unknown things are not cared
for. This unclean spirit remembers the softness and warmth of his old
lodging: and therefore no marvel, if he conets to repossesse it. Because

1. He finds an easier and softer residence there, then in hell. He had rather
be in any place, then his own place: rather in hogs, then in the deep.
There he is tormented himself: here he does vex and Luke 8. 31.
tempt others.

2. Man is made after the Image of God: to whom since he finds, that his malice
cannot extend, he labors to deface his Picture. Hence man bears the blows,
which are meant at God.

3. Man is by Christ advanced to that place, whence God disthroniz'd him. Now
he cannot endure, that a humane creature should ascend to that heaven, whither
himself (once an Angel) may not be admitted.

4. He is exasperated against man, by that curse inflicted on him for seducing
man; that the seed of the Woman should break his head: This irreconcilable
enmity ^nrageth and maddes him. CHRIST he could not quell, have at Christians.

5. Lastly, the Devil is proud still; and, though he be cast down, is not
humbled: though low, not lowly. He takes a pride in his kingdom, though it be
but of darkness: and lones to have many subjects to do him homage. Since he
cannot be King in heaven, he would command in hell. To enlarge his dominion,
he would, like Absolon, steal away the hearts of men, from king, David of
Israel, the Liege-lord of heaven and earth.

Hence he affects his old house: there he is sure of good cheer and welcome:
a fire of lust to warm him: a bed of uncleanness to lodge him, and a table
furnished with all manner of impieties to feast him. Better here, then walking
in dry places; where wickedness is too barren to yield fruits for his diet; and
oppositions too violent to give him rest.

You perceive now his Resolution, Revolution, Description of his old seat, an
affection to it: and in all these his Intention. His Invention follows, and
the successful answerablenesse of all things to his desire. He comes, and he
finds preparation for his entertainment: consisting in Clearenes, Cleanness,
Trimnesse. Clearenes, it is empty. Cleannes, or handsomnesse: it is swept.
Trimnes, or adornation: it is garnished.

1 The Devil shall not want room when he comes: there shall be no in-mate
in the house to molest him; but such as he either left behind, or sent
before, vicious lusts. Which are indeed parts of himself; and therefore
cannot be said to be sodalitium. They are shadows and resemblances of
himself: which though he finds there, he reputes the house no less empty.

2 It is not enough to be empty, and capable to receive him: but it must be
cleanly, and plausible to receive him; swept. There must be a clear riddance
of what soever may discontent him.

3 Nay all this preparation is too slender, as if some great Prince were
expected, the house must be garnished: as it were hung with Tapestry and Arras.
There must not only be emptiness and handsomnesse, but neatness. So then
here is the provision of the house to receive him. 1. It is not troublesome,
for it is empty. 2. It is not sl^tish, for it is swept. 3. It is not incurious,
for it is garnished.

There is capacity, conueniency, curiosity. Which three circumstances of
provision we may thus expound. 1. We will refer clearness or emptiness,
Empty. Swept. Garnished.
to the absence of faith, and good works. 2. Cleanness or handsomeness to an
ouerly repentance. 3. Trimnesse and curiosity to hypocrisy.

1. Vacuitie. It is Empty.
True faith is never alone. It is in the very act of Justification, sola, but
not solitaria. Good works as inseparable attendants, or rather effects,
accompany it. Where these are, there is no emptiness. But in this Apostate or
black Devil, there is neither the Mistress nor the Maids, Faith nor good
works: therefore the room of his heart is empty, and capable of receiving the
unclean spirit. Perhaps in this vacancy and absence of the power of Satan,
there might be an abstinence from gross impieties, but there was no hearty
alacrity to the troublesome works of godliness, therefore he is justly said to
be empty. We know, that the forbearance of monstrous and world-noted
wickedness is not enough to justify before God, or to acquit us from eternal
malediction: the Tree is doomed to the fire, that yields not good fruits,
although it yield no evil. Even infructuous barrenness brought Christ's curse
on the fig tree. Sour grapes are not only displeasing to God, but no
grapes: and condemnations flood reaches further then to drown obstinacy; for
it fetches in also Infertility. God is departed; and you know, that Sede
vacant there will be no paucity of intruders. What house stands long
Tenant-lesse? No marvel then, if an empty vessel be never exalted to honor.

Hence we may infer, that this re-ingresse of Satan can never befall the
Regenerate; for it is impossible to find their heart empty. Faith, temperance,
patience, zeal, charity, hope, humility, are perpetual Residentiaries in the
Temple of their Souls; and if any one be tempted abroad, and allured to a
short discontinuance, yet the other keep infallible possession; and with
unconquered strength keep out Satan. If the rest should be driven into a
corner, yet Faith would defend the door against all assaults.

Indeed there may be such a storm and tempest of an afflicted conscience, that
the graces of the Spirit, (as abscured in a Cloud) may not be sensibly
perceived: and in regard of our own feeling there may be an absence, or
vacuity. But we must not take an abatement for an emptiness; a secession for
a destitution. It is certain, those that have the invisible mark of the
Spirit, shall have the visible mark of an honest life: and totally they cannot
loose grace, nor a second time fall away: for then they could not be renewed
again by repentance; nor ever be restored, except Christ should die again.
Heb. Hebr. 6.
10. For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no Heb. 10. 26.
more Sacrifice for sins: but a certain fearful looking for of judgment,
and fiery indignation which shall devour the adversaries. Paul had some hope of
the incestuous person, and therefore did not wholly cut him off, and accurse
him; but separate and suspend him for a time: that by the delivering of him
unto Satan (for a season) for the destruction of the flesh, his spirit might be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. 1 Cor. 5. 5.
Thus Christ, being once truly in, will never out: the faithful cannot be
empty. There is then a defect of Faith in this black Apostate, that makes
room for the deui^l.

2. Cleanliness. It is swept.
This is the effect of an ouerly and superficial repentance: like a slight
beesome, it sweepes away the dust and cobwebs, and such lighter stuff, but the
filth and dirt is caked and baked on. Sins of less delight to the flesh, and
tentations of weaker force, are brushed away; but the maine affection to some
old impiety has the root in the heart vndigged up. The devil is content,
the conscience should be swept, so long as it is but only swept.

Sin is congealed, concorporated, baked on; and must be pared and dug away
by greater violence then sweeping. Swept Satan yields it, so not pared. Impiety
is habituated by custom, hardened by impenitency, concorporated to him by his
affection to it: and shall he think, that a formal repentance, like a soft
beesome, can sweep all clean? Can a few drops and sprinklings of water purge
off the inueterate foulness and corruption of the flesh? There is required
much rensing to whiten a defiled soul.

How perverse is their course and thought, that imagine, they may repent more
in an hour, then they sin in an age! As if, having in many years kindled a
thousand fires, thou would think to put them out all with one tear: whereas
indeed, many tears can scarce put out one. Then boldly, stain the cloth a
whole vintage, and at last let one washing serve for all. Alas! man is quickly
made miserable, but not with such speed happy. How easily, how suddenly got man
his damnation: it was but eating an apple; soon done. Esau quickly hunted
away his blessing, but could not with many tears recover it. David is not
long in falling, his rising is tedious. With much pains and contention does a
man climb up some high Tower; but loosing his hold, he comes down apace. It
is no easy thing to stand, it is easy to slip, to stumble, to fall. The thick
and foggy air of this sinful world, as the smoke and stenchfull mistes over
some populous Cities, can soon fully the soul: the continual tramplings of
sin brings mire and dirte upon the conscience: these corruptions are not so
presently rid away, as taken.

Clip thy hairs short, yet they will grow again, because the roots are in the
scull. A tree, that is but pruin'd, shredde, topp'd, or lopped, will sprowt
again: root it up, and it shall grow no more. What is it to clip the outward
apparances, and to loppe the superfluous boughs of our sins, when the root
is cherished in the heart? What to have a foul and miry house swept? The
Pharise in his blown prayers, cousening ythes, frequent alms, did but sweep
the house, and remove the cobwebs of outward impieties; but the dirt of
hypocrisy was baked on; the roots of pride and covetousness grew still
untouched.

It is not then a transient sorrow, nor a formal compunction, (which may wound
and prick the heart, like a needle; but wants the thread of Faith to sow and
join it to God) that can make the house clean. It is but swept, and so ready
for Satan's reentry, and repossession.

3. Trimnesse or curiosity. Garnished.
This ornature and fit furnishing of the House for Satan's entertainment, is
done by Hypocrisy: when the rotten Cabin of a foul heart is hung with gay
hangings: when putidum et putridum cadauer, a rotten and stinking carcass is
hid in a Sepulcher painted over with vermillion: when a stenchfull dunghill is
covered with white snow; here is a garnishing for the Devil. He that can pray
at church, and cosen at home; give hi^ debtor fair words, and eat him
through with usury; which is to break his head with precious balmes: has
bitterness in his heart; whilst his tongue distills myrthe, and drops honey:
that man has a house garnished for this unclean spirit.

Satan will allow his Hosts to pretend sanctity, so they intend villainy: aliud
proponere, aliud supponere: to have the cup utterly rensed and cleansed; so it
be within full of extortion and rancor: to guild over a poisonous pill: to pray
in the Church, so they prey on the Church: this is a trimmed house, a chamber
garnished for the Devil. This Satan does in an ambitious imitation of the
Lord, who would have his house garnished, as the Passeouer-chamber was trimmed.

God would have the beams of his house Cedar, and the galleries of fur; like
King Solomon's Chariot; the pillars thereof are silver, the bottom thereof
gold, Cant 1. 17. 3. 10.
the covering of it, of purple; the midst thereof being paued with love for
the daughters of Jerusalem. He would have sanctification for the furniture; For
this is the 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3.
will of God, even your holiness; and for ornaments, the graces of his Spirit.
Thither he comes, and there he sups. Revel. 3. Behold, I stand at the door,
and knock: Reave. 3. 20.
if any man open unto me, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he shall
sup with me.

The Devil accordingly desires his house garnished; but the furniture is Sin,
and the ornaments opera tenebrarum, the works of darkness: And then, if you
will, let this mansion be outwardly pargetted, and whited over. Make they show
of having the Holy Ghost on Sundaies, so they retain the foul devil all the
week. These are they, that make Religion a masquery: lie, swear, cheat,
oppress, scorn, riot, revile, revel; yet appear at Church on the Sabbath;
as if they came for a Pasport to do more mischief. The strength of their
profession is but a gristle; which is indeed neither bone nor flesh; neither
true religion, nor no religion. Like the speckled innocence of the Papists, in
their ostentate charity, unclean chastity, luxurious fasts, and meritorious
treasons, in butchering Princes, and transferring kingdoms.

These hypocrites, being erst so themselves abused and deluded of Satan,
persuade others to villainy, by arguments of virtue. For an hypocrite will do
nothing without a color, and with a color any thing. If thou be'st a good
fellow, pledge this health: if a true gentleman, put not up this disgrace
without revenge: if any charity in thee, maintain this Parasite. Whereas it is
the part of a good man to be sober; of a generous spirit to pass by an
offense, said the wisest King; and of a charitable man to succor the poor,
not to maintain the dissolute.

Yet all this mad troop of enormities must march under the Colors of
religion. As those Rebels in the North, in our late Queens days, of blessed
Memory: who, when all their proiects and stratagems appeared manifestly to the
overthrow of their gracious Princess, yet concluded their Proclamation with,
God save Queen Elizabeth.

These are Satan's white boys, or rather black boys; which he killes, like
the Ape her young, with kindness; and damnes with indulgence. He gives them a
vaster Commission, then I have read that Philip le Long gave the Iacobin. in
Paris; which Charter had a reasonable extention; A portaillorum, ad portam
Inferni, inclusiue. This is the Pasport, which this great Captain gives
Hypocrites; From their own gates to the gates of hell, inclusiuely.

This is that hypocritical and halfe-turning to God; when the outward action
is suppressed, and the hidden corruption lies still fostered in the heart. The
appearance is masked, the affection not mortified. And though, like an Eunuch,
he does not beget palpable and manifest enormities; yet has a lust, and itch,
and concupiscence to them, and forbeares not in the dark, safe from the eyes
of the world, to practice them.

A man, that does outwardly refuse adherence to the world, for a colorable
embracing of the word; yet inwardly, and in a hearty affection parts not with
his former turpitudes, fulfils that on himself, which S. Basil once said of a
Senator: that seemd to renounce the world, yet retained part of his illgotten
riches, as Ananias kept back part of the price of his Lands. Thou have spoild
a Se^our, and have not made a Monk. So I may say of this man, Thou have marred
a worldling, and have not made a christian.

Now the Devil is content, thou should remit some of thy gross impieties,
so thou retain others. He cares not to be cast out by Idolatry, so he be kept
in by Atheism. He is well pleased, that Judas should become an Apostle of
Christ, so he be withal a Traitor. Let Abimelech give hospitality to Abraham,
so he purpose to abuse his wife. Let Herod hear John Baptist proach, perhaps
he will cut off his head, for preaching against Herodias.

The Devil is loath to be dislodged of ignorance, yet is content that error
succeed in place. He is vexed that truth should appear to a man, yet if
worldlines keep fast hold of the affections, this is a cable rope to pull him
in again. If he loose the Sconce of the understanding, yet give him the
Citadell of the affections. Any unmortified, habituated, affected sin, is a
sufficient stirrup to mount him into his old saddle. Either let the soul stoop
to fulfill the bodies base desires: or let the body employ all his members,
faculties, functions, to satisfy the souls lusts, and he is pleased.

The infernal Tyrant deals with men herein, as the Egyptian Pharaoh dealt
with the Israelites. Moses has a Commission and command from God, to take with
him the children of Israel, and to go three days journey in the Wilderness,
to celebrate a Feast to the Lord. Pharaoh is very loath to loose the profit,
which by the servitude of Israel did arise to him; he will not suffer them. But
when renewed plagues prove that there is no remedy, and a perpetual
vicissitude of judgments enforce it; observe how he would compound it.

1. Exodus 8. First, Go ye, s^crifice to your God in Exodus 8. 25. ver. 26.
this land. Nay says Moses: It is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice
the abominations of the Egyptians to the Lord our God. Lo, shall we sacrifice
the abominations of the Egyptians before their eyes, and will they not stone
us? That were a shame, and insufferable offense to them, to immolate beasts
among them that worship beasts.

2. Go ye, says Pharaoh, if there be no remedy, even into the Wilderness,
and sacrifice to your God: Verse. 2^.
but go not far. Nay, says Moses, we must go three days journey. The limits
and confines of the wilderness will not serve our turns; as if our Sacrifice
should not smell of Egypt, we must go so far as our travel can reach in three
days.

3. Go ye, says Pharaoh, and so far as now you desire, and your feet can
measure in three days; but who must go? Moses says our sons and daughters,
Exodus 10. 9.
flocks and herds: for we must hold a feast to the Lord. Not so, your little
ones shall not go, quoth Pharaoh. Go ye that are the men, and serve the Lord,
Verse. 11.
for that was your desire: and they were driven from his presence. But Moses
requires that all may go; old and young, sons and daughters.

4. Pharaoh, after the devouring locusts, and palpable Exodus 10. 24.
darkness, calls again for Moses and Aaron. Go ye your selves, and let your
little ones go also: only let your flocks and your herds be stayed. Nay,
says Moses, we must have burnt offerings and sacrifices for the Verse. 26.
Lord our God. Our cattle shall also go with us: there shall not a hoof be
left behind: for thereof must we take to serve the Lord our God.

Did Pharaoh regard their cattle above their little ones? or their children
beyond themselves? No: but he deals by conditions and limitations, as loath to
part with all at once. Therefore rather their cattle, then nothing. For he
knew, they had covetous minds; and when in the wilderness they wanted
provision, and were pinched with famine, they would return back again for
their cattle. Every yielding concession, that came from him, was by force of
the rack, he grants nothing, but on the compulsion of a judgment.

So this spiritual and hellish Pharaoh has had a soul long in his Egypt; and
has found him beneficial and helpful to his kingdom of darkness in many
services. The word preached comes, like Moses, to call him out of this bondage.
Satan is afraid to be put out of Commons, frantic at the menace of expulsion:
he will not give ground til he be forced, nor depart except plagued. But when
he perceiues no evasion, or remedy against Gods invasion, he falls to
indenting with niggardly grants and allowances.

1. Sacrifice here in this land: put on a mantle of religion over the old body.
Be inwardly an Egyptian still, black and wicked, though an external
sacrificer. Let thy life be statu quo; shift not ground. Answer thou with
Moses, No. I must change place, travel a new way: from Egypt toward Canaan;
from the region of darkness, to the regiment of life.

2. Go then, says the Devil, but not far; keep within my whistle: that
when I beckon my hand with a bag in it, or give you the call of vanity, you may
hear and return. No, Satan: I must go far off; three days journey from
Egypt. I must not stay near Sodom, nor in any of the Plain, lest I be
destroyed. It is no repentance, that puts not on a contrary habit. Pride must
be turned to humility, Couetice to charity, Dissimulation to honesty, etc.

3. Well then, says Satan, go ye the men, but leave the children behind you:
let me have your youth and strength, and when you are old talk of sacrifice
and of religion. This is the Devils dispensation, Youth must be born with. To
dance, to dice, to drink, to ruffle, scuffle, wear fleeces of vanity on their
heads, and to leave no place without some vicious testimony of their presence,
non est vitium adolescenti, is no fault in a young man. So the King of Babylon
took not the men, but the children of the Jews, to teach them the learning of
Chaldea. Answer; Dan. 1.
It is good to begin at the gates of our life to serve God; and from our birth
to be Nazarites unto the Lord. Lest if the frame of our lives be built on a
lascivious, and riotous foundation of long practiced wantonness, Our bones be
full of the sin of our youth, and it lies down with us in the dust: and when
Job. 20. 11.
our bodies arise from the earth, our sins also rise with them to judgment.
No, Satan; youth and age, all the degrees of our life shall be devoted to the
service of God.

4. Yet says Pharaoh, leave your cattle; says the Devil, leave your
affections behind you. I must be content to let you come to church, hear,
read, join in prayers; yet do not quite forsake me. Leave me but a pawn,
your affections, a secret liking to your former iniquities. No, Satan; God must
be served with all the heart, with all the soul, etc. we will not leave so
much as a desire to any sin, we will not leave a hoof behind us. Indeed
Satan willingly would not content himself with the bounds, but aims at the
whole Inheritance: he is not satisfied with the borders, but besieges the
arch-city. Let us keep him out of all, if we can: but since we must sin, let
us hold him occupied in some out-house, but be sure to keep him out of the
bedchamber, from ruling in the heart.

You have here Satan's egresse, and regresse; how he forsakes his Hold, how he
forces and strives for a re-entry. Let the same patience and attention sit
with you, whiles you sit to hear his Ingresse; his fortifying of the Hold
being taken, and provision against future dispossession. This is manifested by
his, 1. Associates. 2. Assault. For the former, he multiplyeth his troops, and
increases his forces: who are described 1. By their nature, spirits. 2. By
their number, seven. 3. By the measure of their malice, more wicked then the
former.

1. Their Nature. Spirits.
And so both more capable of entrance, and more powerful of retention: the
easier to get in, and the harder to get out. We see what kind of possession the
Devil has in this black Apostate, a spiritual and internal power. By which
strong working and ruling in the hearts of the children of disobedience, he
Ephe. 1. 2.
has gotten high titles, as the Prince, the King, the God of the world. Not
that Satan is any such thing of himself, but only through the weakness of
the ungodly, who admit him for a Lord of mis-rule in their hearts. Christ is
the true and only Lord of heaven and earth: the Devil is the Prince of this
world, but merely by imitation, the greatest part of the world being either
his open or secret followers.

They are Spirits, full of tyranny, full of malice. Their temptations in this
life testify the one; and their torments in the next life (or rather death)
shall declare the other. Here is thy misery, oh Apostate; illos dum spiritus
occupat artus; whiles thy own spirit does move thy joints, and other spirits
persecute thy spirit, which is for ever and ever, thou shall have no release of
bondage, no decease, no nor decrease of anguish.

2. Their Number. Seven.
A certain number is put for an uncertain: by seven spirits is intended a
monstrous number of capital sins. This expresses a forcible seducing of
Satan: before one spirit, now seven more. Mary Magdalen had once in her seven
Devils; this Apostate has gotten eight.

It does so provoke and distemper Satan to be cast out, that he means and
menaceth a fiercer assault; and rampires his recouer'd Fortress with a
septuple guard: that the security of his defense may give defiance to all
oppositions. He does so fill the heart, as he filled the heart of Ananias.
Act. 5. that there is no room for the least drop of grace. Acts. 5. 3.
Now he that could not rid himself of one foul spirit, what will he do to
encounter seven with the former? The combat is but tollerably equal, when
one to one; but ne Hercules contraduos, two is ods though against Hercules: how
then shall this weak man shift or deal with eight? If I might a little
allegorize. The Papists make but seven deadly sins. I am sure that Hypocrisy
is none of them in their account. Hypocrisy might be in this Apostate before;
for he was Garnished; and now perhaps those other seven are crept in to it:
and so there are 8. in all. But indeed, as every sin is deadly, though out of
their numeration and register: so by the addition of this number seven, is
signified an abudance of iniquities.

3. The measure of their malice. More wicked.
They are called more wicked, because they make the possessed more wicked. This
is spoken of the Devil, who is always pessimum, the worst; in some degree of
comparison: not so much secundum naturampropriam, but secundum operationem in
alijs: not so much in regard of his own nature, as in respect of the effects
which he works in man. That it shall go worse with this black Devils person,
the conclusion will show: here consider, that his sins are made more wicked.
One and the same sin (even respecting the Identity of it) may be worse in a
quadruple regard.

1. Ratione perpetrantis. In respect of the Committer. Ionah's sleep was worse
then the Mariners. Judas his conspiracy worse then the Jews. Wickedness in a
Christian worse then in an Infidel.

2. Ratione loci. In regard of the place. So wrangling in a church is worse
then in a tauern. Theeuery in the Temple more wicked the^ theeuery in the
market. Amos. 2. They lay themselves down upon clothes Amos. 2. 8.
laid to pledge, by every Altar: and they drink the wine of the condemned in
the house of their God. which was more horrible, then the same wickedness done
in another place. This appeared by Christ's actual punishing that offense, oven
with those hands, that we never else read gave any blows. For Sacrilege is the
worst of all thefts.

3. Ratione temporis. In respect of the time. For to play when thou should
pray; to swear when thou should sing; when thou should bless, to curse;
and to be drunk in a Tavern, when thou ought to serve God in the Temple,
is worse then the same offense at other times. Those Vintners and Victuallers
are grievously guilty, that do in prayer time at once open their own door,
and a door to irreligion and contempt of Gods holy worship.

4. Ratione naturae, in quam peccatur. In regard of that nature, against whom
the sin is committed. If a Traitor condemned for some notorious conspiracy
against his Prince, shall receive at those maligned hands a gracious pardon;
and yet renew his treason with a second attempt: this latter fact, though the
same in nature, (for all is but treason) is more wicked in measure, by reason
of the Conspirators unthankfulness for his Sovereigns goodness. He ill
requites Gods mercy for delivering him from one foul Devil, that opens a
willing door to the entry of seven worse. The more familiar acquaintance we
have had with the blessings of God, the greater condemnation abides us for
ingratitude. If the sin may be thus made more wicked, why not the person that
commits it? Seven new spirits more wicked have made him more wicked then the
first left him. Less had been his woe, if that one unclean Spirit had kept
possession alone, then upon his privation, to have the position of seven worse.

Three inferences from hence must not pass away unobserved.

1. That there is difference of sins, sinners, and consequently of
punishments. The first was said to be an unclean spirit, yet are the latter
seven worse. By the witness of Christ we have it already. Mat. 5. Math. 5, 22.
and by his Judgment shall find it hereafter, that an angry affection is
liable to Judgment: a provoking gesture to the punishment of a Council: but
railing inuectiues are worthy of hellfire. Chorazin and Bethsaida shall speed
worse then Tire and Sidon, and yet these were already in hell. The servant that
knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes.
Simple nescience has an easier judgment, then sinful knowledge. If Barbaria
wring her hands, that she has known so little; Christendom shall rend her
heart, that she has known so much to so little purpose.

Parity of sins is an idle dream: a Stoickc and Ioni^an imagination. For
though the wages of all sin be everlasting death; yet some sins shall feel
the torments of that death more violent and terrifying, then others. I have
other-where showed, that Judas his villainy inbetraying his Master, was more
horrible, then if a Barrabas, a notorious butcherer had done the deed. So our
Savior insinuated to Pilate. He that delivered me unto thee, has the greater
John 19, 11.
sin. That Babilonian Tyrant committed a more heinous offense, in taking the
holy things out of so holy a place, Gods consecrated vessels out of Gods
Temple; then if he had stolen more precious ones out of a private place. Do
you not think that a Cot-purse playing the thief at a Sermon, is more worthy
of hanging, then a robber that stands in the highway!

This David instanceth, Psalm. 1, 1. Blessed is he that has not walked in the
counsel of the ungodly, nor stood in the way of sinners, nor sat in the chair
of the Scorner. Walking is bad enough, but it is worse to stand then to walk,
and to sit then to stand in the ways of wickedness. Though idle words be an
unclean spirit, yet actual disobedience is a fouler Devil. A Christian
usurer is worse then a Turkish. An Indian Idolater to Gold is not so damnable
as a Spanish. All reprobates shall find hel-fire hot enough; but this Black
Devil so much the hoter, as he was once purged of his unclean spirit.

2. God does severely revenge himself upon Ingratitude for his graces: and
squares out his judgment according to the proportion of the blessing conferred
and abused. He that would not be thankful to God for the expulsion of one
unclean spirit, shall in a just quittance be pesterd with seven more, and more
wicked. If Christ be so kind to Judas, as to minister the Sacrament to him,
and he so unkind to Christ, as to lay it upon a foul stomach, a polluted
heart, the Devil shall enter with it.

There is a nescio vos given to those that have eaten and drunk in the
presence of Christ, and have heard Luke. 13, 26.
him teach in their streets; (it is all one) that have feasted at the
Communion Table, and heard Christ in their Pulpits. Even our reading, hearing,
praying, when they are done of custom more then of conscience, shall be but a
means of Satan's introduction. The word of God, like the dew of heaven, never
falls on the earth of our hearts, but it makes either herbs or weeds shoot up
quicker and thicker on them. For the earth which drinks in the rain that
comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs Heb. 5. 7.
meet for them, by whom it is dressed, receives blessing from God. But that
which bears thorns and briars, is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose
end is to be burned.

If they were condemned, Romans 1. and given over to a reprobate sense, that had
^o other glass to see the Deity in, but nature: for Seculum: peculum, the
world is a glass: what shall become of those that have had the book of the
Gospel, yet are stomacksicke at Manna, and beat away the hand of mercy
reached fo^th unto them: what, but a triple reprobate sense; and here, a
septuple possession of Satan?

Thus God in justice (for contempt of his mercy) admits a stronger delusion of
the Devil: not to make them twofold more the children of hell. Math. 23, 15.
as Proselytes; but seven fold as Devils. That Mat. 23, 15.
their bewitched and infatuated souls shall do service to him that murders
them: as Ahaz did sacrifice to the Gods of Damascus that smote him. 2 Chronicles. 2.
Chr. 28, 23.
28. As our treacherous and fugitive Seminaries that adore the Babilonish
Beast, who profusely carowseth up their blood that serve him: and whiles he
builds up the Tower of his universal Monarchy, to ouerlooke and command the
Christian world, he sets them to ciment and mortar the walls with their own
bloods.

Worse then the Indians, in some of their blind and Idolatrous sacrifices;
offering not for a Ne noceat, but for an vt noceat; crouching not for a
blessing, but a curse: and buying with great expense the malediction of God and
men. God threatens Israel, that for the multitude of their rebellions, he will
septuple their punishments. Leuit. 26: And if ye will not yet for all this
hearken unto me, I will punish Leuit. 26. 18. 21.
you seven times more for your sins. And ver. 21 If ye walk contrary, and
will not hearken unto me, I will bring seaue^ times more plagues upon you,
according to your sins. So frequently in the first and second chap. of the
Prophecy of Amos. For three transgressions, and for four; which are seven,
which are Amos. 1.
many, which are innumerable, I will not turn away your punishment, says the
Lord. According to their sins, by weight and measure, proportion and number,
shall be their sorrows. As they have swallowed up the poor, and devoured the
people of God, like bread, impouerished the commonwealth, undone the Church;
and all this under color of long prayers, and of a fiery-hot devotion; so they
shall receive greater damnation. This is Babilons final Luke 20. 47.
recompense. Revel. 18. Reward her even as she rewarded Revel. 18. 6.
you, and double unto her double according to her works: in the cup which she
has filled, fill to her double.

3. As seven worse spirits are the reward to him, that makes much of one bad
and unclean: So are seven better spirits bestowed on him, that uses one good
well. One Talent well employed, shall gain ten: and the more we have, the
more will God delight to load us. God is as kind to those, that traffic his
graces to his glory, as he is severe against those that throw his pearls to
swine. And as this Apostates recidiuation is rewarded by the accession of
seven more wicked Spirits: so our sanctified and confirmed hearts shall be
honored with those seven most pure spirits. Revel. 1. which are before the
throne of God. These seven spirits are taken Revel. 1, 4.
either for the seven gifts of Gods spirit; prefigured by the seven eyes in
one Stone. Zach. 3. and seven Zach. 3, 9, 4. 2.
lamps in one Candlestick. Zach. 4. Which are by some gathered from Esaias 11.
2. And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom, and
Esaias. 11, 2.
of understanding, the spirit of counsel and of might, the spirit of
knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord. The first is the Spirit of Piety, the
second is the Spirit of Wisdom, the third is the Spirit of Understanding, the
fourth is the Spirit of Counsel, the fifth is the Spirit of Might, the sixth is
the Spirit of Knowledge, the seventh is the Spirit of the fear of the Lord.
Or by putting a certain number for an uncertain, all the gifts and graces of
Gods Spirit are here intended; Seven being a number of perfection, and
signifying in the Scriptures, Fullness.

God does so requite his own blessings, that where he finds thankfulness for
his goodness, he opens his hands wider: and where drops of grace take well, he
will rain whole showers of mercy. It is his delight to reward his own
favors, and crown his own blessings: as if he would give, because he had
given. Thus a greater measure of godliness shall possess us; a greater
measure of wickedness, this Apostate, then either in either kind formerly was
had. When we receive grace of God, we also receive grace to employ that grace:
so that if we thrive not in the growth of godliness, we may causefully call our
sanctity into question. As he a malo adpeius from evil to worse, descends
gradually to hell: so must we by joining virtue to faith, and to virtue
knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, 2 Peter 1, 6.
etc. as per scansum, climbing by degrees, get up into heaven.

I have described the Associates; now for the Assault. Wherein briefly observe,
1. their Invasion. 2. their Inhabitation. 3. their Cohabitation.

1. Their Invasion. They enter.
Alas! what should hinder them: when a savage Troop, appointed at all hands,
armed with malice and mischief cap ape, assaults a poor weak Fort, that has
nothing but bare walls, and naked gates, (and those set wide open) to defend
it self? If Lot were in Sodom, if (but) Faith stood in the Turret of the
conscience, there might be some beating back of their forces: but there is no
reluctation, where there is no enemy. S. Paul describes the Christians Armor.
Ephe. 6. Stand, having your loins girt about with truth, having on the
breast plate of righteousness: Ephesians. 6, 14.
your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. Above all take
the shield of Faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench the fiery darts of
the wicked. Take the helmet of salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit, etc.

This Apostate has not a piece of it, to ward the least blow, wheresoever it
strikes him. He is to deal with cunning Fencers, and has neither offeusiue
nor defensive weapons. Not Truth but error is the girdle of his loins: and for
the breast plate of righteousness, he knows not how to put it on. His f^ete
were never shod with the preparation of the Gospel, he had not so much time to
spare from his nimble gadding after vanities. The fiery darts of these wicked
spirits may burn and wound him to death; he has no Shield of Faith to cool
or quench them. The helmet of salvation is far from him; he knows not in
what Armory to find it. And for the sword of the spirit, he cannot tell how to
handle it. He is an unwalled city, an vndefenced Fort, an unarmed man. No
marvel, if th^se foul spirits enter, when there is neither contention nor
intention to repel them. Omnia tradentur: portas reserabimus hosti.

2. Their Inhabitation. Dwell.
The Devil dwells in a Man, not tanquam corpus locatum in loco, as a body
seated in a certain place: for spirits are not contained in any place.
Incorporeall created substances do not dwell in a place locally or
circumscriptiuely, as bodies do; but definitiuely. Nor dwell these in him,
tanquam forma in materia, as the form in a substance, as the soul in the
body. For the Devil is a simple substance of himself, not compounded of any
aliene or second matter.

But they dwell in him by a secret and spiritual power; darkning their minds.
2. Cor. 4. that the light 2 Cor. 4, 4.
of the glorious gospel of christ should not shine unto t^e^. Poisoning their
affections; that being past feeling, they might give themselves over to
lasciviousness, to Ephesians. 4. 19.
work all uncleanness with greediness. Hardening their hearts, Romans 2. til
they treasure up to themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation
of the Romans 2. 5.
righteous Judgment of God. All which is no other in effect; but damming up
the lights and windores of this Fort, ramming up the gates, and fortifying the
walls. Thus they dwell in him, like witches in an enchanted Castle: and who
shall break their spells and deliver him! You see then, this black Devil has
but sorry guests, that purpose longer stay with him then a night; to dwell, yea
to dominere, till they have eaten him quite out of house and home.

3. Their Cohabitation. They dwell there; all of them, even together.
1. There is room enough in one heart for many Obseru.
sins. Mary Magdalens heart held seven devils: this Apostates eight. There was
a whole Legion in another. Math. 8. All the Principalities and powers of
darkness in a fourth. Absolon had treason, ambition, pride, incest,
ingratitude, for his hearts stuffing. Judas had no fewer turpitudes in his. The
heart is so small a piece of flesh, that it will scarce give a Kite her
breakfast: yet, behold, how capacious and roomthy it is, to give house-roome to
seven Devils. He that should read and observe the great Physicians dissection
of man's heart. Math. 15. Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, Math. 15. 19.
fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies; would bless himself to
think, that so little a thing c^uld extend it self to such a capacity; or that
it could be so full and not burst.

2. Behold a rabble of Devils agreeing quietly in one man. Glomerantur in vnum
Innumer a pestes Erebi. Innumerable plagues of hell are rounded up together in
one; yet they fall not out for room. On earth among men it often falls out,
as between those two ambitious Romans. Nec quemquam iam far potest Caesarue
priorem, Pompeiusue parem.

Caesar must have no superior, Pompey no riual. Ahab cannot endure, that
Naboths vineyard should disfigure his Lordship. Rich men in this world agree
like Pikes in a pond, ready to eat up one another: but howsoever; the poor
pay for it, they are sure to be devoured. Tradesinen cannot agree in one City,
nor neighbors in one Town, nor brothers in one house, nor Jacob and Esau in
one womb: yet, behold, many Devils can agree in one man. They know that a
Kingdom divided cannot stand. We quarrel and contend, when hell it self is
at peace.

My journey draws to an end: there remain but two steps; the Conclusion and
Application. The Conclusion of the Parable is fearful. The last state of that
man is worse then the first. Is it possible? His state was so bad before, that
can you imagine it worse? Yes: there was but one Devil before, now there are
eight. By reason of this stronger possession, his damnation will be the sooner
wroght up, the cup of his iniquity brim-fill'd, and himself hurried to hell
with the greater precipitation. This peiority of his state may be amplified in
6. respects.

1. Whilst this black Devil had a white face, and carried the countenance of
religion, he was wrapped up in the general prayers of the Church. He seemed of
that number, for whom as the friends to christ, there was a continual
remembrance in good men's intercessions. If any man see his brother sin a sin,
which is 1. Ioh. 5, 16
not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not
unto death. But there is a sin unto death: I do not say that he shall pray for
it. Samuel will pray for Saul, till he perceive that he has given over the
Lord, and the Lord him.

But when the white scarffe is plucked off this Moors face, and his black
leprosy appears: when the Wolfes sheepskin is stripped off, and he is seen
to worry the lambs: then is he singled out as an enemy to Christ, and Gods
judgment hastened on him at the entreaty of his servants. He is so much the
worse, as he has lost the benefit of good men's prayers. When once in this gall
of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, in vain Simon Magus requests Acts 8, 24.
Simon Peter to request God for him. Pray ye to the Lord for me, that none of
these things which ye have spoken, come upon me.

2. Whilst this black Devil mantled his tawny skin, and vlcerous heart with
dissimulation of piety, there was outwardly some hopeful likelihood of his
reformation, and winning to heaven. (Though God knew otherwise in his hidden
and reserved counsel) whilst he sat in the congregation of Saints, heard what
God spoke to them, and spoke with them to God; the Minister did preach to him
the tidings of peace with a good opinion, and admitted him to the communication
of the Sacrament. But now, his eruption into manifest contempt of sacred
things, and despite done to the spirit of truth, has deaded that hope so that
the Minister has not that confident comfort, that the word will be the fanour
of life unto him. His Hypocrisy has deceived the world; his Apostasy has
deceived himself: therefore his state is worse.

3. His latter end is worse in regard of himself: and this may be amplified
in four circumstances.

1. Before he was sick of spiritual drunkenness, now he is lethargiz'd. Who
knows not that a continued lethargy is worse then a short ebriety Such is his
state.

2. Impenitence has brought him to impudence: and by often prostitution of his
heart to uncleanness, he has gotten a whores forehead, that cannot blush. Ier.
3. Thou refusedst to be ashamed. And Ier. 8. Were they ashamed when they had
committed abomination? Jeremy 3, 3. 8. 12.
Nay, they were not at al ashamd, neither could they blush. He has so little
repented for wickedness, that now he thinks there is no wickedness stands in
need of repentance. A brazen face, which no foul deed, nor reproof for it,
can make to change color. How can it be otherwise? For a black Devil can no
more blush, then a black Dog.

3. He is in worse state, by so much as a relapse is more perilous then the
first sickness. By reason that strength is now spent, and nature made more
weak, and unable to help it self, or to receive benefit by what is
ministered. The sparlies of goodness are now dying, or quite extinct, and the
floods of iniquity more violent against him. There be sorer assaults, and less
strength to encounter.

4. Before he was quiet in himself, and might have a flattering hope, that the
night would never come. But now breaking forthinto palpable contempt and
obduracy, he finds his conscience open to condemn him, and hell gates open to
receive him. His ulcer seemed to be fairly skinn'd over, and in his own sense
healed; but now to come to a new incision, is greater terror then ever. The
sound of fear is now in his ears, the sense of a dagger at his heart. His
body would, his mind cannot rest. The horror of future punishment lies at
Cain's door, and is at every noise ready to wake. There is a fearful
conflict betwixt Sensuality and Reason in him: that he may use Jobs words,
though in a deeper and direr sense. Pactus sum mihimet Job. 7. 20.
ipse grauis: I am a burden and trouble to my self.

Thus the great Parasite of the soul, that heretofore matched the number of
Gods threatenings with as many fair promises, and flattered this wretch with
the paucity of his sins; now takes him in the l^rch, and over rec^ons him.
He that so long kept him in a beautiful gallery of hope, now takes him aside,
and shows him the dark dungeon of despair. He engrosseth his iniquities in
text-letters, and hangs them on the Curtain at his beds f^te, to the racking
amasement of his distracted soul. Before the Devil did put his shoulders
under the burden; but now he shifts it off, and imposes it on the sinner. And
as I have read, the Spanish Index deals with Velcurio: who commenting on Liui
says, that the fifth age was decrepite under the Ind. Hisp. s. 158
Popes and Emperors: the Index takes out the Popes, and leaves the Emperors
obnoxious to the whole imputation: so the devil winds out himself at last
from the wicked, refusing to carry the burden any longer, but leaves it wholly
to their supportation.

This ague, or rather agony, is made more vexing by the sting of conscience:
which is now Gods bailiffe to arrest him; his witness against him; his whip to
lash him. His Register, that reads over the long book of his offenses; and
after a terrible aggrauation of their heynousnes, tells him his penance,
direful and intolerable; and that Coneordat cum actis Curiae, it agrees with
the just decree of Gods Court, never to be avoided.

4. His last state is worse then his first, in respect of God: who will now
turn him out of his protection. When he has once proclaimed open war and
rebellion against God, and has manifestly declared himself an outlaw; no
marvel, if God throw him out of the circumference of his mercy, and let his
Providence take no charge over him; saving only to restrain his savage fury,
from forraging his grace-empaled Church. But for himself, the Scripture gives
a renunciation. If he will go into captivity, let him go. Revel. 22. 11. If he
will be vntust, let him be unjust still. If he will be filthy, let him be
filthy still. I will not hinder his course, Abea^, pere^t, prafundat, perdat,
said that father in the Comedy; Let him go, perish, sink, or swim. He has
full liberty to swill the cup of his own damnation up to the brim.

5. In respect of the Devil, his latter state is worse. Which may be
demonstrated by a familiar smilitude. A man is committed to prison for debt, or
some light trespass; is there indifferently well used, has (for his money) all
the liberty that the layle and layer can afford him; nay, is permitted to go
abroad with keepers. At last, he spies opportunity, and breaks away: then the
layler fumes and fomes and rages; and perhaps, swears away that little share
of his own soul, which he had left. The prisoner had need look to himself:
if the layler catch him, he had better never have stirred. At last he is taken;
now bolts, and locks, and heavy yrons, a strong guard, and a vigilant watch;
til he be made safe for stirring again. This bondage is far worse then the
first.

The sinner in the devils keeping is let alone to enjoy the liberty of the
prison, that is, this world; he may feed his eye with vanities, his hand with
extortions, his belly with iunkets, his spleen with laughter, his ears with
music, his heart with iollity, his flesh with lusts; and all this without
control. But if he be won by the Gospel preached to break prison; and
thereupon give the devil the slip: let him take heed, Satan do not catch
him again. If he once recouers him into his prison, he will dungeon him;
remove from him all means, whereby he might be saved; let him see, hear,
feel, understand nothing but temptations and snares; blind his soul, harden
his heart; load him with heavy irons, and lock him up in bolts and fetters of
everlasting perdition.

6. Then lastly, his end shall be worse at the last; when the least parcel of
Gods wrath shall be heavier, then all the anguish he felt before. When his
Almond tree shall be turned to his iron rod; his afflictions to Scorpions.
When the short and momentany vexations of this world shall no sooner cease to
him, then the eternal torments of Hell shall begin, and (which is most
fearful) shall never end. Be his body burned to death in fire, yet those
flames shall go out with his ashes: but come his flesh and soul to that
infernal fire, and when they have been burned myriads of years, yet it shall
not be quenched.

The Application does immediately concern the Jews; which has before been
plentifully instanced. For our selves. 1. The unclean spirit has by Gods holy
Gospel been cast out of us. 2. Do you think, he is at quiet? No: he
esteems al places dry and barren, till he get into us again. 3. He resolves
to try for entrance. 4. Now is it enough, that we leave ourselves empty of
faith and good works? for all our abominable sins swepe with an ouerly
repentance? and garnished with hypocrisy, and with our old affections to sin
still? 5. Take we heed; he will come with seven spirits, more wicked then the
former, and give us a fiercer assault.

But our help is in the name of GOD, who has made heaven and earth: in whose
mercy we trust, because his compassions fail not. Our own strength is no
confidence for us; but the grace of that strongest man, who is alone able to
keep out Satan. Let us adhere to Him by a true faith; and serve him in an holy
integrity of conversation: and our latter end shall be better then our
beginning. Mark the upright man, and behold the just; for the end of that man
is peace. Our end shall be better hereafter; Psalm. 37, 37.
when GOD shall wipe away all tears from our eyes: when sorrow, and sickness,
and death shall be no more: when Senacherib cannot rage, nor the Leuiathan of
hell assault us. Peace shall enuiron us, Heaven shall contain us, Glory shall
crown us. Our trouble, woe, mourning, have been momentany: but our joys,
peace, bliss, shall have no intermission, no mutation, no end. Now He that
perfects all good works, make our latter end better then our beginning. To
whom, three persons, one eternal God, be all prais^ and glory, for ever and
for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
LYCANTHROPY, OR THE WOLF worrying THE LAMBS.

By THOMAS ADAMS.

Matthew 7. 15.

Beware of false Prophets which come to you in sheep clothing, but inwardly
they are ravening Wolves.

TERTVLL.

Quaenam sunt istae pelles ovium, nisi nominis
Christiani extrinsecus superficies?
Hic dolus est magnus; Lupus est qui creditur agnus.

LONDON, Printed by William Iaggard, 1615.

TO THE TRVEly worthy Gentleman M. HENRY FORTESCVE, Esquire, a favorer of
virtue and good Learning.
SIR, I have put up the Wolf, though not hunted him; as judging my self too
weak for that sport-earnest. It is no desertlesse Office to discover that
subtle and insatiate Beast; to pull the Sheepe-skinne of Hypocrisy over his
ears; and to expose his feming malice and sanguisugous cruelty to men's censure
and detestation. Let those hands strike him, that have darts of authority put
into their Quiuers. Our Land is no Forest, literally or metaphorically
understood: but whether for Church or Commonwealth, profession or soil, an
Orchard of Gods own planting; fruitful in goods and good works. Wolves we
have none, but some Mystical ones; whose ferocity is yet hidden under the
habites and cases of those Lambs, they have devoured. These I have set in
view, or at least meant my best to do it. I have seldom pretended that common
poyse, that (by their own report) sets so many mad pens, like wheels, a
running, Importunacy of friends. I have willingly published, what I had hope
would do good published. Only this I feared to keep from the Press, lest it
should steal thither another way. Being there, I could not with better
confidence fasten upon a known Patron, then your self: who can both
understand it, and will read it: not only the Epistle, but the whole Book.
Though that fashion with many patrons, of perusing more then their own Titles,
be now as a Suit of the old make. I know you spend some hours of all days in
such good exercises; abandoning those idle and excessive customs, wherein too
many will please themselves, and none else.

It is an unthrifty spending of time, and a sorry success will conclude it,
when we are curious in plotting a method for our inferior delights; and leave
our Salvation unwrought up. We strive to settle our Lands, to secure our
moneys, to confirm our estates; but to conform our lives, or to make sure our
Election is vilipended. And yet when all is done; brains have plotted, means
have seconded, bonds and laws have established; nothing can be made Sure but
only our Salvation. But go you forward to adorn your eternal mind; and to
plant your soul full of those Flowers, which give already a pleasant odor on
earth, and shall one day be stuck like glories in Heaven. So shall your memory
be sweet in the mouths and hearts of future generations; whiles the vicious,
even alive, do not escape the Satyr. Thus with true thankful love I behight
you in my prayers, a happy Progress in Grace, till you shall come to your
Standinghouse of Glory.

Your Worships in my best services, Tho: Adams.

LYCANTHROPY. OR THE WOLF Worrying The LAMBS.
Luke 10. 3. Behold, I send you forth as Lambs among Wolves.
THE Great Bishop of our souls being now at the Ordination of his Ministers;
having first instructed them in via Domini, does here discipline them in vita
Discipuli: and pre-armes them to that entertainment, which the Samaritans of
the world are likely to give all those, whose faces look toward Jerusalem.
Math. 10. ver. 22. You shall be hated of all men for my names sake. If they
had but some opposers, there were some comfort; then it is probable that the
rest would help: nay, All. Yet if they were but indifferently affected toward
us, and would neither defend nor offend. but resign us up to our selves: nay,
they shall oppose, they will Hate: your persecutors shall be in every City, not
few but many, not neuters but maligners. If there were many and not haters,
then as it is in the Proverb, The more the merrier: if haters and not many,
then the fewer the better cheer: but they are for nature persecutors; for
number many me^, most men, innumerable, all men. But we are here praemoniti,
and therefore should be praemuniti: neither need we grudge to suffer in measure
for Him, that has suffered beyond measure for us. Whatsoever we endure for
his names sake, the patience and passion of others has matched it: but His
grief for us could not be fitted with a Sicut in all the world.

But I would not, like a careless Porter, keep you without doors, til you had
lost your stomachs. There is some cheer coming, and I will now unlock the
gates of my Text, to let you in to it. The words contain the Deputation to an
Office. Behold, I send you forth as Lambs among Wolves. Considerable in the
Deputation are a Commission, wherein observe the Sender: Christ. Sent: the
Apostles. Sending; or warrant.
Commixtion, which consists in a Prescription, what they should be that are
sent, Lambs. Description, what they are, among whom sent, Wolves.




This is the Tree, and the branches: shall we now step forward to gather and
taste the fruit? But stay. Here is a Gardener must first be spoke with: one
that stands in the very entrance of my Text; for some purpose sure. Behold.

Behold, is like John Baptist, in holy writ, evermore the vant-currer of some
excellent thing. Pontan: compares it to the sounding of a Trumpet, before some
great Proclamation. It is like the hand in the margin of a book, pointing to
some remarkable thing, and of great succeeding consequence. It is a Direct, a
Reference, a dash of the Holy-Ghosts pen; seldom used repletiuely: but to
impart and import some special note, worthy our deeper, and more serious
observation. It is like the ringing of the great Bell, before the Sermon of
some famous Preacher; and bids us here, as a monitor, keep silence, to hear
what the Eternal Word speaks unto us. In a word, it is but a word, and yet
the Epitome of that whole sentence. Let him that has ears to hear, hear:
let him that has eyes to see, Behold.

Thi^ was our Savior Christ's Sermon ad Clerum; whose Pulpit is now in Heaven:
and sends us to preach on his preachings, to paraphrase his Lectures, and no
more but to deliver that to you, which he has dictated to us. Your attention
is therefore charged in this Behold. Open your ears, those organical conduits
of discipline: nay, your hearts are liable, and therefore should be pliable to
this charge. Keep then patience in your minds, attention in your ears,
meditation in your hearts, practice in your lives. Behold.

Behold what? S. Matthew recites this Deputation, together with a Direction.
Behold, I send you forth as Math. 10, 16.
Lambs in the midst of Wolves: be ye therefore wise as Serpents, and
harme-lesse as Doves. Where Christ does not only confer a Charge, but
infer a Carriage. The former is Institutio viae, the other Instructio vitae.
I send: Be you, etc. The Deputation or designing their office, shall only
limit my speech, and your attention for this time. This Current parts it self
into two rivulets, a Commission, a Commixtion. The Missure, I send you: the
Mixture, as Lambs among wolves. Every Commission, consists on necessity,
besides the mere act, of at least two persons, the Sender, the Sent.

In the Sender, may be considered his Greatness, his Goodness. His Greatness
that he can send: his goodness, that he will send, for the benefit of his church

1. His Greatness. The Sender is greater then the person Sent: as Paul said
in a shallower inequality of Melchisedech and Abraham, being both men. Heb. 7
Without al contradiction, the less is blessed of the greater. Hebr. (...).
Here the Sender is God and man: a King, the King; of pure, absolute, and
independent authority: a real Prince, a royal Prince. Real in his right, in
his might: Royal in his affects and effects: he purposes, and disposes good
to his Church. Tyrants are the Kings of slaves: liberal Princes are the Kings
of men: Christ is the King of Kings: here dispatching his Legates on an
Embassage to the world. This his Greatness.

2. His Goodness: he that is King does send to his subjects, abiects; or
rather to rebels, to make them subjects: with a pardon of all their treasons,
ready signed and sea'ld to their accepting hands. Ephesians. 4. 8. When he had led
captivity captive, he gave gifts unto men. When he had led captivity
captive; there is his Greatness: he gave gifts unto men; there is his Goodness.
By the former he is mirificans: mitificans by the latter. Behold; he must send
to us: we knew not, desired not access to him. He is the way, the truth, the
life: and therefore sends out these as describers of the way, dispensers of the
truth, co^ductors to the life. If the way had not found us, we should never
have found the way. Here then is his Goodness; though a King, yet he
preaches himself, and sends Preachers. As was Solomon, his type; both a King
over Israel, and a Preacher to Israel. Time was; Christ refused to be a King,
denied to be a Judge, but vouchsafed to be a Preacher. Without this sweet
dignation to us, we should never have ascended to him, nec opibus, nec operibus,
nec opera: neither by our wealth, nor by our worth, nor by our wills, nor by our
works, nor by our wits, nor by our worship. Thus for the Sender. In a
Messenger sent


Is required Celerity, Sincerity, Constancy. That he be speedy, that he be
heedy: and (as we say) that he be deedy; hold out till his Embassage be ended,
and till he that sent him send after him a reuocation. Celerity without
discretion is like wings without eyes: discretion without celerity like eyes
without wings: both without constancy are like seete and eyes without a heart.

1. For their Speediness. Before they are sent, they should not run at all:
after they are sent, they cannot run too fast. We may say of these
Messengers, as it was prouerb'd of the Lacedemonian^ Turpe est cuilibet fugere,
Laconi etiam deliberasse. Go^ grant, all our consciences may witness with our
selves, what Paul speaks of his vnretarded execution Gal. 1, 16.
of Christ's message. When it pleased God to send me to preach his Son among
the heathen, immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood. To adjure their
posting alacrity to this business, the Apostles were charged to salut no man
by the way: much less should the burying our dead friends, or taking leave of
our living friends, procrastinate our course. Prou. 10. Prou. 10, 26.
26. As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, so is a sluggard to
them that send him. Esaias 40. 31. But Esaias 40, 31.
they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength: they shall mount up
with wings as Eagles: they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not
faint. It is so, or it should be so: our diligence should tread upon the heels
of our calling for haste; and we should make use of the first handsell of time.
In limine offendisse ominosum, odiosum. To stumble at the threshold, is a bad
heed, and a worse sign.

2. It is not enough to be speedfull; we must also be discreet and faithful.
The messenger must do the Senders business, not his own. Celerity lays the
raynes on our necks: discretion is the curb of the bridle. There are that
run too fast; Qui trans mare currunt. As Cyprian writes of some
Schismatickes, that had put to sea for Rome; quasi veritas Lib. 1. Ep. 3. ad
Co^l.
post eos nauigare non possit. This is called by Saint August. Cursus
celerrimus praeter viam. The four Cherubins. Ezekiel. 1. 7. had pedes rectos,
straight feet: and the feet of Ministers, if they be beautiful, take Ezekiel.
17.
strait steps. Sunt opera quae videntur bona, et non sunt: quia non referuntur
ad illum finem, ex quo bona sunt. Aug. in Ioh. Tract. 25.
Indeed Intentio facit bonum opus; but then fides dirigit intentione^, says
the same father. It is not enough that conscience must lead us, but truth must
lead our conscience. Non est rectum, quod non est a Deo directum. He that
commands us agere, commands us hoc agere: non aliud, sed illud. With God,
aduerbs shall have better thanks then nownes. Both good and well, must in our
actions meet.
Wicked is not much worse then indiscreet.
Says a modern Poet. He that has a nimble foot and a false heart, runs
himself out of breath, ere he remembers his errand. Fidelity is requisite in a
Messenger. Non boue mactato coelestia Numina gaudent;
Sed, quae praestanda est, et sine test, fide. Quid.



3. It is not yet enough to go speedfully, and heedfully; except also
deedfully, with a constant holding out. Though soon enough, and fast enough,
it is not well enough, except far enough. Lauda nauigantem, cum peruenerit ad
portum. Paul must fight out his battle with victory: finish his race with
winning the prize: and keep the faith, though he bear about in his body the
marks of the Lord Jesus. And 2. Tim. 4, 8.
then there is laid up for him a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give him at the last day: and not to him only, but to
them also that love his appearing. Inueniat mittens missum iudicabundus
praedicantem.

Some begin hotely, and keep the Pulpits warm at first, barking loud against
dumb dogs; thundering out, Let him that labors not, not eat: forbidding
promotion without devotion. On a sudden, these sons of thunder are as mute as
fishes. What Is the matter? Now from their own lips, they should have no
promotion. Oh Sir; they have the promotion already. You may perceive, the fish
is caught by their hanging aside their nets. Perhaps in a Cathedral Church, to
a refined audience, some Episcopal command may deliver him of Elephanti
partum, a child of two years breeding^ one whereof is spent in the
conception, another in fashioning the members; and yet a mere Embrion when it
is borne. Oh favor them. Rarae fumant faelicibus arae. Their beginning was
golden, like that Monarchs drea med Image; but their conclusion is dirty, they
end in clay; leaving the word, and cleaving to the world. It were good for the
church, and not amiss for themselves if their gains might be decreased with
their pains. But if a restraint of Pluralities, or a diminution and abatement
of their demeanes, should be imposed, how would they complain! Let them
complain; and be answered as certain Monks in Winchester were: who
complaining to King Henry the 2. that their Bishop had taken away three of
their Dishes, and left them but ten: the King replied, That the Bishop should
do well to take away the ten, and leave them but three. As they have crimen
immane, and nomen inane, so let them have mercedem tenuem, a slender
recompense. Inertes should be justly inopes: especially cum valuerunt, et non
voluerunt praedicare. Is this all? No: but as the tree falls, so it lies. If
Christ find them at last loyterers, he will set them to work for ever in
torments.

You have heard the Persons designing, and designed: the Designation follows;
which gives the^, 1. Their VVarrant. 2. Their Qualification.

1. Christ seals them a warrant in his word, (...) I send you. It is not
Humanum inuentum, but Diuinum Institutum: authorized under the Broad-seale of
heaven, in the power of the second Person of that State-royall. He says not, I
will pray Theophyl. in John 20. Math. 28, 18
to my Father to send you, but I send you. For All power is given to me in
heaven, and in earth. They come not then, without their commission; as those,
Ier. 23. 21. I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran: I have not spoken
to them, yet they prophesied. Would Jeremy 23, 21
you have a Minister? Seek to the Nurseries of Christian learning, the
Universities: there you shall have them furnished with excellent parts and
arts. Is it enough to have learning? No, the man of God must also be holy.
Say, he be well learned, and well lived, may he instantly climb up into the
Pulpit and preach? No; he must first have an inward commission from heaven, and
an outward Ordination on earth by imposition of hands. You may see their
warrant.

2. Their Qualification is inseparable to their missure. Christ not only
speaks, but works effectually in them, and gives them a Fieri faciam, how
unapt and unable soever they were before. So Math. 4 Ego faciam vos piscatores
hominum. You made your selves Fishermen, I will make you Fishers of men. He
Math 4. ^9.
does not in these days so enthusiastically inspire men: but sets them first
to be Cesternes in the University, before they be Conduits in the Country.
Before they can minister a word in time, there must Esaias 50 4.
be a time to have it ministered to them. Ere their words be like apples of
gold, with pictures of silver; Prou. 25. 11.
they must be refined in some Academicall furnace, and by much study have this
picture and impression of wisdom set on them.

Neither were these Apostles dismissed out of 1 Timothy 3, (...).
Christ's College, till they were made fit to teach. Christ, that set them up
as Lights, and bad them shine, made them shine; and not as Ardens speaks of
some since their days, that are fumantes, magis qua^ Hom. in Fest. Sanc. Luc.
flammantes. Both our Torches, life and learning must burn brightly. It is for
the Papists to build up a B^ocke-house of Ignorance; and to set dunces over
fools; for so the Jesuits call their Seculars; that they may both fall into
the ditch. It was a rule with them, the very Epitome of their Canons in that
point.

Qui been Can, Con, le, poterit been Presbiter esse. And yet me thinks, they
should be more circumspect in their choice: for they seem to magnify it
beyond us, and make it a Sacrament, calling it the Sacrament of Order. O what
you not why? they think the Sacraments confer grace, and let him be a devil
before; the Imposition of hands shall make him holy enough.

We have examined their Commission, let us now consider their Commixtion. As
Lambs among Wolves. Alas! it goes harsh, when these two natures meet. It must
be miraculous, if one of them come not short home. Yet I find it prophesied of
the days of the Gospel. The Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together. Indeed
when Wolves become Lambs, Esaias 65, 25.
of which supernatural effect these Lambs are sent forth as isntrumental
causes; this peace may be fulfilled. But Wolves, whiles they are Wolves, will
not let the Lambs live in quiet. In this mixture, there is a Prescription, a
Description. What we must be that are sent; what they are amongst whom sent.

The duty of our natures, and nature of our duties is exemplified in this word,
Lambs. Not that there should be a Metamorphosis or transformation of us into
that kind of beasts, literally. But as Lambs. As is sometimes a note of
Quality, sometimes of equality, here it is only similitudinary. As Lambs, as
Doves, etc. Neither is this enjoined likeness catholic, but partial: we must
not be in every respect, as Lambs: but it must be taken in a limited and
qualified sense.

Lambs! Let us observe here, Quam ob rem, Quainre. 1. Wherefore. 2. Wherein,
we must be Lambs.

1. Wherefore. Good reason: he that sends the^ forth was a Lamb. John 1.
Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. (...), the
John 1, 29.
Lamb, that Lamb of God, even from his own bosom: taking away the sin of
the world. Other Leuiticall Lambs took away sin typically; this really.
They were slain for the sins of the Jews, this of all the world. There is
tacita antithesis in (...). Christ was a Lamb, (that we may take with us our
Precedent) especially in three respects. Of his Innocence, Patience, Profit.

1. For his Innocence, Ioh. 8. Which of you can convince Ioh. 8, 46,
me of sin? You may reprove, can you disprove? The world traduced him for a
blasphemer, a Samaritan, a Sorcerer, an enemy to Caesar, a boon companion: so
easy is it to auile, and revile, so hard to convince. The Church sweetly and
truly commends him. Cant. 5, 10. My beloved is white and ruddy, the cheifest
among ten thousand. Candidus Cant. 5. 10. Rupert. in locu^.
sanctitate, rubicundus passione. He was white of himself; made read by the
wounds of his enemies. It was not praise enough for him, that he was (as it is
said of David) Ore rubicundo, of a ruddy color: unless this read had been
first grounded on white. His passion had lost the virtue of merit, had he not
been innocent. But he was Agnus ille immaculatus. 1. Pet. 1. 19. A lamb, that
lamb 1. Pet. 1, 19.
without blemish, without spot.

A Sun without a mote, a rose without a canker, a clear heaven without any
cloud.

2. For his Patience. Esaias 53. He was oppressed, he was afflicted, yet he
opened not his mouth: he is Esaias 53, 7.
brought as a Lamb to the slaughter; and as a sheep before the shearer is
dumb, so opens he not his mouth. First, the shearers fleece him, and then
the butchers kill him, yet he opens not his mouth: to wit, against them, but
for them. Father forgive them, they know not what they do. He wrote that in
the dust, which many engraue in brass and marble; wrongs. Behold, the King of
heaven is factus in terris, and fractus in terris: yet calls not fire from
heaven to consume his enemies: but quenches that fire with his own blood by
them shed; which they in shedding it had kindled against themselves. It is
probable, that some of the agents in his death, were saved by his death. O
strange inuersion, wrought by mercy; that Iniusti in homicidio, should be made
Iusti per homicidium; and that the blood, which was scarce washed from their
guilty hands, should now whiten their consciences. Like that impostum'd
Souldior; the blow that was thought to have killed him, cured him.

3. For his Profit. He was profitable in his fleece, profitable in his flesh,
profitable in his blood, in his life, in his death, and after death eternally
profitable.

1. His Flesh is meat indeed; though non dentis, sedmentis. Our fathers did
eat Manna, which was the food of Angels, as it were; and yet dyed corporally:
Ioh. 6, 19.
but whosoever eat the God of Angels spiritually, shall not dye eternally.

2. His fleece good. We were cold, and naked. Is this all? Nay, and polluted
too. The fleece of his imputed Righteousness, keeps us warm, clothes our
nakedness, hides our uncleanness. Hence the Prophet calls him, The Lord our
righteousness. Ours not inherent, but imputative. 2. Cor. 5. 21. We are made
no otherwise the righteousness of God in him, then he was made sin for us:
which was only by imputation. So Luther, Christiana sanctitas non est actiua,
sed passiua sanctitas: extra nos est iustitia nostra, non in nobis.

3. His blood excellent, and of most transcendent virtue; whether lauando, or
leuando: we were maculati, et mactati: speckled with corruptions, dead in
sins. Not only as the Remists say, Diseased: but as Paul says, Deceased:
Ephe. 2, 1. Dead in sins and trespasses. His blood has recovered our life,
our health; and washed us as white, as the snow i^ Salmon. Thus he is in every
respect profitable to us; more then we could either expetere, or expectare;
deserve, or desire. Satan is against us: behold Christ is with us; and we
overcome him by the blood of the Revel. 12, 11.
Lamb.

Now, is Christ a Lamb? then must you be sicut agni, as Lambs. Christ is the
principal and truest exemplar; a general rule without exception. Imitation
does soonest come, and best become Children and Scholars. We are Children.
Math. 5. Math. 5, 45.
Love your enemies, etc. That ye may be the children of your Father which is in
heaven. We are Servants to John 13, 13.
Christ. Io. 13. Ye call me Master, and Lord, and ye say well: for so I am.
Though we cannot tread in his steps, we must walk in his path. As Virgil of
Ascanius, son to Aeneas. Sequiturque patrem non passibus aequis. Now our
imitation is confined (not to his miracles, but) to his moralls.

It is fit the Disciple should follow his Master. Math. 16. If any man will
come after me, let him deny Math. 16, 24.
himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. Some follow him, as Peter, a
far off. Some go cheek by iowle with him, as the Papists; confounding their
own merits with his, and therein themselves. Some out-runne Christ, as James
and John. Luke 9. 54. in a preproperous, preposterous zeal; as hot as Mount
Hecla. Let us follow him close, but in meekness. Vis capere celsitudinem Dei?
cape prius Aug.
humilitatem Dei. We must be Lambs accordingly; and that in

1. Patience. We must take up Christ's cross, when we become his Scholars.
Not only bear it, but take it up. Tollere and Far differ. An Ass bears,
man takes up. There is a threefold cross: Innocent, perient, penitent. Christ
bore the first: the perishing thief the second: the repentant; and we all
must bear the last. The lamb, whether he be shorn or slain, is dumb to
complaints.

We bless God, that we are well freed from the Boners and butchers of these
lambs: but we have still fleecers enough, too many; that love to see Learning
follow Homer with a staff and a wallet. This we must expect: Christ sends us
not as wolves among wolves, or Shepherds among wolves, or sheep about wolves;
but as lambs (...), in the Math. 10, 16.
midst of wolves; as S. Matthew has it. If they cannot devour our flesh,
they will pluck our fleeces; leave us nothing but the tag-locks, poor
vicaredge tithes: whiles themselves and their children are kept warm in our
wool, the Parsonage. Nay, and they would clippe off the tag-locks too; raven
up the vicaredges, if the law would but allow them a pair of sheares. Every
Gentleman thinks the Priest mean; but the Priests means has made many a
Gentleman.

Well, he had need be a lamb that lives among such wolves. But as Doctor
Luther was wont to say. Mitte mundum vadere sicut vadit, nam vult vadere sicut
vadit. Merry Latin, but resolute Patience. Let the world go as it does, for it
will go as it does. Let us comfort our selves, as our Jewel did his friends in
banishment. Haec non durabunt aetatem. This world will not last ever.

He that enters this holy Calling, must be content, as Paul, to dye daily. 1.
Cor. 15. 31. To preach the Gospel boldly, is to pull the world about our
ears; and to conjure up the furies of hell against us. But

Frangit, et attollit vires in milite causa,

Yet Patience is the best gamester; for it wins, Propert.
when it loses. He had need be a Job, that lives among the Sabeans and
Chaldeans of our times. Are you disparaged? suffer. Are you despised? suffer.
Are you impouerished? suffer. This same Bulapathu^ is the best herb in the
garden, the herb Patience. It shall amase them, after all wrongs, to see your
foreheads smoothe, countenances mild, lips silent, and your habites
vn-moued. The Wolf in the Fable (oh that it were but a fable) when he sees
the Lamb drinking at the poole, comes blundring into the water and troubles
it: then quarrels with the Lamb. Quare turbasti aquam? Why have thou troubled
the water?

Sic nocet innocuo nocuus, causamque nocendi Quaerit. So Ahab the wolf told
Elias the lamb, that he troubled Israel. As it is truly reported; the Papists
would have laid the Gunpowder-treason on the Puritaines; if it had been
effected. Hebr. 10. Ye Heb. 10, 36.
have need of patience; that after ye have done the will of God, ye might
receive the promise. But I fear, I have incited your impatience, by standing.
so long upon patience.

2. Time and your expectation call me to the Innocence of these Lambs. It is
not enough for them to suffer wrongs: but they must offer none. For he that
does injury, may well receive it. To look for good, and do bad, is against the
law of Retaile. Dyonisius Lexta^nis. Valor. Max. lib. 4.
of Syracusa being banished, came to Theodores Court a supplyant; where not
presently admitted, he turned to his Companion with these words. Perhaps I did
the like, when I was in the like dignity. When thou receiuest injury, remember
what thou have given.

It is no wonder, if those lambs be stricken, that strike. He that will be an
agent in wrongs, must be a patient. How strange, and improper a speech is this;
a contentious lamb, a troublesome Minister! How learned soever such men may
seem, they are indeed illiterate. They are bad writers that have not learnd to
join: simple Grammarians, that have not their Concords. It is observed of
Lambs; that Caetera animalia armauit natura, solum agnum dimisit inermem.
Other living creatures Nature has armed; but the lamb she sent into the world
naked and unarmed: giving it neither offensive nor defensive weapons. The Dog
has teeth to bite: the Horse hoofes to trample: the Bear nails to tear: the
Ox horns to dash: the Lion paws and jaws to devour: The Bore has his
tush: the Elephant his snowt: the Hind and Hare have swift feet, to save
themselves by flight. Only the Lamb has no means, either to help it self,
or to hurt others.

Neither is this our Innocence only to be considered, in respect immediately
of man, or of injuries directed to him. But these Lambs must be innocent, in
regard of God, in regard of their Calling. The Priest in his breast plate must
not only have Vrim which is Science; but Thummim which is Conscience. We have
manifold weakness; we must not have manifest wickedness. Though we be not
in Facto, we must be in Fieri: and not then to begin, when we should be onwards
half our journey. Theodore required, that the Schoole-maisters for his
children should be (...), as well as (...): and Christ's Apostles were not only
Depurati, but Depurati. Ioh. 13. If I wash thee not, thou have no part with me.
Bis peccat, qui peccat exemplo. Uncleansed Ioh. 13, 8.
Ministers are like Bilha and Zilpha, Jacobs maids; that being bound
themselves, brought forth children that were free. Such Churchmen are like the
Pinacles on some Battlements; that point upward to heaven, but poyse downward
to their Center.

The best Schooleman said, that Magistrates and Ministers, when they sin, do
Peccare in quid essentialiter: all others but in quale accidentaliter. To
smoke with the Indian, quarrel with the Frenchman, court a Lady with the
Venetian, plot villainy with the Italian, be proud with the Spaniard, cogge with
a Jew, insult with a Turk, drink down a Dutchman, and tell lies with the
Devil -- for a wager: are works for wolves, not for lambs. To conclude; as
we have Deputation, we should have Reputation: and because called to be lambs,
behave our selves in Innocence.

3. Our Patience and Innocence make us not complet lambs, without our
Profitablenes. Malum ferimus, malum non offerimus, bonum proferimus. We offer
no evil, we suffer evil, we return good. It is not enough to suffer wrongs,
but we must do none. It is not enough to do no wrong, but we must do good for
wrong. Bonum pro malo reddere Christianum est. Every thing in a lamb is good
and useful. Math. 5, 44.
His fell good, his fleece good, his flesh good: immo et viscera et exorementa
commoda sunt. The lambs of God, the Ministers of the Gospel, must universally
abound with benefits.

1. To some this lamb gives his fleece: he clothes the naked; and keeps the
sick and poor warm in his wool. He sees not a lamb of Christ stripped by
poverty; but he lends him one lock, to hide his nakedness. Sic vos, non
vobis, vellera fertis oues.


2. He is no niggard of his flesh. Part of his meat and drink, and such
refections as God has sent him, he willingly gives. The Lamb is not covetous.
If I have food and raiment, says S. Paul, I have learned to be content.
Covetousness becomes a lamb, worse then rapine a wolf. Jude makes it the mark
of false teachers to feed themselves: and Jeremy says, Jude. verse 12
the wind shall feed them; nay feed on them, and eat Ier. 22, 22.
them up. Says Gregor. Considerate, quid de gregibus agatur, quando lupi sunt
pastores! What shall become Homil. 17. Messis quidem multa, etc.
of the Lambs, under the tuition of Wolves!

3. Yea, even the blood of these lambs is profitable: which they grudge not to
give for the glory of God, and benefit of the Church, when a just cause has
called for it. We know that the blood of Martyrs, was milk which nourished the
Primitive Infancy of the Church, and Gods tithe has bin paid in the lives of
his servants. Every drop of blood so spilt has bin like a grain sown in
mature ground, and brought forth a plenteous harvest of believers. Well may
that lamb of God, that has begotte the Church by his blood on the Cross: and
still nourishes her with the same blood in the Sacrament: deseruingly require
this Circuncision and tribute of blood, at the hands of his lambs. The Jews
sacrificed their beasts to God: we equal them in sacrificing our concupiscences
and beastly lusts. But we far exceed those typicke times, when we immolate our
souls and bodies to God. What confirmation of faith, where it was weak: what
inkindling of zeal, where it was not; has been thus effected, the devout
acknowledgment of many, non obiter, but ex professo has demonstrated.

Innumerable are the benefits redounding to you by these Lambs. They are eyes
to the blind, and feet to the lame; nurses to infants, and feeders of
stronger Christians. They lend their eyes to those that cannot see: their feet
to those that cannot go: speak comfortable things to the troubled heart; and
inform others in the higher mysteries of salvation. If you truly prized, and
duly praised the profits arising to you by them; you would not, as most do,
more esteem a rotten sheep, then a sound Minister.

But I forget my self; as if I were so delighted with these Lambs, that I
knew not how to leave them. Especially (blame me not, if I be) loath to come
among the wolves: whereupon, by the next point of my Text, and last I purpose
now to handle, I am enforced to venture. Of the Wolf I must speak: but I hope
it cannot be said, lupus in fabula: there are any such present to hear me.

This is the Description of those, among whom the Lambs are sent. There is a
natural antipathy of these, one against another; ever since God put emnity, an
irreconcilable hatred and contrariety, between the seed of the Woman and of
the Serpent. I have read, that a string made of Wolves guts, put amongst a
knotte of strings made of the guts of sheep, corrupts and spoils them all.
A strange secret in nature: and may serve to insinuate the malice of these
Lycanthropi against Lambs: that they do not only persecute them living, but
even infest them dead.

No marvel then, if the lambs care not greatly for the company of wolves. For
if one scabbed sheep infect the whole flock for morality: what will one wolf
do among the lambs for mortality! Therefore so far as we may, let us fly
the society of wolves. With the merciful thou shall show thy self Psalm. 18,
25.
merciful, etc. Therefore with the Poet; fly wicked company, et te melioribus
offer. But how can this be, when we are sent as Lambs in medio luporum? The
lamb would not willingly be alone: yet is far better when solitary, then in
woluish society. Plutarch speaks of certain Law-giuers, that would have their
Priests abstain from Goats: a luxurious beast, and making men by contact
obnoxious to Epilepsie. (As the Jews were commanded in Leuiticus, to abstain
from unclean things.) Though we cannot escape the company of wolves: let us
abhor 1. Cor. 5, 10.
all participation of their vices.

The holy word of God, who can give most congruous names to natures, often
compares the wicked to brute and savage creatures. God does not only send
reasonable man, to learn wisdom of the unreasonable beast. So he schooled
Israel by the Ox, Balaam by his Ass; and Solomon sends the Sluggard to the
Pismire. For it is certain, that many beasts exceed man in diverse natural
faculties: as the dog in smelling, Heart in hearing, Ape in tasting, etc. But he
matcheth degenerate man with beasts of the most notorious turpitudes.

The proud enemies of the Church are called Lions. Psalm. 58. Break out the
great teeth of the young Psalm. 58, 6. Psalm. 80, 13.
Lions, O Lord. Wild Boares. Psalm. 80. The Boar out of the wood does waste
it: and the wild beast of the field deuoures it. Bulls. Psalm. 22. Many bulls
have compassed Psalm. 22, 12.
me: strong Bulls of Bashan have beset me round. And in the same Psalm;
Unicorns. The Bull has 2. horns, the Unicorn one. The roaring Bull, (I had
almost said the roaring Boy) the swaggering Ruffian has two horns; Ishmaels
tongue, and Esau's hand: with one horn wounding our bodies and estates, with
the other our good names. The Unicorn, that is the Hypocrite, the
fowle-brested, fair crested, factious Puritaine has but one horn: but
therewith he does no small mischief. This Unicorns horn might be very good,
if it were out of his head: but so long as it is there, it hurts rather.

David, Psalm. 32. compares refractary men to horses Psalm. 32, 9.
and mules; which have no understanding: whose mouth must be held in with bitte
and bridle, lest they come near unto thee. The Mule, if you heed not, will
take his rider in his teeth, and lay him in the manger. And the Horse, when he
has cast his load, gives him a kind farewell with his heels. Experience
justifies this truth amongst us: for many of our Parishioners are so full of
Iadish qualities, that the poor Minister can hardly keep his saddle.

Sometimes we have the wicked likened to fowls There is the Peacocke, the
proud man, stretching out his painted and gaudy wings. The desperate Cock, the
contentious, that fights without any quarrel. The house-bird, the Sparrow, the
Emblem of an incontinent and hot adulterer. The Lap-wing, the Hypocrite; that
cries, here it is, here it is: here is holiness: when he builds his nest on the
ground; is earthly minded; and runs away with the shell on his head; as if he
were perfect, when he is not begun. There is the Owl, the night-bird, the
Iesuited Seminary; that sculkes all day in a hollow tree, in some Popish vault;
and at even howtes his masses, and skreeks downfall and ruin to King, Church,
and Commonwealth. There is the Batte, the Neuter; that has both wings and
teeth, and is both a bird and a beast; of any religion, of no religion. There
is the Cormorant, the Corne-vorant; the Mire-drumble, the Covetous: that are
ever rooting and rotting their hearts in the mire of this world. There is also
the vulture, that follows armies to prey upon dead corpses: the usurer that
waits on Prodigalls, to devour their decaying fortunes. Some have in them the
pernicious nature of all these foul fowls.

We may say of a wicked man, as their Schooleglosse says of their
Soule-Priests. Malus Presbiter aequiparatur Coruo, in nigredine vitiorum, in
raucedine vocis, in voracitate oblationum mortuorum, in foetore spiritus, in
garrulitate, et in furto. Such a man is resembled to a Raven; in the blackness
of his vices, in the hoarcenesse of his voice, in his insatiable voracity, in
his stench of breath, in his tatling garrulity, and in theft.

We find the wicked otherwhiles compared to Dogs. Psalm. 22. Dogs have
compassed me. And ver. 20. Deliver my soul from the sword, and my darling from
Psalm. 22, 16.
the power of the Dog. And Psalm. 59. They return at Evening: they make a noise
like a Dog, and go round about Psalm. 59, 6.
the City. Says Paul, Philip. 3. Beware of Dogs, etc. either grinning in
malice, or barking with reproaches, Philip. 3. 2.
or biting with mischief.

There is the great Mastiffe, the usurer; that worryeth all the lambs in a
Country. The Bloudhound, the malicious Murderer, that kills any man which
angers him; relying on a friend in the Court for pardon. There is the nimble
Beagle, the cunning Persecutor; that has always the innocent in the wind.
The proud Gray-hound, the gay Gallant, that out-runnes all moderation. The
fawning Spaniell, the flattering Sycophant, that has only learned to fetch
and carry; to spring the Couey of his masters lusts, and to arride, and deride
him. You have also Setters, Quicke-setters I should say, that undo the
Country by making Commons several. You have your trencher-dogs, lazy
Seruitors, that do nothing, but eat, drink, play, and sleep. There be
Tumblers too, luxurious Scortators, and their infectious harlots. Some have
yard- dogs, churlish Porters, to keep the poor away from their gates. And
there be bawling Curres, rural ignorants, that blaspheme all godliness under
the name of Puritanisme.

To come home, there be wolves every where in abundance. I do not mean
literally those, who^ the Greeks call (...): whereof I have read in diverse
stories. And more authentically reported by Doctor Joseph Hall, in his short
Epistolicall discourse of his Travels, to abound in Ardenna; called by the
Inhabitants Lougarous; in English, VVitchwolues; witches that had put on the
form of those cruel beasts. Aristotle in his second book of the nature of
beasts, says that in India is a wolf, that has 3. rows of teeth above, has
feet like a Lion, face like a man, and the tail of a Scorpion: his voice like
a man's voice, and shrill as a Trumpet: and is (...), as these wolves are.

But mystical wolves: ravenous in the forms of men: having a greater
similitude to wolves in the disposition of their minds, then dissimilitude in
the composition of their bodies. The wicked have many resemblances to wolves.
Desire of breuity shall reduce them to four. Sterrillity, ferocity, voracity,
subtlety.

1. For Sterrillity. The wolf is not very fertile in producing the one kind:
(if less, better.) But utterly unprofitable in any good thing redounding from
him. The horse carries his Master, the ox is strong to draw the plough, the
sheep gives us wool for warmth, and flesh for nourishment, the Cowes vdder
drops milk into our pailes. The Elephant has virtue in his tooth, the
Unicorn in his horn, the Ciuet-cat in her sent, the Goat in his blood, the
Beuer in his genitals. The dog has his service, and the catte keeps away
vermin: not the ape, but makes some sport; and the very poison of serpents is
by art made medicinal. For hyde, or hair, or horn, or hoof, or blood, or
flesh, most beasts yield some profit; but the wolf is good for nothing.

A fit Emblem of a wicked man; that is universally evil whiles he lives:
and not often does so much good as a hog when he dies. Only death has bound
him to the good forbearance, and restraines him from doing any further
mischief. Perhaps he may give away some fragments in his Testament: but he
parts with it in his will, against his will: and it is but a part, whereas
Judas returned al, yet went to hell. The wolf living is like Rumney Marsh.
Hyeme malus, aestate molestus, nunquam bonus. Liberts Peramb. of Kent.
Tide and time, morning and evening, winter and summer, never good. Thus every
way is this wolf infructuous.

2. For Ferocity. The wolf is savage and cruel; and loves to lick his own
lips, when they reeke with the lukewarm goare of the lambs. There is no
such complacency to the wicked, as the wreaking their malicious teenes on the
good. If they cannot reach with their claws, they vomit out fire, or at least
smoke. Omnis malitia cructat fumum. Fulgent.
The tongue of such a wolf is often like a warre-arrow, which doubly hurts
where it lights. It wounds the flesh in going in, and it rends it worse in
pulling out. This is the arrow they make ready on the string, to shoot privily
at the upright in heart. Psalm 11, 2.


Their atrocity is not thus satisfied; but if opportunity give power, they will
wound and worry the lambs first, and proclaim their guiltinesses afterward.
As Cyrill observes, the lamb of God was served by the Jews. Primum ligant;
deinde causas in eum In Ioh. lib. 12. cap. 45.
quaerunt. First they bind him, and then they seek matter against him. As it
is reported of a Judge of the Stemery at Lydford in Devonshire; who having
hanged a felon among the Tinners in the forenoon, sat in judgment on him in
the afternoon. So the wolves in Queen Mary's days, imprisoned the innocent
lambs that had broken no law; and afterward devised a law to conde^n them. And
having first martyrd the^, then held disputation whether the act were
authentical. These were the sanguisugous wolves, Papists. There are still
rapidi, rabidi lupi, that must have somewhat to expiate their savage fury.
Auicen speaks of the wolf; that if the Fishermen leave him no offall, he will
rend their nets. These Canibals look for somewhat; if it be but for a Ne
noceant. Other wolves are afraid of burning flames: but these Lycanthropi budge
not an inch for all the fire in hell.

3. For voracity. The wolf is ravenous of al beasts; especially the she-
wolf, when she has a litter: and eats the very earth when she has no other
prey, says Isiodore. These mystical wolves rob the Ministers, and take away
the portion of their meat, as Melzar did from Daniel, though against our wills;
and force us to live with pulse and water-gruell. They love to have the Priest
look through a Lattice; and would be loath, all his means should keep his
house from Dilapidations. The maine policy and piety of many, that would seem
to be most religious and pure, consists in plotting and parlying how to lessen
the Clergymans estate. They grudge not the Merchants wealth, nor envy the
ditation of Lawyers, nor hinder the enriching of Physicians. These occupations
provide for their bellies, their bodies, their estates. But (as if all were
more precious then their souls) their whole labor is to devour the Ministers
due, and to beggar him. I could tell them what Paul says, If we have sown to
you spiritual thing, is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal
things? but these 1 Cor. 9, 11.
have no faith in the Scriptures. They are very hot for the Gospel, they love
the Gospel: who but they? Not because they believe it, but because they feel
it: the wealth, peace, liberty that arises by it.

To cosen the Ministers of their tithes in private; or to devour them in
public, and to justify it when they have done, and to have the wrested law
taking their parts. (But alas! how should it be otherwise, when it is both
Judges and Jurors own case too often!) to laugh at the poor Vicar, that is
glad to feed on crusts, and to spinne out 20. marks a year into a thread as
long as his life; whiles the wo^fe innes a Crop worth three hundred pound per
annum: this is a prey somewhat answerable to the voracity of their throats. Let
every man, of what profession soever, necessary or superfluous; be he a member
or scabbe of the Common wealth, live: so the Priest be poor, they care not.

Aristotle says, that when wolves go out of their dens to prey; they first
sharpen and whet their teeth with Origanum, or wild Margerom. Before these
wolves speak in public, or confer in private, theyedge their tongues
against the Clergy: and like the merciless Spaniards to the Indians, they will
set them a great deal of work, and but a little meat. Let them preach their
hearts out: for they will see their hearts out, ere they restore them ought of
their own.

Go to thou wolf: put that thou have robbed the Minister of into the
Inuentory of thy goods: it shall be gravel in thy throat, hooks in the
bellies of thy posterity, and engender destruction to all the rest. Aristotle
says, that the wool of that sheep which was devoured by a wolf, infecteth
and annoyeth the wearer. So the goods stolen from the Minister, though never so
closely, is an infectious contagion, and a devouring pestilence to thy body, to
thy state, to thy conscience; and will bring all thou have to confusion. The
world says now, Alas poor Lamb: It shall say one day, Alas poor Wolf;
how art thou caught in the snares of Hell! Mean time they lie in the bosom of
the Church; as that disease in the breast, called the Cancer, vulgarly the
wolf: devouring our very flesh, if we will not pacify and satisfy them with
our substance.

4. For Subtlety. The Fox is admired for craft: but he has not stolen all
from the wo^fe. It is observed of wolves, that when they go to the fold for
prey, they will be sure to advantage themselves of the wind. And Solinus
reports of them, that they hide themselves in bushes (...) thickets, for the
more sudden and guilefull preying upon Goats and sheep. These Lycanthropi
in our times do more hurt by their subtlety, then by their violence. More is
to be feared their pax, quam fax: malitia, quam militia. Beware of them which
come to you in sheep Math. 7, 15.
clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves.

They have outsides of Christianity, but insides of rapine. Intus, linum
subtilitatis, extra lanam simplicitatis Greg. Mag. Tertull.
demonstrant. Says Tertullian. Quaenam sunt istae pelles ouium, nisi
Christiani nominis extrinsecus superficies?

Hic dolus est magnus, iupus est qui creditur agnus. If you take a wolf in a
lambe-skinne, hang him up, for he is the worst of the generation.

You will ask how we should know them. A wolf is discerned from a sheep, by
his howling, and by his claws; tanquam ex vngue leonem. For the howling of
these wolves; you shall hear them barking at the Moon, railing, reuiling,
swearing, blaspheming, abusing, slandering: for this is a woluish language. For
their claws. Mat. 7, 16. By their fruits Math. 17. 15. Anselm.
you shall know them. Etsi non ex omnibus fructibus, tamen ex aliquibus
cognoscetis eos.

Their woluish nature will burst forth to their own shame, and the abhorring
of all men. Thus says Melancthon. Ex malo dogmate, et ma^is moribus
dignosce^tur. You see the nature of these wolves. O that they would consider
it, that have power to menage the^: that they would protect the lambs; and as
we have detected their enemies, so punish them. Muzzle the wolves, that they
may not devour the flocks: give them their chain and their clog; bind them
to the good behauior toward the Minister; and restrain their violences. Wolves
fly him that is anointed with the oil of Lions. If Magistrates would use
that sword, which the Lion, the King has put into their hands, to Gods glory,
the wolves would be in more fear and quiet.

Let him that has Episcopal Jurisdiction consider what S. Bernard writes to
Eugenius: that it is his office, Magis domare lupos, quam dominari ouibus. And
as they say, the Subject of the Canon law is, De Consider. lib. 2.
Homo dirigibilis in Deum, et in bonum commune: so that Court, which is called
Forum spirituale, should specially consider the public tranquillity of these
Lambs, and to eneruate the furious strength of wolves.

Let them that are deputed Superuisors of Parishes, Churchwardens; remember
that nothing in the world is more spiritual, tender, and delicate, then the
conscience of a man: and nothing binds the conscience more strongly then an
oath. Come ye not therefore with Omne been, when there are so many wolves among
you. If you favor the wolves, you give shrewd suspicion, that you are wolves
your selves. Is there nothing for you to present? Gods house, Gods day is
neglected: the Temples vnrepaired, and vnrepaired too: neither adorned, nor
frequented. Adultery breaks forth into smoke, fame, infamy. Drunkenness cannot
find the way to the Church, so readily as to the Alehouse: and when it comes to
the Temple, takes a nap just the length of the Sermon. And yet Omnia been
still. Let me say; Security and Partiality are often the Churchwardens:
Conniuence, and wilful Ignorance the Sidemen. You will say, I take for the
profit of the Commissary. I answer in the face and fear of God; I speak not
to benefit his Office, but to discharge my own office.

When all is done, and yet all undone still, the lambs must be patient, though
in medio luporu^. God will not suffer our labors to pass unrewarded.
Emittuntur, non amittuntur agni. When we have finished our course, there is
laid up for us a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge
shall give us at 2 Timothy 4, 8.
the last day. Aristotle in his Ethics affirms virtue to be only Bonum
laudabile, making (...) to be the adiunct thereof: but his Felicity to be
Bonum honorabile; and gives for the adiunct (...), making it the most
honorable thing in the world. But Gods reward to his servants surmounts all
Ethicke or Ethnicke happiness: bestowing a Kingdom upon his Lambs on the
right hand; whiles the wolves and Goats on the left be sent away to eternal
malediction. Now the Lamb of God make us Lambs, and give us the reward of
Lambs, his everlasting comforts.

Amen.
FINIS.
THE Spiritual Nauigator BOUND For the Holy Land.

Preached at St. Giles without Cripplegate, on Trinity Sunday last, 1615.

By THOMAS ADAMS.

Revel. 15. 2. 3.

I saw as it were a Sea of Glass, mingled with fire; and they, that had gotten
the victory over the Beast, and over his Image, and over his Mark, and over
the number of his name, stand on the Sea of glass, having the Harpes of GOD.

And they sing the Song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb,
saying; Great and marvelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true
are thy ways, thou King of Saints.

LONDON, Printed by William Iaggard, 1615.

TO THE TRVLY-Religious M. Crashavv, M. Milward, M. Dauyes, M. Heling, with
other worthy Citizens, my very good Friends.
GEntlemen, Because you have just occasion in your callings to deal often with
Merchandise, I have been bold to call you a little from your Temporal, to a
Spiritual Traffic: and have sent you a Christian Nauigatour, bound for the
Holy Land; who without question will give you some relations of his Trauells,
worthy two hours perusing. You shall find a whole Sea sailed through in a
short time; and that a large Sea, not a foot less then the World. You will
say, the description lies in a little volume: Why, you have seen the whole
world narrow'd up into a small Map. They that have been said, after many
years, at last to compass it, have not described all coasts and corners of
it. Even their silence has given succeeding generations hope to find out new
Lands; and you know, they have found them. You cannot expect more of two hours
discovery, then of seven years. I leave many things to be descried by others:
yet dare promise this, that I have given you some necessary directions for your
happiest voyage. Over this glassy Sea you must sail, you are now sailing.
Truth be your Card, and the Holy Ghost your Pilot. Your Course being well
directed, you cannot possibly make a happier journey. The Haven is before your
eyes, where your Savior sits with the hand of mercy wafting you to him. You
cannot be Sea-sicke, but he will comfort, and restore you. If the Tempest
comes, call on him with Peter, Lord save us; and he will rebuke the winds and
the Seas; they shall not hurt you. Storm and tempest, winds and waters obey his
voice. What Rocks, Gulfes, Swallows, and the danger (worse then that is called
the Terror of the Exchange, the Pyrate; one plague which the Devil has added
to the Sea, more then Nature gave it) of that great Leuiathan, Satan; and other
perils that may endanger you, are marked out. Decline them so well as you may;
and consider what Providence guides your course: this Sea is Before Gods
Throne. Keep you the Cape of good Hope in your eye: and what ever becomes of
this weak Vessel, your Body; make sure to save the Passenger, your Soul, in
the day of the Lord Jesus. What is here directed you, shall be faithfully
prayed for, by him

That unfeignedly desires your Salvation, Tho: Adams.

THE Spiritual Nauigator BOUND For the Holy Land.
Revel. Chap. 4. ver. 6. Before the Throne there was a Sea of Glass like unto
Crystal.
I Have chosen a member of the Epistle appointed by our Church to be read in
the celebration of this Feast to the most Sacred Trinity. There is One sitting
on the Throne, which is God the Father: on his right hand the Lamb which was
slain, only worthy to unseal the Book, which is God the Son: and seven
Lamps of fire burning before the Throne, the seauen-fold Spirit, which is God
the Holy Ghost. Vnus potentialiter, trinus personaliter. Which blessed Trinity
in Unity, and Unity in Trinity inspire me to speak, and you to hear. Amen.
Before the Throne etc.

The Revelation is a book of great depth; containing tot Sa^menta, quot verba;
as many wonders Ieron. Ep. Paulin.
as words, mysteries as sentences. There are other books of the Gospel; but
Bullinger calls this Librum euangelicissimum, the most Gospel-like In. Ipoc.
con. 61
book, a book of most happy consolation: delivering those euentuall comforts,
which shall successively and succesfully, accompany the Church unto the end of
the world. It presents, as in a perspectiue glass, the lamb of God guarding,
and regarding his Saints: and giving them triumphant victory over all his and
their enemies. The writings of S. John, as I have read it observed, are of
three sorts. He teaches in his Gospel especially Faith; in his Epistles
love; hope in his Revelation.

This last (as of great consolation, so) is of great difficulty. There is Manna
in the Arc, but who shall open it to us? Within the Sanctum Sanctorum there is
the Mercy-seate; but who shall draw the Curtain for us, pull away the veil?
Our Savior lies here; (not dead, but living) but who shall roll away the stone
for us; open a passage to our understanding? The impediment is not in Obiecto
percipiendo, but in Organo percipiendi; not in the object to be seen, but in
our organ or instrument of seeing it: not in the Sun, but in the dim
thicknes of our sight. God must say unto us, as the man of God spoke to Eli in
the name of Jehovah. 1. Sam. 2. Reuelando reuelaui etc. I have plainly
appeared unto the house of thy father.

For my own part, I purpofe not to plunge to the depth with the Elephant; but
to wade with the lamb in the shallowes: not to be ouer-ventrous in the
Apocalypse, as if I could reveal the Revelation: but briefly to report what
expositions others have given of this branch: and then gather some fruit from
it, for our own instruction and comfort. Being bold to say with S. Agustine,
whosoever hears me, vbi pariter certus est, pergat mecum; vbi pariter Lib. 1.
de Trin. cap. 3.
hasitat, quarat mecum; vbi errorem suum cognoscit, redeat ad me: vbi meum,
reuocet me. If he be certain with me, let him go on with me: if he doubt with
me, let him seek with me: if he find out his own error, let him come unto
me: if mine, let him recall me.

With purpose of avoiding prolixity, I have limited my self to this member of
the 6. ver. And before the Throne there was a sea of glass like unto
Crystal. I find hereof seven several expositions. I will lightly touch
them, and present them only to your view; then build upon the soundest.

1. Some expound this glassy and Chrystal-like Sea, of Contemplative men: so
Emanuel Sa. But I find this foundation so weak, that I dare not set any frame
of discourse on it.

2. Some conceive it to be an abundant understanding of the Truth; a happy and
excellent knowledge, given to the Saints; and that in a wonderful plentitude:
so Ambrose. Per mare historica, per vitrum moralis, per Chrystallinum
spiritualis intelligentia. By Sea is intended an historical knowledge; by
glass a moral; a spiritual and supernatural by Crystal.

3. Some understand by this glassy Sea-like Crystal, the Fullness of all
those gifts and graces, which the Church deriues from Christ. In him dwells all
fullness: yea so abundant is his oil of gladness, that it runs (as it
were) over the verges of his humane nature, unto the skirts of his clothing;
plentifully blessing his whole Church. Thus it is conceived by Brightman. As if
this mare vitreum were an antitype to that mare fusum: spoken of 1. Kings 7. 1
King. 7, 23.
this glassy sea, to that molten sea. Among other admirable works of that
heauen-inspired King. ver. 23. He made a molten sea, ten cubits from the one
brimme to the other: it was round all about, and his height was five cubits:
and a line of thirty cubits did compass it round about, etc. It contained two
ver 26.
thousand Baths. The end why it was made, and use for which it served, you
shall find, 2. Chron. 2. Chro. 1, 6.
4. The sea was for the Priests to wash in. Now this might well seem to
prefigure some great plenitude. For otherwise, for Aaron and his sons to wash
in, Exiguus aliquis vrceolus vel guttulus suffecisset: some cruet, basin, or
lauer might sufficiently have served.

4. Some intend this glassy sea, like to Crystal, to signify Coelum
Chrystallinum, the Chrystalline heaven: which they affirm to be next under
that heaven of heavens, where the eternal God keeps his Court, and sits in
his Throne. And somewhat to hearten the probability of this opinion; it is said
here, this Sea is before the Throne.

5. Some expositions give this sea for the Gospel. And their opinion is
probably deduced from the two attributes, Glassy and Chrystalline.

1. The first expresses perlucidam materiem, a bright and clear matter. Which
sets a difference betwixt that legal, and this Evangelical Sea. That was ex
aere constatum, which is densa et opaca materies: of molten brass, which was a
thick, duskish, and shaddowy matter; not penetrable to the sight. This is mare
vttreum, a Sea of glass; more clear, perspicable, and transparent. That was a
Sea of Brass, this of Glass. In which disparity this latter far transcends
the former. So that if David said, Psalm. 84. How amiable are thy Tabernacles,
oh Lord of Hosts! My soul longs, yea even faints for the Psalm 84, 1.
Courts of the Lord: speaking but of that Legal Sanctuary; Heb. 9, 1.
which was adorned with those Leuiticall Ordinances, and Typical Sacrifices:
How much more cause have we to rejoice with Peter and those two brethren,
Matthew 17. to see Jesus Christ transfigured in the Gospel: his face shining as
the Sun, Matthew 17, 1
and his raiment white as the light? Being not come to the Mount of terror,
full of blackness, and darkness, Heb. 1^, 18.
and tempest; whereat even Moses himself did exceedingly fear and quake. But
unto Mount Sion, unto the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and
to an innumerable company of Angels. ver. 22.
To the general assembly and Church of the first borne, which are written in
heaven, etc. The greater glory gives ^s the greater joy. For, says Saint Paul
2 Cor. 3, 9.
sweetly, If the ministration of condemnation be glory, much more does the
ministration of righteousness exceed in glory. They saw (Christum velatum, we
reuelatum) Christ shadowed in the law, we see him manifested in the Gospel.
Great, without controversy, is the 1 Timothy 3, 16
mystery of godliness: God manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit,
etc. They saw per fenestram, we sine medio: they darkely through the windows,
we without interposition of any cloud. Great then is the difference between
that figurative molten sea of brass, and this bright glassy sea of the Gospel.

This Glass lively represents to us our selves, and our Savior. Our selves
wicked and wretched, damnatos priusquam natos, condemned before we were borne:
sinful, sorrowful: cast down by our own fault, but never restore-able by
our own strength: without grace, without Christ, without hope, without God in
the world. Our Savior descending from Ephesians. 2, 12.
heaven to suffer for us; ascending to heaven to provide for us: discharging us
from hell by his sufferings, and interessing us to heaven by his
righteousness. Oh look in this blessed Glass, and Behold the Lamb of God
taking away the sin of the Ioh. 1, 29.
world. Look in it again, and behold all the spots and blemishes in your own
consciences: as you would discover to your eye any blot on your face, by
beholding it reflected in a material glass. See, contemplate, admire,
meditate your own misery, and your Saviors mercy, in this Glass presented.

2. Chrystalline is the other attribute: which is not idem significans, but
plenioris, nec non planioris virtutis: not signifying the same thing, but of a
fuller and plainer virtue, or demonstration. Chrystallum est quasi expers color
is, accedens proxime ad puritatem aeris. Crystal is described to be (as it
were void of color, as coming next to the simple purity of the air. Now as
the other attribute takes from the Gospel al obscurity: so this takes from it
all impurity. There is no humane inventions, carnal traditions, or
will worship mixed with this Sea: it is pure as Crystal. Abundant plagues shall
be added to him, that shall add to this Book: and Reave. 22, 18.
his part shall be taken away out of the book of life, that shall
sacrilegiously take ought from it.

Let me say: God beholds us through this Crystal, Jesus Christ; and sees
nothing in us lean, lame, polluted, or ill-fauour'd. What ever our own
proper, and personal inclinations and inquinations have been, this tralucent
Crystal, the merits and righteousness of our Savior presents us pure in the
eyes of God. Through this Crystal Christ himself beholds his Church; and
then says: Thou art all fair, my Love, there is no spot in thee. Cant. 4, 7.


6. There is a sixth opinion. Some by this glassy and Chrystall-sea, conceived
to be meant Baptism. Prefigured by that Red sea. Exodus 14. To which red sea
Paul alludes in the point of Baptism. 1. Cor. 10. I would not have you
ignorant, how that all our fathers 1 Cor. 10, 1, 2.
were under the Cloud, and al passed through the Sea. And were al baptized unto
Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea. Of this mind are Augustine. Tractat. 11.
in Ioh. Rupertus. Euthymius.

The accordance of the Type and Antitype stands thus. As none of the children
of Israel entered the terrestrial Canaan, but by passing the red Sea: so
ordinarily, no Christian enters the celestial Canaan, but through this glassy
Sea. The Lauer of regeneration is that Sea, wherein we must all wash. Verily,
verily, I say unto thee: (He said so, that could tell; and he doubles his
asseueration) except a man be borne of water and of the spirit, he cannot
enter into the John 3, 5.
kingdom of God. Ordinarily, no man comes to heaven dry-shod: he must wade
through this ford. The Minister must irrigare. 1 Cor. 3. John Baptist must
power on water: and Christ must Christen us with the Holy Ghost and with fire.
There must be a Matthew 3, 11
washed body, a cleansed conscience. This is that the Apostle calls pure water.
Heb. 10. Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith,
having Heb. 10, 22.
our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with Pure
water. So let us draw near: without this no daring to approach the Throne of
grace. Through this Sea we must all sail, the Holy Ghost being our Pilot, the
word of God our Compass; or how should we think to land at the haven of
heaven!

7. Lastly others affirm, that by this glassy Sea is meant the World. So
Bullinger, etc. This being the most general and most probable opinion, on it I
purpose to build my subsequent discourse. A special reason to induce me, (as I
think, the best light to understand the Scripture is taken from the Scripture:
and as God best understands his own meaning, so he expounds it to us by
conferring places difficult with semblable of more facility) I derive from
Revel. 15. verse 2. I saw as it were a Sea of glass mingled with fire, and
they that had gotten the victory Revel. 15, 2.
over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and over the number of
his name, stand on the sea of glass, having the harpes of God. Where the
Saints having passed the dangers of the glassy sea, all the perils and terrors
of this brittle and slippery World: and now setting their triumphant feet on
the shores of happiness; they sing a victorious song. Great and marvelous are
thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways, thou King of
Saints. Praising God with harpes and voices for their safe waftage over the sea
of this World.

Now for further confirmation of this opinion, in the 3. verse, the exultation
which they sing, is called the song of Moses the servant of God. So that it
seems directly to answer in a sweet allusion, to the delivery of Israel from
the Egyptians. At what Exodus 14.
time the divided waters of the red sea gave them way; standing up as a wall
on their right hand, and a wall on their left; and that so long, till the
little ones, and the women with child might pass over dry-shod. But at last
returning to their old course, swallowed up their pursuers. Immediately hereon,
Exodus 15. Moses and all Israel turning back to behold the Egyptians drowned
in the sea, or floting on the waves, whiles themselves stood secure on dry
land; they sung a song to the LORD. The Children of Israel having passed the red sea, sing a song to the LORD: the children of GOD having past the glassy
sea sing a song also; and this latter song is called by the name of that first,
even the song of Moses.

So that the Analogy stands thus. 1. The red sea was a type of this glassy
sea, the World. 2. The old Israelites of the new and true Israelites, the
Faithful. 3. The Egyptians of all wicked persecutors and enemies of Gods
Church. 4. Canaan the Land of promise, of Heaven the Land of purchase, which
Christ bought for us at so great a price. Our Adversaries like theirs, our
dangers like theirs, our waftage like theirs: but the Country we sail to, far
transcends that earthly Canaan. That did but flow with milk and honey for a
time: this with infinite joy, and illimited glory for ever. Against this
construction it is objected.

1. This Sea is before the Throne: how can the World be so said? Answ.
Properly: to show that all things in the World are not subject to fortune, but
governed by Him that sits on the Throne.

2. The world is rather thick and muddie: how can it be called Crystal?
Answ. Fitly: not in regard of the own nature; for so it is polluted: but
respectu Intuentis, in regard of God that beholds it: who sees all things done
in it so clearly, as in Crystal.

The Allegory then gives the World 1. for a Sea. 2. for a Sea of glass. 3.
Like to Crystal. 4. Lastly, it is before the Throne. Two of the
circumstances concern the world in thesi, two in hypothesi. It is described
taliter and totaliter: simply, and in reference. Simply, what it is in it
self. In reference, what it is in respect of God. The world is In regard of it
self a Sea. A Sea, for Tempestuousness. Sea of Glass. A Sea of Glass, for
Brittlenesse. In regard of God Like Crystal: for Gods eye to see all things
in it. Before the Throne: subject to Gods governance.

A Sea.
The World is not a material, but a Mystical Sea. Time was, that the whole
world was a Sea. Genesis 7. The waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth, and
Gen 7. 19, 20.
all the high hills, that were under the whole Heaven, were covered. Fifteen
Cubits upward did the waters prevail, and the Mountains were covered. As a
Poet according with the Scripture:

Omnia Pontus erant, deerant quoque littora Ponto. All was a Sea, and that sea
had no shores. The Deluge of sin is no less now, then was the^ the deluge of
Waters. The flood of wickedness brought that flood of vengeance. If their
souls had not been first drowned, their bodies had not been overwhelmed. The
same ouer-flowing of iniquity shall at last drown the world in fire.

The World may be very fitly compared to the Sea in many concurrences.

1. The Sea is an unquiet Element, a fuming and foming beast, which none but
the Makers hand can bridle. Math. 8. What manner of man is this, that even
Math. 8, 27.
the Winds and the Sea obey him? The world is in full measure as unruly. It is
the Lord that stilleth the noise of the Seas, the roaring of their waves, and
the tumult Psalm. 65: 7.
of the people. Where the Psalmist matcheth roaring waves, and roaring men: the
raging of the Sea with the madness of the world. And yet God is able to still
them both. The Prophet calls the Sea a raging creature, and therein yoakes it
with the wicked. The wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest,
whose waters cast up mire and dirt. Esaias 57, 20.


Vna Eurusque Notusque ruunt, creberque procellis ^ncid. 1.

Affricus, et vastos tollunt ad littora fluctus.
Yet the Lord gathers the waters of the sea together as an heap: and lays
up the depth in storehouses. Hear God himself speak to this boystrous
Element. Psalm 33, 7.
Job. 38. Hitherto shall thou come, but no further: and here shall thy proud
waves be stayed: Let me say truly of God, what Pliny of Nature, in this
Element. Hic ipsa se Natura vincit numerosis modis. God, who is marvelous in
all his ways, wonderful in all his works; is in the Sea most wonderfully
wonderful. It is called Aequor, quasi minime aequum: so (I think) the World
mundus, quasi minime mundus. Sometime Fretum a fremitu; of a boisterous and
troublesome nature. The World is full of molesting vexations, no less then
the Sea.

1. Sometimes it swells with Pride, as the Sea with waves; which David says,
mount up to heaven. Behold that Babilonian Lucifer, saying, I will exalt Psalm
107.
my throne above the stars of God. I will ascend above Esa. 14, 13, 14
the heights of the Clouds: I will be like the most High. Pride is haughty, and
walks with a stretched out neck, Esaias 3, 16.
and with an elevated head: as if at every step it could knock out a star
in heaven. Especially the proud man, like the Sea, swells if the Moon inclines,
if his Mistress grace him.

2. Vaineglory is the wind, that raises up the billows of this Sea. The off
spring of the revived Genesis 11.
world are erecting a turret, whose battlements were meant to threaten heaven.
Did they it in an holy ambition of such neighborhood? No: they loved not
heaven so well. Did they it for security upon earth? Neither: for Feriunt
summos fulgura montes; the nearer to heaven, the more subject to thunder,
lightning, and those higher inflammations of heaven. VVheras Procul a love,
procul a fulmine, was the old saying: Far from Jupiter, far from his thunder.
Their purpose was only glory in this world. And as the Psalmist says, that
the wind raises the billows of the sea. He commands and raises the stormy
wind: which lifts up the waves thereof. So Ambition was Psalm. 107, 25.
the wind, that reared those waves and walls of pride.

3. The World like the sea, is blew with envy, liuid with malice. It is the
nature of worldlings to ouer-vexe themselves at the succesfull fortunes of
others. God must do nothing for another man, but his evil eye thinks himself
wronged. He repines at that shower, which falls not on his own ground. The
pretions balmes distilled from heaven on neighbors break the malicious man's
head. He has in him no honesty, but especially wants an honest eye. He wounds
himself to see others healed. Neither are the blows, he gives his own soul,
transient flashes, or lashes that leave no impression behind them: but marks
that he carries with him to his grave: a lean, macilent, affamished body; a
soul self beaten black and blew.

4. Sometimes it boyles with wrath: and herein the world and the sea are very
semblable. A mad and impatient element it is; how unfit to figure man! Ye^ such
is his indignation; if in the rage and fury of the sea there be not more mercy.

There is a time when the sea cease from her raging: but the turbulent
perturbations of this passion in the world continue without remission or
interruption. The angry man is compared to a Ship sent into the sea quae
Daemonem habet gubernator^m; which has the Devil for the Pilot. Ira mortalium
debet esse mortalis. The anger of mortal man should Lactant.
be mortal, like himself. But we say of many, as Va^er. Max. of Sylla: It is
a question, whether they or their anger dye first: or whether death preuents
them both together. If you look into this troubled Sea of anger, and desire to
see the Image of a man: behold, you find fiery eyes, a faltring tongue, gnashing
teeth, a heart boiling in brine, and drying up the moisture of the flesh; till
there be scarce any part lest of his right composition. The tumultuous rage of
the world so reekes with these passions, that the company of those men is as
ominous and full of evil bodings, as the foming Sea.

5. The Sea is not more deep then the World. A bottomless subtlety is in men's
hearts, and an honest man wants a plummet to sound it. Policy and Piety have
parted company; and it is to be feared, they will hardly ever meet again. He
is counted a shallow fellow, that is, as the Scripture commends Jacob, a plain
man, dwelling in tents. New devices, tricks, plots, and stratagoms are only in
Genesis 25, 27
request. Do you not know the reason hereof? The world is a Sea; and in this
Sea is plaine-dealing drowned.

6. There is foming luxury in this Sea: a corrupt and stinking froth, which the
world casts up. The steame of lust in this mare mortuum fumes perpetually;
poisons the air we breathe; and like a thick fogge, rises up to heaven, as
if it would exhale vengeance from above the clouds. This spumy foam is on the
surface of the world, and runs like a white leprosy over the body of it.
Commend the world, ye affecters and affected of it: there is a foam that
spoils the beauty. Praise it no further then Naaman was, 2. King. 5. He was
Captain of the host of the King of Syria, a great man with his 2 King. 5, 1.
master, and honorable, because the Lord by him had given deliverance to
Syria: He was also a mighty man in valor, but he was a Leaper. There is a
blurre in the end of the Encomium: a blanke in the Catastrophe: a prickle under
the rose. But he was a leaper. This veruntamen marres all. The world you say,
is spaciosus, speciosus; beautiful, bountiful; rich, delightful: But it is
leprous. There is a Sed to it: a filthy some that defiles it.

7. The world, as the Sea, is a swallowing Gulf. It deuoures more then the Sea
of Rome: yea, and will devour that to at last. It swallows those that swallow
it: and will triumph one day with insultation over the hugest Cormorants, whose
gorges have been long ingurgitated with the world; In visceribus meis sunt:
They are all in my bowels. The Gentleman has swallowed many a poor man: the
Merchant swallows the Gentleman: and at last this Sea swallows the Merchant.
There are four great deuourers in the world, Luxury, Pride, Gluttony,
Covetousness. The Prophet I^l speaks of four horrible destroyers. That which
the Palmer worm Joel. 1, 1.
has left, has the Locust eaten: that which the Locust has left, has the
Canker-worme caten: and that which the Canker-worme has left, has the
Caterpiller eaten. The Palmer is Luxury: the Locust Pride: the Canker Gluttony:
and you all know that the Caterpiller is Covetousness. Luxury, like the
Palmer, swallows much in the world: that which luxury leaves unspent, Pride
the locust deuoures: the scraps of Pride, the Canker Gluttony eats, and the
fragments of all the former, the Caterpiller Covetousness soon dispatcheth.
These be the worlds four widethroated Swallowers.

These circumstances have demonstrated (the first instance of this comparison)
the tumultuous turbulency of the world. There be many other resemblances of it
to the Sea.

2. Mare amarum. The Sea is bitter, and therefore called the sea. A quo
dominatio, denominatio. The waters thereof are also salt and brinish. Al
demonstrates the world to have an unsavory relish. So it has truly; whether
we respect the works or the pleasures of it.

The works of this sea are the waters of Marah. Exodus 15. If we be true
Israelites, when we come to the waters of this Marah, we cannot drink of the
waters Exodus 15, 23.
of Marah; for they are bitter. The works of the world have an unsavory
relish. Would you know what they are? Ask S. John. All that is in the world,
1 John 2, 16.
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of
the Father, but is of the world. Haec tria pro trino Numine mundus habet. Ask
S. Paul. Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, Idolatry, Gal. 5,
19.
witch craft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies,
enuyings, murders, drunkenness, reuellings: These opera tenebrarum are bitter
works: branches springing from that root, which bears gall and wormwood.
Deuteronomy. 29. Sour and Deuteronomy 29, 18.
wild grapes which the soul of God abhors. As the good Simon told the bad
Simon. Act. 8. Thou art Acts 8, 23.
in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity.

Nay even the delights of the world are bitter, sour, and unsavory. For if
medio de font leporum, there hap not surgere amari aliquid; yet know thou
not, it will be bitterness in the end? Rejoice, oh young man, Eccle. 11, 9.
in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee, etc. But know thou, that for all
these things, God will bring thee into judgment. It may be honey in the Palate,
it is gal in the bowels. Job. 20. Though wickedness be sweet in his Job. ^0,
12.
mouth, though he hide it under his tongue: Though he spare it, and forsake it
not, but keep it still within his mouth. Yet his meat in his bowels is turned,
it is the gall of Aspes within him. He that swims in a full sea of riches, and
is borne up with whole floods of delights, is but like a Sumpter-horse, that
has carried the Trunkes all day, and at night his treasure is taken from him,
and himself turned into a foul stable; perhaps with a galled back. The rich
worldling is but a hired Porter, that carries a great load of wealth on his
weary back all his day, till he groan under it: at night, when the Sun of his
life sets, it is taken from him; and he is turned into a foul stable, a
squallid grave: perchance with a galled shoulder, a raw and macerated
conscience.

Say, the delights of this world were tollerably sweet; yet eue^ this makes
them bitter, that the sweetest joys of eternity are lost by ouer-louing them.
There was a Roman, that in his will bequeathed a Legacy of a hundred Crowns
to the greatest fool. The Executors inquiring in the City for such a one,
were directed to a Nobleman, that having left his own fair revenues, Manors
and manners, became a Hog-heard. All men consented, that he was the greatest
fool. If such a Legacy were now given, the Heirs need not trouble
themselves in scrutiny: there be fools enough to be found every where: even so
many, as there be worldlings: that refusing the honors of heaven, and the
riches of glory, turn Hog-keepers, nay rather Hogs; rooting in the earth,
and eating husks.

But how bitter, saltish, and unsavory soever the Sea is, yet the Fishes that
swim in it, exceedingly like it. The World is not so distasteful to the
heavenly palate, as it is sweet to the wicked. Who have learned, though with
that woe and curse. Esa. 5. To call good evil, and evil good; bitter sweet,
and Esaias 5, 20.
sweet bitter. They strip themselves to adorn it, as the Israelites did for
the Golden Calfe; and so adorned, adore it with devoted hearts. It is their
Baal, their Idol, their God. Alas! it is no God; more like, they will find it
a Devil. M. Fox in his Martyrologie has a story of the men of Cockeram in
Page 1404.
Lancashire. By a threatening command from Bon^r, they were charged to set up a
Rood in their church: accordingly they compounded with a Caruer to make it.
Being made, and erected, it seems it was not so beautiful as they desired it;
but with the harsh visage thereof scared their children. (And what should a
R^od serve for, but to please children and fools?) Hereupon they refused to
pay the Caruer. The Caruer complains to the Justice. The Justice well
examining and understanding the matter, answers the Townsmen. Go to, pay the
workman; pay him: and get you home, and mark your Roode better. If it be not
well-fauoured enough to make a God of; it is but clapping a pair of horns
on it, and it will serve to make an excellent Devil. So add but your
superstitious dotage, covetous oppressions, and racking extortions to the
World, whereby you gore poor men's sides, and let out their heart-blouds: and
though it be no God to comfort, you shall find it Devil enough to confound.
The world then is extremely bitter in digestion, what ever it be at the first
relish.

Well yet, as salt and bitter as this Ocean the world is, there is some good
wrought out of this ill. That supreme and infinite goodness deswades his
Children from affecting it, by their experienced tartness of it. So the Nurse
embitters the dugge, when she would weane the Infant. How easily had Solomon
been drowned in this Sea, had he not perceived the distastfulnesse? when his
understanding and sense concludes, All is vexations his affections must needs
begin to abhor it. Gods lets his look into the world, as some go to Sea, to
be Sea-sicke: that finding by experience, what they would not credit by
relation, they may loath this troublesome world, and long to be in the Land of
Promise. He that once thoroughly feels the turbulencie of the Sea, will love the
^ry land, the better whiles he lives. Our better spiritual health is not
seldom wrought, by being first Sea-sicke, disquieted with the worlds
vexations. Salt water has sometimes done as much good as sweet: hard things,
as soft: as stones, as well as cotton, are good casting for a hawke. The
crudities of sin in David's soul were vomited up by a draught of this bitter
water. That profuse Son would have been a longer stranger to his Fathers
house; if the Luke 15.
World had not put him to a Hogs diet. Peter no sooner sees the billow, but
he eiaculates to Christ, a short but substantial prayer, Lord, save me.

For this cause is the world made to us so full of afflictions. Christ
promises to give a reward, but not to take away persecutions. Blessed are
they, which are persecuted for righteousness sake: for theirs is the Math. 5, 10.
Kingdom of heaven. He does not subtract all suffering, but adds a
recompense, God does so mingle, and compound, and make them both of one
indifferency and relish: that we can scarce distinguish which is the meat,
and which the sauce; both together norishing our spiritual health. You see the
alike distastfulnes of the world and sea. This is the second resemblance.

3. The sea does cast forth her dead fishes; as if it labourd to purge it self
of that which annoyes it: giving only contentfull solace and nutriment to
those that naturally live in it. So does the world; co^tending to spew out
those that are dead to it. 1. Cor. 4. We are made as the filth of the world,
and the offscouring of all things unto this day. No marvel if she pukes 1 Cor.
4, 13.
when we lie on her stomach. A body inured to poisons, grows sick and queasie
at the receipt of wholesome nourishment. Ioh. 15. If ye were of the world, the
world would love his own. But because you are not John 15, 19.
of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world
hates you. Not a piece of the world, but all the world. Math. 10. You shall be
hated Math. 10, 22.
of all men for my name sake.

The godly are indeed the very health of the world. The Family thriues the
better, that Joseph but serves in. The City is forborne so long as Lot is in
it. The whole world stands for the Elects sake. And if their number were
accomplished, it should be delivered to the fire. Yet: oh strange! Eliah is
said to trouble Israel: and the Apostles are thrust out of Cities for turbulent
fellows. But says Ambros. Turbatur illa nauis, in qua Judas fuit. The Ship
was troubled wherein Judas was. Christ was in a Ship with the other Apostles,
without Judas: behold the winds are still, the sea is calm, the Ship safe.
Christ was in a Ship with Judas amongst the rest, and Turbatur illa nauis: the
wind blusters, the waves rore, and a tempest endangers the vessel to ruin.

Benefit multis ex societate boni. One goodman does much good to many. He is
not only as manacles to the hands of God, to hold them from the defulmination
of judgments; but is also a happy prevention of sin. He keeps God from being
angry: he calmes him, when he is angry. A godly man is like David's Harp; he
chaseth away the evil spirit from the company: and he does (as it were)
conjure the Devil. For in his presence, (as if he could work miracles)
Impudence grows ashamed, ribaldry appears chaste, drunkenesse is sober,
blasphemers have their lips sealed up, and the mouth of all wickedness is
stopped. This good comes by the good.

Yet because they are dead to the world, it casts them out. So the Gergesites
did cast Christ out of their borders. Math. 8. So the Pharisees did cast the
Convert that was born blind, out of their Synagogue. Ioh. 9. So the Antiochians
did cast Paul and Barnabas John 9, 34. Acts 13, 50
out of their coasts. Act. 12. Like Confectioners, that throw away the juice of
the Orenges, and preserve only the rindes: or as certain Chemists, that cast
all good extractions to the ground, and only make much of the poison. But if
you will not be picked up of the world, you must adhere close to it, and with
alimental congruence please his stomach. Will you go to the Court? you must be
proud, or you shall be despised. Will you to the city? you must be subtle, or you
shall be cheated. Will you to the Country? you must partake of their ignorant
and blind dotage, and join in their vicious customs, or you shall be
rejected. If you live in the world, and not as the world, this Sea will spew
you up, as too holy for their company. But let'hem. For God forbid that I
should glory, save in the Cross of Galath. 6, 14.
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the
world.

4. The Sea is no place to continue in. No man sails there to sail there: but
as he propounds to his purpose a voyage, so to his hopes a return. You hold
him a prisoner, that is shut up in close walls; the door of egresse barred
against him. He is no less a Prisoner, (though his Iaile be as large as the
Sea) that must not set his foot on dry ground. The banks and shores be his
prison walls: and although he has room enough for his body, he is narrow'd up
in his desires. He finds bondage in liberty: the one half of the earth is but
his prison; and he would change his walk for some little Island.

The world in like sort, is no place to dwell in for ever. Selfe-flattering
fools, that so esteem it. Psalm. 49. Their inward thought is, that their
houses Psalm. 49, 11.
shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations:
therefore they call their lands after their own names. As if the Sea were for
mansion, not for transition. It was a glorious piece of the world, which
ravished Peter desired to build Tabernacles on: Math. 17. yet it was perishable
earth; and it might not be granted. Heaven only has mansions. Ioh. John 14, 2.
14. (In my Fathers house there are many mansions; all the world else is but of
tottering Tabernacles.) And immobile regnum. Heb. 12. a kingdom that cannot be
shaken; when all the kingdoms and Principalities Heb. 1^, 28.
of the earth shall be ouerturned. This world then only is for waftage.

There is one Sea to all men common, but a different home. We are all in this
world either Strangers 1 Peter 2, 11.
or Straglers. The godly are strangers. 1. Pet. 2. Dearly beloved, I beseech
you as Pilgrims and strangers, abstain from fleshly lusts which fight against
the soul. So that aged Patriarch acknowledged to the Egyptian King. Few and
evil have the dates of thy servant been in his Pilgrimage. In that true
golden legend of the Saints, it is said of them. They confessed Heb. 11, 13.
that they were strangers and Pilgrims on the earth. The wicked are straglers
too; and howsoever conentur figere pedes, and to take their portion in this
life. Psalm. Psalm. 17, 14. Acts 1, 25.
17. yet they must, with Judas, to their own home. We grow upward, they go
forward, to heaven or hell, every man to his own place. Let the rich man
promise his soul a Requiem here. Lu. 12. 20. Let the Atheistical Cardinal of
Bourbon prefer his part in Paris to his part in Paradise: yet the sea is not
to be dwelt on: It is but for waftage, not for perpetuity of habitation. This
is the fourth Resemblance.

5. The Sea is full of dangers. To discuss the perils of the sea belongs
rather to the capacity of a Mariner, then of a Divine. I will only apprehend
so much, as may serve to exemplisie this dangerous world.

1. The Sea is one of those fearful elements, wherein there is no mercy. Oh
that the world had but so much mercy, as might exempt and discharge it of this
comparison. But if we take the world for the wicked of the world, we read that
the very mercies of the wicked are cruel.

2. There be Pirates in the Sea. Alas! but a handful to that huge army of them
in the world. Take a short view of them from our most excellent Postillist.
Fury fights against us, like a mad Turk. Fornication, like a treacherous Ioab;
in kisses, it kills. Drunkenness is the maister-gunner, that gives fire to all the
rest. Gluttony may stand for a Corporal; Avarice for a Pioner; Idleness for a
Gentleman of a company. Pride must be C^ptaine.

But the Arch. Pyrate of all is the Devil; that huge Leuiathan, that takes his
pleasure in this sea. Psa. 104. And his pastime is, to sink the fraught of
those Merchants, that are laded with holy traffic for heaven. Can thou draw
out this Leuiathan with an Job. 41, 1, 2.
hook? or his tongue with a cord which thou letst down? Can thou put a hook
into his nose, or bore his iaw th^rough with a thorn? Historians speak of a
fish that is a special, and oft-preuailing enemy to this Whale; called by some
Vihuella, or the Sword-fish. The most powerful thing to overcome this
mystical Leuiathan, is the sword of the Spirit: which to be seconded with the
temporal sword of the Magistrate is of singular purpose. Whiles neither of
these swords are drawn against this Pyrate, and his malignant rabble; no
marvel, if they make such massacres on the sea of this world. Let the red
Dragon alone, and whilst himself comes tumbling down from heaven, he will
draw down many stars with his tail.

3. There be Rocks in the sea; which if a skillful Pilote avoid not warily, he
may soon have his vessel dashed in pieces. How many Ships have been thus cast
away! How many Merchants hopes thus split? They call their vessels by many
prosperous names: as the Success, the Good speed, the Triumph, the Safeguard;
How vain does one Rock prove all these titiles! The Rocks of our Marine world
are Persecutions and offenses: which lie as thick, as those fiery serpents in
the wilderness, with their venomous and burning stings. Numb. 21. Christ's cause
and Christ's cross go most commonly together: and who shall be sooner offended
then his little ones? All that will live god^y in 2. Tim. 3, 12.
Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. As if it were a fatal kind of
destiny to them, not to be euaded. Woe Math. 18, (...).
unto the world, because of offenses; says He that is able to execute
vengeance upon his adversaries. It must needs be that offenses come: but woe be
to that man by whom the offense comes. It were better for him, that with a
Mil-stone hung about his neck, he were drowned in the depth of the material
Sea: as his soul has been already drowned in this mystical Sea of
wickedness. Well, put the worst: if these Rocks do shatter us, if these
pensecutions shall splitte the Bark of our life, yet this be our comfort: our
death is not Mors but immortalitas: not a death, but an entrance to life
incapable of dying. Rocks in the Sea undo many a Merchant; these Rocks
euentually make us happy: and often we have just cause to take up that saying.
Perieramus, nisi perijssemus; we had been undone, had we not been undone.

4. Besides Rocks, in the sea there be also gulfes. In the Sicilian sea there
is Scylla, a great Rock: and Charybdis, a place of dangerous swallows:
whereout was drawn that proverb. Incidit in Scyllam, cupiens vitare
Charybdim. Mystically, in this world there are not only Rocks of
persecutions, but gulfes and swallows of Errors and Heresies. Let us beware,
lest avoiding the one, we be devoured of the other. There is a perilous Gulf
in the Roman sea: (too too many of our nation have found it.) Dangerous
swallows about Amsterdam. It is good to fly from the Gulf of superstition;
but withal to avoid the swallow of separation. It is ill turning either to
the right hand or to the left: mediocrity is the safest way. When Opinion goes
before us, it is a great question, whether Truth will follow us. Straggling
Dinahs seldom return, but ravished home. Singularity in conceits concerning
matters of Religion, are as perilous as to follow a plurality or multitude in
evil customs. A man may perish as easily in the faire-colour'd waters of
heresy, as in the mudde of iniquity. What matters it, whether thou be drowned
in fair water or foul, so thou be drowned. Beware of these gulfes and
swallows.

5. There be Straites in the sea of this world: those of Magellan or
Giberaltare are less dangerous. The hard exigents of hatred, obloquie, exile,
penury, misery: difficult Straites, which all sea. faring Christians must
pass by to the Haven of bliss. Pirates that care not which way they direct
their course, but only watch to rob and spoil, are not bound to these
passages. So worldlings, that never aim or intend for heaven, but to ballace
themselves with the wealth of the world, from whomsoever, good or bad: or
howsoever, by fair means or foul, they attain it; may keep the broad
Ocean, and have sea-roome enough. For broad is the way of destruction, Matthew.
7.
and many there be that keep it. But the godly are bound for the Coast, that
lies upon the Cape of Bona Speranza, and they must of necessity pass through
these Straights. Strait and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few
there be that find it. But if, like those Argo-nautae, we will sail for the
Golden fleece of joy and happiness, we must be (militantes inter fluctus)
content with hard Passages. It is our solid comfort, (as it was fabled of that
Ship, that it was made a star in heaven) that we shall be one day, (inter
syderatriumphantes) stars fixed in the right hand of God; and shining for ever
in glory. This is the fifth danger of our mystical sea; straights.

6. There be Sirens in the Sea of this world. Sirens? Hirens, as they are now
called. Those in the material Sea are described to have in their upper parts
the proportion or beauty of women: downwards they are squalid and pernicious.
Virgo form^sa superne, Decidit in turpem piscem. They inchant men with their
voices: and with sweet songs labor sopire nautas, sopitos demergere, to lull
the Mariners asleep, and sleeping to sink and drown them. What a number of
these Sirens, Hirens, Cockatrices, Courteghians, in plain English Harlots
swim amongst us, happy is it for him that has only heard, and not been
infected.

Their faces, and their voices promise joy and iollity; their effects are only
to drown and shipwreck men's fortunes, their credites, their lives, their
souls. A Book called Opus tripartitum speaks of the Storkes; that if they
catch one Storke leaving his own mate, and coupling with another, they all
fall upon him, and spoil him of his feathers and life to. But as if this sin
were grown a virtue by custom among us, there are not wanting, who knowing
the judgment of God (that they which commit such Romans 1, 32.
things, are worthy of death) not only do the same, but have pleasure in them
that do them. If in Authority subordinate to inferior Magistrates (the
persuasion of my heart excuses the higher powers; and the impartial
proceedings of the truly Reverend and godly Prelates of this land testify it)
there were not some conniuence, (God forbid Patronizing) of these enormities
for some sinister respects: the Sirens about our River of Thames should be (if
not sent swimming to Graues-end, yet at least) taken in at Bridewell stairs.

Perhaps a poor man incontinent may smart for it; but how often dares an
Apparitor knock at a Great-mans gate? If Lust comes under the rank of
Honorable, or Worshipful, who dares tax it? But let as many as would be one
Spirit with the Lord Jesus, hate to be one flesh with a Siren. It is recorded 1
Cor. 6.
of Ulysses, that he stopped his ears to the incantations of these Sirens; and
having put the rest under the hatches, bound himself to the Mast; to prevent
the power of their tempting witch-crafts. Ulysses was held a wise man: sure
then they are no less then fools, that prove and approve their charms. No
man loves a Gally-pot for the paint, when he knows there is poison in it. I
end in the Epigram of a modern Poet. Si renum cupis inco^mem seruare salutem,
Sirenum cantus effuge, sanus eris.


7. Another peril in this mystical Sea is the frequencie of tempests. Some
have tempestuous looks, as Laban. Genesis 31. Some tempestuous hands, as
Samballat. Nehem. 4. to hinder the building of Jerusalem. Innumerable have
tempestuous tongues, as Ishmael, Shimei, Rabshakeh. Such tempests have been
often raised from the vapor of a malicious breath, that whole Kingdoms have
been shaken with it. Master Fox mentions in his Book of Martyrs, that one
in the street crying fire, fire; the whole assembly Page 1180.
in S. Mary's in Oxford at one Mallary's Recantation, presumed it in the
Church. Insomuch, that some labored at the doors, where through the crowd of
many, not one could pass: some stuck in the windores: al imagined the very
Church on fire, and that they felt the very molten lead drop on their heads:
whereas all was but a false fire; there was no such matter. In like sort
scandalous slanders, and inuectiue contumelies begin at a little breach, one
calumnious tongue; and get such strength, like mutiners which marching forward,
that the world soon rises in an uproar. These are called by Ambrose,
Procellae mundi. And what world-faring Christian has escaped these storms! But
says Epictetus. Si recte facis, quid eos vereris, qui non recte reprehendunt?
If thou do rightly, why should thou fear them that blame wrongfully? Do
well, and be happy, though thou hear ill. This is another danger, Tempests.

8. There is yet a last peril in the Sea; which is the fish Remora. A fish^ as
it is described of no magnitude, about a cubit in length; yet for strength able
to stay a Ship. It is recorded, that Caius Caesar's Galley was stayed by this
fish.

There are many Remora's in this world, that hinder the good speed of Christian
endeavors. Would Herod hear and obey John Baptists preaching? He has a Remora
that hinders him, Herodias. Would Nicodemus feign come to Christ? Fear of the
Jews is his Remora. Would Paul come to Thessalonica? The Devil is his Remora.
We would have come to you once and again, but Satan hindered us. Yea even 1 Thessalonians. 2, 18.
does Christ Jesus purpose in his infinite mercy to suffer for us, and
pre-acquaint his Apostles with it? Even Peter will be his Remora. Master
favor thy Math. 16, 22
self. This shall not be unto thee. Has that forward young man any good mind
to follow Christ? The parting with his goods to the poor is his Remora. Would
you have him that is rich follow poverty?

Such are our Remora's now; that hang upon our arms, like Lots wife, deswading
our departure from Sodom. Are we invited to Christ's Supper, the Gospel? Some
Oxen, or Farms, or a wives idleness, the pleasures of the flesh retards us.
Some business of our own is a Remora to Gods business. Are we called to
speak in the Truths cause boldly? The awefull presence of some great man is
our Remora, we dare not. Does our consciences prompt us to parle for the
restoring of the Churches right? Our own Impropriations, and the easy gain
of the tenth of our neighbors goods, are a Remora, we cannot. Are we exhorted
in the name of JESUS CHRIST, for Gods mercy to us, to show mercy to his; to
feed the hungry, succor the weak, relieve the poor, and make us friends of
our unrighteous Mammon by charity? Alas! the world, covetous desire of gain
is our Remora; we must not. Tell the Covetous man, that he is not Gods
Treasurer, but his Steward; and blame him for perverting the end of his
Factor-ship; there is a Devil plucks him by the sleeue, thirst of gain, God
he confesses his Master; but the world his Mistrisse. If you ask him, why
he does not in charitable deeds obey his Master; he answers, his Mistress will
not let him.

Would the young man repent? his harlot steps forth, and like a Remora, stays
his course. Let a Sermon touch a man's heart, and begin remorse in him, that he
purpose reformation; good fellowship, like a Remora, stops him. Yea, let a man
in an age, (for rare are the birds that drop such feathers) erect Hospitals:
Piety and devotion shall meet with some Remora's, that would overthrow them.
You hear the dangers of the sea of the world; the fifth circumstance of this
Comparison.

6. In the sea there be (...), fishes that eat up fishes: so in the world
(...), men that eat up men. Psalm. 14. Have all the workers of iniquity no
knowledge? who eat up my people Psalm 14, (...).
as they eat bread. Hab. 1. The wicked man deuoureth the righteous. Thou
make men as the fishes of the Sea. The labors of the poor, even his whole
heritage is worn upon the proud man's back, or swallowed down into his belly.
He racks rents, wrings out fines, extorteth, inhaunceth, improueth,
impouerisheth, oppresses; till the poor Tenant, his wife, and children cry
out for bread: and behold, all buys him scarce a suit of clothes; he eats and
drinks it at one feast.

Oh the shrill cry of our Land for this sin, and the loud noise it makes in
the ears of the Lord of Hoasts! The Father is dead, that kept good hospitality
in the Country: and the Gallant, his son must live in London; where if he
want the least superfluity, that his proud heart desires: (and how can he but
want in the infinite pride of that City?) He co^mits all to a hard Steward: who
must wrings the last drop of blood from the Tenants hearts; before the
Landlord must want the least cup to his drunkenness, the least toy to his
wardrobe.

If this be not to eat, swallow, devour men, blood and bones, then the fishes
in the sea forbear it. Hear this ye oppressers! Be merciful: you will one
day be glad of mercy. The yellings of the poor in the Country, are as loud as
your rorings in the City. The Cups you drink, are full of those tears, that
drop from affamished eyes, though you perceive it not. You laugh, when they
lament: you feast, when they fast: you devour them, that do your service. God
will one day set these things Psalm. 50, ^1
in order before you.

7. The sea is full of Monsters. Innumerable, and almost incredible are the
relations of Travelers in this punctual demonstration. As of Estaurus, a fish
chewing the cudde like a beast: of the Manate, headed like an Ox: and of
certain flying fishes, etc. And are there not in this world Men-monsters? I
do not say of Gods making, but of their own marring.

You would think it prodigious, to see a man with two faces. Alas: how many
of these walk daily in our streets? They have one face for the Gospel,
another for the masse-booke: a brow of allegiance for the King, and a brow of
apostasy of treason for the Pope; whenever he shall call for it. You would
think it a strange defect in nature, to see a man borne without a head: why
there are innumerable of these head-lesse men among us: who like brute beasts,
have no understanding, but are led by the precipitation of their feet; follow
their own mad affections. Others redundantly have two tongues, dissemblers,
hypocrites: the one to bless God, the other to curse man made after his
Image. James 3.
They have one to sing in a church, another to blaspheme and rore in a Tavern.

Some have their faces in their feet; whereas God (Os homini sublime dedit,
caelumque tueri iuss it) gave man an upright countenance, and framed him to
look upwards; these look not to heaven whence they did drop, but to hell
whether they will drop. Insatiable earth-scrapers, covetous wretches; that
would dig to the Center to exhale riches. Others have swords in their lips, a
strange kind of people, but common; raylers and reuilers: every word they
speak, is a wounding gash to their neighbors. Weigh it seriously. Are not
these monsters?

8 On the Sea men do not walk, but are borne in vessels; unless, like our
Savior Christ, they could work miracles. In the world, men do not so much
travel of themselves, as they are carried by the stream of their own
concupiscence. So says S. Chrysostom. Hic homines non ambulant, sed feruntur;
Hom. 7. open impers.
quia Diabolus cum delectatione compellit illos in mala. Here men do not
walk, but are carried: for the Devil bears them upon his back: and whiles
he labors them to hell, wind and tide are on his side. When he has them in
Profundis Abyssi, upon that bottomless depth, he strives to exonerate his
shoulders, and does what he can to let them fall and sink into the infernal
lake. So ^aul says, that temptations and snares, foolish and hurtful lusts do
(no less then) 1 Timothy 6, 9.
drown men in perdition. You think your selves on dry and firm ground, ye
presumptuous wantons; Alas! you are on the sea, an inconstant sea, Digitis a
morte remoti Quatuor, aut septem, si sit latissima taeda.

Soon ouer-boord. The winds will rise, the surges will beat, you will be
ready to sink: cry faithfully, and in time with the Apostles. Lord save us, or
we perish.

9. Lastly, the Sea is that great Cesterne, that sends waters over all the
earth: conueying it through the veins, the springs; till those dispersed waters
become Rivers, and then those Rivers run back again into the Sea. This vast
world scatters abroad her riches; drives and deriues them by certain
passages, as by Cunduit pipes unto many men. The rich man shall have many
springs to feed him with wealth: the east and west winds shall blow him
profit: industry, policy, fraud, luck shall contend to give his dition the
addition of more wealth. At length when these springs have made a brook, and
these brooks a river, this river runs again into the Sea. When the rich
man has sucked the world long, at last absorbetur a mundo, he is sucked up of
the world. Whatsoever it gave him at many times, it takes away at once.
War, exile, prison, displeasure of greatness, suits of law, death, empty
that River in one moment, that was so many years a filling.

Man's wealth is like his life; long a breeding, soon extinct. Man is born into
the world with much pain, nursed with much tenderness, kept in childehood with
much care, in youth with much cost. All this time is spent in expectation. At
last, being now (upon the point) a man, the prick of a sword kills him. Even
so is our wealth piled, so spoiled: the world, like some politic Tyrant,
suffering us to scrape together abundant riches, that it may surprise us and
them at once.

Innumerable other relations would the World and the Sea affoorde us. I desire
not to say all, but enough: and enough I have said, if the affections of any
soul present shall hereby distaste the world, and grow heavenly. Oh, what is
in this Sea worth our dotage! what not worthy our detestation! The sins of
the world offend our God: the vanities hurt our selves: only the good
blessings serve for our godly use, and to help us in our journey. But we know
that we are of God, and the whole world lies 1 John 5, 19.
in wickedness. Pray we, that this Sea infect us not; especially drown us
not. Though we lose, like the Mariners in the prophecy of Jonas, our wares,
our goods, our vessel, our liberties, yea our lives, let us keep our faith.
It is the most dangerous shipwreck, that this naufragous world can give us, the
shipwreck of faith. They write of the serpent, 1 Timothy 1, 19.
that he exposes al his body to the blow of the smiter, that he may save his
head. So lose we our riches, our houses, lands, liberties, lives: but keep we
Faith in our Head, Jesus Christ.

Though we live in the world, let us not love the world, says S. John. Not
fashion our selves to it, says S. Paul: hate the vices, the villainies, the
vanities of it. Think it easier, for that to pervert thee, then for thee to
convert that. Water will sooner quench fire, then fire can warm water. A
little wormwood embitters a good deal of honey; but much honey cannot sweeten
a little wormwood. Call we then on our God to preserve us, that the evil of
the world infect us nor. Aristotle says, if a man take a vessel of earth new
and raw, close up the mouth thereof, throw it into the salt sea, letting it lie
there a day or two; when he takes it up, he shall find fresh water in it.
Though we be sowsd in this Ocean- world, yet if the Spirit of grace seal us
up, the brinish waters of sin shall not enter us; but we shall be vessels of
grace, here, hereafter of glory.

Amen.
THE Spiritual Nauigator BOUND For the Holy Land.
Revel. Chap. 4. ver. 6. Before the Throne there was a Sea of Glass like unto
Crystal.
IF I have been somewhat long on the Sea, you will excuse me. It is a great
and vaste Element to travel over in so short a time. Some Observations I have
given you; that I might not cross the World without some fruit of my voyage.
Only what I have spoken of the waters, let it not be drowned in the waters, as
the proverb says; not perish in your memories, without some fruit in your
lives.

The next circumstance gives the world, not only for a Sea, but Mare vitreum, a
Sea of glass. You see, I must carry you further on this Element, and yet at
last leave many coasts unvisited, much smotherd in silence. Let not all be via
nauis, as the Wise man speaks, the way of a Ship on the sea, leaving no
tracke or print in your meditations.

This glassy attribute shall give us obseruable three properties in the world.
1. Color. 2. Slipperinesse. 3. Brittlenesse. As certainly as you find these
qualities in Glass, expect them in the world. Color.


There is a Glassy color congruent to the Sea. So Virgil insinuates,
describing the Nereades, certain marine Nymphs. Milesia vellera Nymphae
Carpebant Hyali saturo fucata color. Georg. 4.


And not far removed. Vitreisque sedilibus omnes


Obstupuere. Which is spoken, not in respect of the matter, but of the Color,
and perspicuity. So Ovid in an Epistle. Est nitidus, vitreoque magis perlucidus
amne, Sappho. Phaoni.
Fons sacer.



All the beauty of Glass consists in the Color: and what in the world, that
is of the world, is commendable, praeter Colorem, besides the Color? A Cottage
would serve to sleep in, as well as a sumptuous Palace, but for the color.
Russets be as warm as silks, but for the glistering Color. The Egyptian
bondwoman give as much content, as Queen Vashti, but for the color. The
beauty of the fairest woman is but skin-deep: which if nature denies, art
helps them to lay on colors. And when they are most artificially
complexion'd, they are but walking and speaking pictures. It is the color of
gold, that bewitcheth the auarous: the colors of lewels, that make the Ladies
proud. If you say, these are precious and comfortable in themselves: then feed
on them; and try, if those metals can (without meat) keep your life and
soul together.

The truth is: man's corporal eye sees nothing but color. It is the sole
indefinite object of our sight, whither soever we direct it. We see but the
lay-part of things with these opticke organs. It is the understanding, the
souls interior eye, that conceiues and perceiues the latent virtues. All that
we outwardly behold, is but the fashion of the world: and S. Paul says, The
fashion of the world perishes. The color fades, and the splendour of things is
decayed. 1 Cor. 7, 31.
That if the world, like aged and wrinckled Helen, should contemplate her own
face in a glass; she would wonder, that for her beauties sake Troy should be
sacked and burned: man's soul endangered to eternal fire.

Oh how is the splendour and glory of the world bated and empair'd since the
original creation! The sky looks dusky: the Sun puts forth a drowsy head:
as if he were no longer, as David once described him, like a Bridegroom
coming out of his chamber, or a strong man rejoicing to run his race. The
Psalm. 19, 5.
Moon looks pale, as if she were sick with age: and the stars do but
twinckle; as if they were dim, and looked upon the earth with spectacles. The
Colors of the Rainbow are not so radiant: and the whole earth shows but like
a garment often died, destitute of the native hew.

It is but color, that delights you, ye worldlings: Esau lusts for the
pottage, because they look read: and the drunkard loves the wine, because it
looks read, and sparkles in the cup. Prou. 23. Look not thou upon the wine
when it is read, when it gives his Prou. 23, 31.
color in the cup, when it moves it self aright. What babes are we to be
taken with these colors, that only please the eye, or the sensual part of
man, and harm the soul? like children, that play with Glass, till they cut
their fingers.

Auicen says, that glass among stones, is as a fool amongst men. For it
takes all paint, and follows precious stones in color, not in virtue. So does
this world give colors to her riches, as if there were some worth and virtue
in them: till we are cosen'd of heavenly and substantial treasures by over
prizing them. No matter (says Isiodore) is more apt to make mirrors, or to
receive painting then Glass. So men de^ke the world, as the Israelites did
their Calfe: and then superstiously dote upon it, as Pigmalion on his carved
Stone.

But can color satisfy? Is man's imaginatiue power so dull and thick, as to
be thus pleased? Shall a man toil to dig a pit, and laboriously draw up the
water; and then must he sit by, and not drink? or drink, and not have his
thirst quenched? Yes. Thus do we long after earthly things, which obtained give
us no full content: thus disregard spiritual and heavenly; whereof but once
rafting, we go away highly satisfied. Say then with Bernard.

Oh bone Jesus, fons indeficiens,
Humana corda reficiens:
Ad te curro, te solum sitiens:
Tu mihi salus sufficiens.
Oh Jesus, fountain ever flowing,
Thy graces on man's soul bestowing:
To thee I run with thirsty heart,
And none shall want, though I have part.
For others it shall be said. Lo, this is the man that made not God his
strength: but trusted in the abundances Psalm 52, 7.
of his riches, and strengthened himself in his wickedness. But the faithful
shall be like a green Oliue-tree in the house of God; and of a fresher blee then
Daniel; whom the mercy of God, wherein he verse 8.
trusts, waters for ever and ever. The Color of this glassy Sea vanishes,
like the beauty of a flower; and when it is withered, who shall revive it? Rub
your eyes, and look on this world better: it has but a surphul'd cheek, a
colored beauty; which God shall one day scowre off with a flood of fire. Trust
not this Glass for reflection; as if it could present you truly to your own
judgments. It is but a false Glass, and will make you enamored both of your
selves and it: till at last, the Glass being broken, the Sea swallows you.
Thus for the Color.

2. Glass is a slippery met^all: a man, that walks on it, had need be shod as
the Germans, that slide upon Ioe. But go we never so steady on this glassy
sea; even the just man falls seven times a day. How soon are we tripping in
our most considerate pace! David said, he would take heed to his ways; but how
soon did his foot slide upon this glass! Psalm. 94. Psalm 94, 18
When I said, My foot slippeth, thy mercy, oh Lord, held me up. Let us all
pray with him. Hold up my goings Psalm 17, (...).
in thy paths, that my foot steps slip not. And if we have stood, let us
magnify him in the next Psalm. Thou have enlarged my steps under me; that
Psalm. 18, 35,
my feet did not slip. For the wicked, how surely soever they think
themselves fixed in the world: yet Psalm. 73. they are are set in slippery
places. They Psalm 73, 18.
talk of strong and subtle VVrastlers: but the cunningst wrastler of all is
the world: for whose heels has not it tripp'd up! The wisest Solomon, the
stro^gest Sampson, have been fetchd up by this wrastler and measured their
lengths on the ground. How dangerous then is it to run fast on this Sea,
whereon men are scarce able to stand! No marvel, if you see them fall in
troops, and lie in heaps: til with their weight they crack the Glass, and
topple into the depth.

There you shall see a knot of Gallants laid along on this glass, that have
run headlong at Pride. There a Corporation of Citizens, that have run at
Riches. Here a rabble of Drunkards that ran apace to the Tavern: there a
crew of cheaters, that posted as fast to Tyburne. Thus the Devil laughes to
see men so wildely running after vanity; and this glassy s^ so easily hurling
up their heels. It is reported of the Irish, that they dig deep trenches in
the ground, and paue the surface over with green turues: that their
suspectlesse enemies may think it firm ground. This World is the devils
vaulty Sea, full of trenches and swallows: which he paues over with glass:
the way seems smooth, but it is slippery: his intention is mischievous, vt
lapsu grauiore ruamus, that we may have the surer and sorer fall. He that
walks on this slippery glass had need of three helps. Circumspect eyes, sober
feet, and a good staff in his hand.

1 He must keep his eyes in his head. Ephe. 5. See that ye walk
circumspectly, not as fools, but as Ephe 5, 15.
wise. Pliny writes of the Eagle, that when she would make the Stagge her prey,
she lights down between his horns, whence he cannot shake her: and with
dust ready laid up in her feathers, she so fills his eyes, that he
blinded, breaks his own neck from some high cliffe or mountain. If the
devil can blind a man's eyes with the dusts of vanities, he will easily fling
him down on this slippery glass, and drown him in this dangerous Sea.
Neither must our eyes only be careful to descry our way; but of sound and
faithful descretion, not to be deluded with the spectacles, which this glassy
sea presents us; so retarding our journey to heaven. Pliny reports, that when
the Hunter has stolen away the Tygresse whelps, he scatters in the way great
mirrours of glass: wherein when the savage creature looks, she seeing her
self presented, imagines there to be her young-ones: and whiles she is much
troubled to deliver them, the Hunter scapes. If we stand gazing on the glassy
mirrours of this world; fame, honor, beauty, wealth, wantonness: thinking we
see therein presented those dear joys, we should seek for: behold, Satan
in the mean time does insensibly rob us of them. Let us look well about us:
we walk upon Glass.

2. He must have sober feet: he had not need be drunken, that walks upon
glass. If he be drunken with the vanities of this world, he may mistake
himself, as that drunkard did; who seeing the resultant light of the stars
shining in the water about him, thought he had been translated into heaven: and
rapp'd in a great joy fell a wauing, as he imagined, in the air, till he fell
into the water, not without peril of his life. He that is spiritually drunk,
may in like sort imagine the stars to be fixed in this glassy Sea, which are
indeed in heaven: and that the world can afford those true joys, which are
only to be found above. I have heard of some coming out of a Tavern well
lined with lycour, that seeing the shadows of the chimnies in the street,
made by the Moon; have took them for great blocks, and down on their knees
to climb and scramble over them. So worldlings, that are drunk but not with
wine; enchanted with earthly vanities, think every shadow which is put in
their way to heaven, a great block, and they dare not venture. Sober feet are
necessarily required to our travel on this glassy Sea.

3 Lastly, and mostly: he that would walk steadfastly on this glassy Sea, had
need of a good Staff to stay him. The best and surest, and that which will not
let him fall; or if he do fall, will soon raise him, is that David speaks of.
(...). 23. Gods Staff. Though I walk Psalm 23, 4
through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art
with me; thy rod and thy Staff, they comfort me: confortant; make me strong,
bear and hold me up.

Egypt is but a broken reed; he that leanes on it shall find the splinters
running into his hand: and cursed is he that makes flesh his arm: but who
leanes faithfully on this Staff, shall never perish. Thus you have heard this
glassy worlds Slipperinesse.

3. This Glass denotes brittlenesse. Proverb and experience justify this: As
brittle as glass. A fit attribute to express the nature of worldly things:
for glass is not more fragile. The world passes away, 1 Ioh. 2, 17.
and the lust thereof, says S. John. Man himself is but brittle stuff, and
he is the noblest part of the world. Man that is borne of a woman is of few
days, and full of trouble. He comes forth like a flower, Job. 14, 1.
and is cut down, he flies as a shadow, and continues not. Sic in non
hominem vertitur omnis homo.
Let him have an ample portion in this life, and his Psalm. 17, 14.
belly be filled with Gods hidden treasures. Let him be full of children, and
leave the rest of his substance to his babes. Let him be happy in his Lands, in
his children: in his success, and succession. Yet a little while, and the
wicked shall not be: thou shall diligently consider his place, and shall not
find it. Psalm. 37, 10.


Glass, whiles it is melting hot and soft, is pliable to any form; but cold
and hard, it is brittle. When God first made the world, it was malleable to his
working hand; to his commanding word: for he spoke the word, and things were
created. The next time he touches it, it shall br^ke to pieces, like a
pot-sheard. The heavens shall pass away with a great 2 Pet. 3, 10.
noise, the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the earth also, and the
works that are therein, shall be burnt up. Isiodore mentions one, that came to
Tyberius the Emperor with a vial of glass in his hand: and throwing it down
to the ground, it brake not; but only was bent, which he straightened again
with his hammer. But, says the same Author, the Emperor hanged him for his
skill. How pleasing an invention should that false Prophet make; that should
come, and tell the covetous worldling, or luxurious Epicure, that this glassy
world is not brittle; but shall abide ever! But serve him, as the Emperor did;
hang him up for an Atheistical liar, that so speaks.

The decay of the parts argues the dotage of the whole. Aetna, Pernassus,
Olympus are not so visible, as they were. The sea now rages where the ground
was dry: and fishes swim, where men walked. Hills are sunk, floods dried
up, rocks broken, towns swallowed up of earthquakes: plants lose their
force, and planets their virtue. The Sun stoopes like an aged man; as weary
of his course, and willing to fall asleep. All things are subject to violence
and contrariety; as if both the Poles were ready to ruinate their climates. The
end of all 1 Pet. 4, 7.
things is at hand: when Compage soluta, Secula tot mundi suprema coaggeret
hara.

God has given us many signs of this. Portenta, quasi porro tendentia. Signa
habent, si intelligantur, linguam suam. Signs have their language, if they
could be rightly understood. Vltima tribulatio multis tribulationibus
praeuenitur. There are many calamities preceding the last, and universal
calamity of the world. No Comet, but threatens; no strange exhalations,
alterations, seeming combustion in the heavens, but demonstrate the general
deluge of fire, that shall destroy all. Nunquam futilibus percanduit ignibus
ether.
As Gods tokens in the plague pronounce the infallibility of instant death: so
these signs of the worlds sickness, are vant-currers of the destruction.

Men are desirous to buy the Calender; that in the beginning of the year they
may know what will betide in the end; what dearth, or what death will ensue.
Behold; Christ and his Apostles give us a Prognostication in the Scripture:
foretelling by signs in the Sun, Moon, Stars, in the universal decay of
nature, and sickness of the world; what will happen in this old year, what in
the new-year, which is the world to come. The Mathematicians and Astronomers of
the Earth never dreamed of an universal Eclipse of the Sun: only Christ's
Almanacke reports this. Math. 24.


All beings are of one of these 4. sorts. 1. Some are from everlasting, not to
everlasting. 2. Some to everlasting, not from everlasting. 3. One only thing is
both from, and to everlasting. 4. The rest are neither to, nor from everlasting.

1 Some are from everlasting, not to everlasting: as Gods eternal decrees;
which have an end in their determined time, but had no beginning. So God before
all worlds determined the sending of his Son to dye for us: but he came in the
fullness of time, says the Apostle. This decree had no beginning; Acts 2, 23.
Galath. 4, 4.
it had an ending.

2. Some are to everlasting, not from everlasting: as Angels, and men's Souls;
which had a beginning in time, but shall never end; because they are created of
an immortal nature.

3. One only thing, which is indeed Ens Entium, God himself, is both from
everlasting and to everlasting. For he is an uncreated, and eternal
subsistence: Alpha, and Omega; that first, and last; that had neither
beginning, nor shall have ending. VVho^ Plato called (...); and he calls
himself to Moses, (...). That was, that is, and that is to come; the same for
ever.

4. Other things are neither from everlasting, nor to everlasting: for they had
a beginning, and shall have an end. Of this sort are all worldly things. God
will give them their end as he is Omega, that gave them their creation as he is
Alpha. All these things do decay, and shall perish. Mors etiam saxis,
nominibusqque venit.
Death shall extend the force even upon stones and names.

Who can then deny this world to be brittle? we see how slowly the tired earth
returns us the fruits, which we trusted her bowels with. Her usury grows
weak, like a decayed debtor, unable to pay us the interest, she was wont. Ni
vis humana quotannis Maxima quaeque manu legeret.



The World is lame, Georg. 1.
and every member, as it were out of joint. It caught a fall in the Cradle, as
Mephibosheth by falling from his Nurse; and the older it waxes, the more
maimedly it halteth. Sin entered presently after the worlds birth, and gave it
a mortal wound. It has labored ever since of an incurable consump tion; The
noblest part of it, Man, first felt the smart, and in his curse both beasts and
plants received theirs. It fell sick early in the morning; and has now
languished in a lingering lethargy, till the evening of dissolution is at hand.

Now, since the world is a Sea, and so brittle, a Sea of glass, let us seek
to pass over well, but especially to land well. A Ship under sail is a good
sight: but it is better to see her well moored in the haven. Be desirous of
good life, not of long life: the shortest cut to our haven is the happiest
voyage. Who would be long on the Sea? If a storm or wrack do come, let us
save the best good: whatsoever becomes of the vessel, thy body; make sure to
save the Passenger, thy soul, in the day of the Lord Jesus. I have now done
with the Sea; and for this point, here cast anchor.

Thus far we have suruay'd this glassy Sea the world, in regard of it self.
The other two attributes concern Almighty Gods Holding and Beholding, Guarding
and Regarding, his Seeing and Ouer-seeing it. Et videt, et prouidet: he
contemplates, he gouernes it. His Inquisition, and his disposition is here
insinuated. Somewhat (and not much) of either.

1 That God may most clearly view all things being and done in this world; it
is said to be in his sight, as clear as Crystal. As in Crystal there is
nothing so little, but it may be seen: so there is nothing on earth, said or
done, so slight or small, that it may escape his all-seeing providence. Heb. 4.
Omnia Heb. 4, 13.
sunt nuda et patentia oculis eius. There is no creature that is not manifest
in his sight: but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him, with
whom we have to do. In vain men hope to be hid from God. He that planted the
ear, shall he not hear? He that Psalm 94, 9.
formed the eye, shall he not see? All the earth is full of his glory. Whither
shall I go from thy Spirit? or whither Psalm. 139, 7.
shall Iflye from thy presence? It is there amply proved, that neither heaven
nor hell, nor uttermost part of the Sea, nor day nor night, light nor
darkness, can hide us from his face. For thou have possessed my reins, thou
have covered me in in my mothers womb. Our sitting, walking, lying down, or
rising up, the thoughts of our hearts, works of our hands, words of our lips,
ways of our feet, our reins, bones, bosoms, and our mothers wombes, wherein
we lay in our first informity, are well known unto him. Qualis, mihi dicite,
Deus censendus est;
Qui cunct a cernit, ipse autem non cernitur!
Said an old Poet. Zach. 4. The Lord has seven Zach. (...), 10.
eyes, which run to and fro through the whole earth. He is totus oculus. Let
us not flatter our selves, with those, Psalm. 10. that say in their heart; God
has forgotten; he hides his face, he will never see it: and so Psalm 10, 11
endeavor to pluck out the eye of knowledge it self. But there is neither
couch in chamber, nor vault in the ground, clouds of day, darkness of night;
bottomes of Mountains, nor holes of Rocks, nor depth of Seas; secret friend,
nor more secret conscience, heaven nor hell, that can obscure or shadow us from
the eye of the Lord. Wheresoever we are, let us say with Jacob. The Lord is in
this place, Genesis 28, 17.
though we be not aware of it.

Oh the infinite things and actions, that the eye of God sees at once, in this
Crystal glass of the world! Some caring to come out of debt, others to get
into debt. Some deluing for gold in the bowelles of the earth, others in the
bowels of the poor. Some buying and bargaining, others cheating in the market.
Some praying in their Closets, others quafflug in Tauernes. Here some raising
their Houses, there others ruining them. Alterum consummantem matrimonium,
alterum consumentem patrimonium. One marrying, and going to the world; another
miscarrying, the world going from him. There run honor and pride aequis
ceruicibus. There walks fraud cheek by iowle with a Tradesman. There stalks
pride, with the pace of a Soldier, but habit of a Courtier; striving to add
to her own stature: fetherd on the crown, cork'd at the heels, light all
over: stretching her legs, and spreading her wings like the Ostrich, with
ostentation of great flight: but nil penna, sed vsus; not an inche higher or
bettet. There slugs Idleness: both hands are in the bosom, whiles one foot
should be in the stirrup. Hollow in his ear, preach to him: if he will not
waken, prick him with goads; let the correctiue Law discple him. He cries not
Fodere nescio, but Fodere nolo. Not, I know not how to dig, but I will not
dig.

Here halts Opinion, lame not with the shortness, but length of his legs:
one foot too long, that marres the verse. There runs Policy, and moves more
with an Engine, then many men can do with their hands: leading the life after
this rule. Si occulte, been. If close enough, well enough. There hurries the
Papist to the Mass, and his wife the Catholic: aequiuocate before a
competent Judge, though Christ would not before a Caiaphas: climbing to
salvation by an Attorney, and likely to speed by a Proxey.

There slides by the meager ghost of malice, her blood drunk up, the marrow of
her bones wasted, her whole body like a mere Anatomy. There fly a crew of
Oaths, like a flight of dismal Ravens; croking the Plague to the House, where
the Swearer is. Zach. 5. Nay, ruin to the whole Land. Ier. 23. For Oaths the
Land mourns. Here reeles drunkenness, with swollen eyes, stammering feet:
befriended of that poor remnant of all his wealth, (the richly stocked
grounds, richly furnished house, richly filled purse, are all wasted; and nothing
is left rich but) the nose. There goes murder from Aceldama, the field of
blood, to Golgotha the place of dead sculs, and from thence to Hinnon the
valley of fire and torments. There see Atheism proiecting to displant the
Paradise of God, and turn it to a wilderness of Serpents. Heaven is held but a
Poets fable: and the terrors of hell, like Hercules club in the Tragedy, of
huge bulk, but rags and straw are the stuffing. Creatures that have a little
time on earth, and then vanish. Tu qui dicis, Transit Christianus, ipse transis
sine Christianis. Thou that say, the Christians perish, do perish thy
self, and leave the Christians behind thee. Whither go these Atheists? I
believe not to heaven; for they believe there is no heaven. They shall never
have those joys, they would nor believe. They are not in hell neither: there
is no Atheist. Where then? In hell they are indeed, but not as Atheists. They
no sooner put their heads within those gates, but Atheism drops off: they
believe and feel now, there is a God.

There you shall hear Hypocrites, a pipient brood, cackling their own
ripeness, when they are scarce out of their shelles. Whose words and works
differ, as it is seen in some Tappe-houses: when the painted walls have sober
sentences on them, as Fear God, honor the King, watch and pray, be sober,
etc. and there is nothing but drunkenness and swearing in the house. There is
Ignorance, like a stricken Sodomite, groping for the way: nay indeed, neither
discerning nor desiring it. He sees neither Numen, nor Lumen; neither Diem the
daylight of the Gospel, nor Deum, the God of day and Gospel.

There goes slouenly Faction, like a mal content, that with incendiary scruples
labors to divide Judah from Israel. It was a strange doom, that Valens the
Emperor gave against Procopius; causing him to be tied to two great trees
bowed forcibly together, and so his body to be pulled asunder, that would have
pulled asunder the body of the Empire. The Humourists thrust themselves into
this throng, or else I would have spared them, and that for loves sake: but
truth of love must not prejudice love of Truth. If they had as Imperative
toungs, and Potential hands as they have Optatiue minds, they would keep an
Infinitive stir in the lacerated Church. God sees the malicious Jesuit
calling up a Parliament of Devils, to plot treasons. He hears their damnable
consultations: and observes them, whiles they apparel bloud-red murder, and
black conspiracy, in the white robes of Religion. He saw Garnet plotting in
his study; and Faulx digging in the vault; and meant to make the pit, which
they dug for others, swallow themselves.

He beholds as in a clear mirror of Crystal all our impurities, impieties;
our contempt of Sermons, neglect of Sacraments, dishallowing his Saboths. Well*
as God sees all things so clearly; so I would to God, we would behold
somewhat. Let us open our eyes, and view in this Crystal glass our own
works. Consider we a little our own wicked courses, our perverse ways on
this Sea. Look upon this Angle of the world; for so we think, Anglia
signifies: how many vipers does she nurse and nourish in her indulgent bosom,
that wound and sting her! The Landlords oppression, Usurers extortion, Patrons
Simonie, Commons covetousness: our unmercifulness to the poor,
ouer-mercifulnes to the rich; malice, ebriety, pride, profanation. These,
these are the works, that God sees among us: and shall we not see them our
selves? shall we be utter strangers to our own doings? Be not deceived.
Neither fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor adulterers, 1 Cor. 6. 9.
nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor reuilers, nor extortioners shall
inherit the kingdom of God. Let not us then be such. Let us not be desirous
of vainglory, provoking one another, envying Gal. 5, 26.
one another. Me thinks here, vainglory stalks in like a Mountebank-Gallant:
Provocation, like a swaggering Rorer: and Malice, like a meager and melancholy
Jesuit. All these things we do, and God sees in the light: and in the light we
must repent them, or God will punish them with everlasting darkness. You see,
how the world is clear to Gods eye, as Crystal.

Lastly, this glassy sea is not only as Crystal for the transparent
brightness; that the Almighties eye may see all things done in it. But it lies
for situation before his Throne; generally for the whole, and particularly for
every member, subject to his judgment and governance.

His Throne signifies that imperial government, which he exercises over the
world. Psalm. 9. The Lord shall endure for ever: he has prepared his Throne
for Psalm. 9, (...), 8.
judgment. And he shall judge the world in righteousness; he shall minister
judgment to the people in uprightness. Neither is it all for Judgment: there
is not only a terrible thunder and lightning flashing from this Throne; but
out of it proceed comfortable voices: speaking the solaces of the Gospel, and
binding up the brokenhearted. Therefore it is said verse 3. there is a
Rainbow about the Throne; which is a sign of Gods covenant, a seal of his
eternal mercy toward us. This is round about the Seat; that God can look no
way, but he must needs see it. So that to the faithful this Throne is not
terrible. Heb. 4. Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of grace, that
we may obtain mercy, and find grace to Heb. 4, 16.
help in time of need. If there be the fire of Judgment, there is also the
rain of Mercy to quench it.

Neither is this a transitory Throne, subject to changes and chances, as all
earthly thrones are: but Heb. 1. Thy throne, oh God, is for ever and ever: a
scepter Heb. 1, 8.
of righteousness is the scepter of thy kingdom. Lu. Luke 1, 33.
1. He shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there
shall be no end.

He that sittes on the Throne is not idle; to let all things in the world run
at six and seauens: but Omnia non solum permissa a Deo, sed etiam immissa. So
disposing all things, that not only the good are Lips.
ordained by him, but even the evil ordered. The sin is of man, the
disposition of God. But let God alone with Oportet necessitatis: let us look
to Oportet offi^ij. Senacherib cannot do what he lists. God can put a bridle
in his lips, a hook in his nosethrils. Esaias 10. O Assyrian, the rod of mine
anger: and Esaias 10, 6.
the staff in their hand is mine indignation. Jeremy 51. Thou art my
battell-axe and weapons of war: for with Ier. 51, 20.
thee will I break in pieces the Nations, and with thee will I destroy
Kingdoms. Vlterius ne tend odijs. Go no further upon Gods wrath thou
desperate wicked man. Greg. Nazian. speaks of the Emperor Valentine, infected
with the Arrian heresy: that being about to write with his own hand, the
proscription and banishment of Basil; the pen thrice refused to let fall any
ink. But when he would needs write, such a trembling invaded his hand, that
his heart being touched, he rent presently, and recanted what he had written.
But I press this point no further, having in other places liberally handled it.

The four beasts in the 8. ver. rest not day and night, saying: Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. The Fathers from
these words observe the mystery of Trinity in Unity; and of Unity in Trinity:
That God is thrice called Holy, signifies the Tinity: that once Lord God
Almighty, the Unity. Fulgent. Quid est, quod ter Sanctus dicitur, si non est
vna in Diuinitate substantia? Let us then with the four and twenty Elders,
fall down before him that sits on the Throne, ascribing worship to to him that
lives for ever: and casting our Crowns to the ground, renouncing our own
merits, say to the ternall and eternal Unity, Thou art worthy, O Lord, Verse 11
to receive glory, and honor, and power: for thou have created all things, and
for thy pleasure they are, and were created.

Amen.
FINIS.

