CYGNEA CANTIO: OR, LEARNED DECISIONS, AND MOST PRVDENT AND PIOUS DIRECTIONS
FOR STVDENTS IN DIVINITY; Delivered by our late Sovereign of Happy Memory,
KING JAMES, At White Hall a few weeks before his Death.

Eccles 12. 11. The words of the wise are as goad, and as nails fastened by
the masters of the assembly. LONDON, Printed for Robert Mylbourne at the Sign
of the Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard. 1629.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
Dread Sovereign:
THere is nothing can dry the overflowing spring ofteares in all your loyal
Subjects eyes for the inestimable loss of our late Sovereign, your most Noble
Father, but the Orient beams, and bright luster of your Majesty's Imperial
Crown, and most happy reign over us: whereby that is come to pass which the
ancient English Poet so much admired, Sol occubuit nox nulla secuta est: The
Sun set, and no night ensued thereupon: Blessed and glorified be his Name
for it, that dwells in a light which none can approach unto. Who had no
sooner fitted the King your Father for a throne in heaven, but he fitted you
his Son for his throne upon earth, and has peaceably settled you in it. Vno
avulso non deficit alter
Aureus ac simili frondescit virga metallo.


No sooner that golden branch was plucked away, but another of the same stock
grows up in the room: Under whose shade the Church and Common wealth now
shelter themselves. If any man have any of your Fathers Jewels, he ought to
bring them to you his sole Heir. The learned resolutions, and divine
instructions which I lately received from your Fathers mouth, I value no less
then peereless Pearls: And because the last speech of a departing friend
makes the deepest impression, and Art herein imitating Nature holds out long
the last note of the dying sound in the Organ; I thought it my duty to offer
unto your Majesty the ensuing Relation of the last polemicall discourses of
his Majesty your Father, in matter of controversy in Divinity. I read in
Martial of a Fly that by a drop of Amber casually falling upon it, grew in such
request, that a great sum of money was given for it. implicuit succina gutta
feram
Et sic quae fuerat vita, contempta, manente
Facta est funeribus mox pretiosa suis.


The like I am persuaded of the enclosed Narration, that many will esteem of
it not for the flies sake, but for the Amber; not for it self or the penners
sake, but for his Majesty's remarkable passages related in it. For my part I
challenge no more therein than S. Austine did in his child Adeodatus, Nihil
agnosco meum nifi peccatum: I own nothing in it but the faults and defects.
All my hope is, that the darker the foil is, the brighter the Diamonds of his
Majesty's speeches inserted therein will appear; which with all humility I
present to your Majesty with the tender of my bounden duty, and service to God
for you, to you for God as becomes

Your Majesty's meanest, yet most humble and affectionately devoted Subject,
Daniel Featly.

THE COPY OF A LETTER SENT TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL THE DEANE OF W:
Relating diverse difficult points, and remarkable directions to Students in
Divinity, delivered by King James our late Sovereign of blessed memory; by the
occasion of the publishing Mr. Elton his exposition upon the Commandment,
entitled Gods holy mind; and Mr. Crompton his answer to Mr. Brearly,
entitled St. Augustines Summos. Ian. 6. 1624.
WHat Varius Geminus spoke sometime to Augustus, Qui apud te audent dicere,
ignorant tuam magnitudinem; qui non audent, humanitatem: Those that dare speak
before thee know not thy greatness; those that dare not, know not thy
goodness: I may as truly apply to the admirable temper of Majesty and gracious
Clemency in our late Sovereign King James. Those that were not afraid to come
before him, were ignorant of his Princely Majesty; those that were afraid, were
unacquainted with his benign affability. To omit manifold instances for proof
hereof, which more learned pens have and will commend to posterity: the
sweet close which his Majesty set (a little before the changing of his
corruptible Crown with an incorruptible) to the late harsh sounding business
about the publishing of two Treatises, the one penned by M. Elton, the other by
M. Crompton, deserves a thankful acknowledgement of all that were any way
interessed in the making or setting forth of those Books. The special
passages of his Majesty's learned and pious discourses upon that occasion I
have here, though not perfectly yet faithfully related. Pind.
(...).

First, his Majesty questioned me for licensing M. Elton his book, and he
seemed to be very much displeased that any should be permitted to print books
in the Church of England, who were not conformable to the discipline of the
Church of England. Whereunto my conscience bears me witness that my answer
was according to the truth.

First, that M. Elton had set forth in print other books before this, at which
I never heard any exception taken for matter of inconformitie.

Secondly, that if he had been a man unconformable, doubtless my Lord of
Winton, no favourer of non-conformitants, would never have suffered him to have
discharged his Ministry so many years so near him, without ever calling him
in question, much less suspending him for non-conformitie.

Thirdly, that the general good report of M. Elton his meek spirit and
peaceable carriage as well as his extraordinary painfulnesse in his pastoral
function, even to the enfeebling of his body, moved me to gratify him so
far, being my neighbor, as at his request to peruse that his book, and if I
thought it fit, commend it to the Press.

Fourthly, that of this book I perused but 52. pages, in which I was confident
that there was nothing contrary to the discipline or doctrine of the Church of
England; and that my approbation extends no further then the 52. page,
appears by my Imprimatur, and the Warden of the Stationers hand affixed to
the 52. page, and not to the last page of the book: at which we usually set
our hands, if we allow the whole book. After that first part of the book
allowed by me, I made a stop, because I then understood the Author had made a
period of his life. Whilst he lived I might and did alter with his consent,
what we thought fit: but after his decease I left often intermedling in such a
work wherein I could not suffer all things to pass as they were in that copy,
bona conscientia, nor yet change or mend any thing bona fide. Yet the book
took the liberty of fly out of the Press without license: But that which
then escaped virgulam censoriam, has since met with facem expiatoriam. On
Sunday the 13. of February 1624. we saw a februation or purging by fire of all
the errors discovered in that Posthumus, some concerning the Sabbath it self,
there were burnt above 800 Copies. The greatest holocaust that has been
offered in this kind in our memory, for ought I know. VVhereupon the wits of
the City (which usually will be working upon such occasions) have made a
conceited Pageant: And although even innocent mirth may be subject to censure,
when the occasion rather presents matter of pensive, or at least serious
thoughts; yet because the Emblem and Motto devised upon this occasion
discovers the affections of many that were there present, I hold it not
altogether unfit here to set them down. Saint Paul's Cross is drawn at large,
and a number of men, partly running away that they might not see such a
spectacle, partly weeping, and wiping their eyes to see a book so full (as
they conceived) of heavenly zeal and holy fire, sacrificed in earthly and
unhallowed flames: their Motto was, Ardebant sancti sceleratis ignibus ignes,
Ovid fast. de incendio templi vestae.

Et mista est flammae flamma profana piae.


In the midst of the area there is described a huge pile of books burning;
and on the one side the Author casting his books into the fire, with this
Motto: Sancte (nec invideo) sine me liber ibis in igne^. And on the other side
a Popish shaveling Priest answering him with this motto in the next verse: Hei
mihi quod domino non licetire tuo. Before the burning of the Books, the
Preacher at the Cross declared diverse erroneous assertions therein, condemned
(as he said) by Authority. Among which that assertion in the forefront, Inter
damnatos, See Amphilochius in vita Batalii. Paulinus in vita Ambrosii. Eusebius
lib. 6. histor. cap. 36. Amillarius de officiis Ecclesiast. lib. 3. cap. 35.
Micrologus de rebus eccles cap. 17. Concilium Turonicum lib. 3 cap. 9. Council.
Bracher. 3. Can. 1
touching the denial of the Sacrament to the sick requiring it on their
deathbed, collected by consequences from some passages of that book, seemed
to me most blame worthy. For what law of God or man depriveth the sick in
their greatest extremity of pains of body, and troubles of mind, of that
unspeakeable comfort which the participating of the blessed Sacrament affords
to all that worthily receive it. What devout Christian would not desire with
Simeon to take his Savior into his hands before his departure, that he might
the more cheerfully sing his Nunc dimittis? Is the Church so charitable to send
the other Sacrament home to sick infants? and will any deny this Sacrament to
men of ripe years, hungring for this bread of life? what though this Sacrament
be not of like necessity as the other is? yet is it of as great virtue, and
greater comfort, by present apprehension: whereof men stand in great need amidst
the temptations of Satan, and terrors of conscience, and fear of death, and
the strict account to be given after death. Who knows not that the Primitive
Church took special care that all those who were taking their last journey to
another world should be provided of this celestial Viand, which they Ignat
epist. ad Ephe.
call Viaticum morientium, nay (...), yet such is the nature of misguided
zeal, that under color of weeding out superstition, it will pluck up by the
roots many plants of Paradise, and acts of true Religion.

But because M. Elton himself has now made his account before the supreme
Judge of all, I will amplify no longer upon this or any other error rehearsed
out of those books, published after his death, nor enter any action of
unkindness against any concerning that business; but bury all in his grave:
because though some of them perhaps intended much evil against me, yet God
(through his Majesty's grace and goodness) has turned it to good.

Pliny writes of a marble Image of Diana set up in Chios, the face whereof
was so drawn by Art, that the Goddess seemed to look sad upon her worshippers
as they entered into her Temple, but smiled upon them as they came out. This
Statua presents to me a copy of his Majesty's countenance in this business,
which was sad and dreadful at my coming to him, but cheerful and comfortable
at my departing. It is well known what a bitter storm fell at my first
appearance before his Majesty, which yet the day following, through Gods
mercy, in whose hands the hearts of Kings are, turned a golden shower; which
fell For he received 40. pieces in gold of his Majesty.
literally upon M. Crompton, and allegorically upon me. Seldom or never heard
I (especially on the sudden) such apt solutions of knottie and entangled
questions, so pithie and sinewie Arguments, such useful observations, such
divine instructions, from any Chrysostom in our Church, as I heard that day
from his Majesty's mouth: Had not fear and sorrow for his Majesty's
displeasure, much crazed my memory, and deaded my spirits at the present, I
should have carried away more, and have given a better account of his Majesty's
learned resolutions, and pious admonitions, given to me and M. Crompton that
day: Now I can but present bracteolas sermonis pure aurei and stricturas
ingenii vere ignei.

THe first thing to my remembrance questioned touching M. Cromptons book, was
a clause in my written defense, that I was rather induced to license the book
out of a respect to my Lord, D. his Grace, to whom the book is dedicated by his
Chaplain. What a reason is this, (said his Majesty?) Is it an honor to my
Lord D. to be a patron of errors? Is it any honor to me that the Arians in
Polonia have dedicated one of their books to me, containing damnable heresies?
I account it rather a dishonor, and cannot with patience look upon their
dedication to me. For answer hereunto I humbly beseeched his Majesty, that
he would be pleased to hear that clause in my answer entirely read unto him.
VVhereupon my Lord of Durham reached me the paper wherein I read as follows:
That although I found many errors in M. Crompton his book, for which I might
have wholly rejected the book, yet I chose rather to purge those errors, and
mend those faults in the book, and therein used the help and advise of M.
Cook, (who lately set forth a Treatise of the same argument, entitled. S.
Austines Religion,) to the end I might gratify. M. Crompton out of a respect
to the Duke, to whom the Book was dedicated.

The next thing examined by his Majesty was the reason of the suppressing
three of the Authors Sections, whereof he complains in Print in the
conclusion of his book. My answer to this charge was, That I crossed out those
Sections because they crossed the doctrine and discipline established in this
Kingdom, and savoured of that humor which never yet bred good blood in the
Church. And for proof of my exceptions against those sections I produced the
original copy written with M. Cromptons own hand, which tendering to his
Majesty, he commanded M. Crompton to read the first Section suppressed
touching a paritie amongst the Clergy: Upon the hearing whereof his Majesty
much distasting M. Crompton his assertions, took occasion fully to enucliate
that question touching the distinction of Bishops and Presbyters jure divino.
Beside the judgment of the primitive Church, and consent of all ancient
writers, his Majesty much pressed the subscription of the Epistle to Titus,
Ordained the first Bishop of Creet.
and of the second Epistle to Timothy, as also the Apostles charge to Timothy,
1. 5. 19. Ordained the first Bishop of the Church of Ephesus.
Receive not an accusation against an Elder, but before two or three witnesses.
And to Titus the 1. and 5. For this cause left I thee in Creet, to ordain
Elders in every Church. Out of which passages of Scripture his Majesty so
clearly and evidently evicted a superiority in Bishops over Presbyters, jure
divino, that as he reformed master Crompton in his opinion, so he much more
confirmed and settled my judgment in that tenet, which I held before, and
delivered in two several Consecration Sermons preached in his Graces Chapel
at Lambeth: viz. That the distinction of Bishops and Presbyters is de jure
divino, or Apostolico, not de Ecclesiastico only, and that according to the
Canon of the great Council of Calcedon, (...), to bring down a Bishop to the
low rank of Presbyters of Priests, is sacrilege. The first I find that ever
went about to break down the partition wall between Bishops and Presbyters,
was Aerius, a man like his name, light and easy to be carried away with the
wind of ambition: For as Epiphanius writes, (Here Is. 75.) this Aerius standing
for a Bishopric, and being put by it by Eustathius, invented this heresy, ut
se consolaretur, to comfort his heart upon the repulse: So when he could not
raise up himself to the higher rank of Bishops, he sought to pull down
Bishops to his lower rank of Presbyters. What (says he) does a Bishop differ
from a Priest? nothing at all, A Bishop differs nothing at all from a Priest,
for they are both of one and the same rank and dignity.
(...). But for this saucy malipartnesse he felt the smart of the Crosiers
staff, and for ranking Bishops among Presbyters or Elders, was himself ranked
amongst heretics.

After this point touching different degrees in the Clergy was discussed, the
two other suppressed sections in M. Cromptons book were read, the former
touching the unlawfulness of any contract of matrimony between parties of a
different Religion. The latter touching the marriage of the innocent party
after divorce for adultery. In both which Sections such offensive matter was
found, that his Majesty was pleased to say that master Crompton was beholding
to me for suppressing them.

Thus it appears my defense for striking out of those sections in master
Cromptons book was very easy: the harder province was to excuse such
sections which I struck not out, for his Majesty distasted many tenets of
master Crompton, but especially insisted upon four. First, Touching the sign
of the Cross.
Secondly, Touching women's baptizing in case of necessity.
Thirdly, Touching some kind of ignorance supposed to be in Christ according
to his humanity.
Fourthly, Touching S. Augustines opinion of Children dying without baptism.


1. TOuching the sign of the Cross his Majesty very much disliked that
which M. Crompton averreth, page 81. That the sign of the Cross was not
received in the Church till one hundred and sixty years after Christ, and
that the author thereof was Valentinus the heretic, who coming to Rome
stayed there twelve years, and brought up the use of the Cross, as Irenaeus
reports. This observation, said his Majesty, is most false, the sign of the
Cross is more ancient, Valentinus brought it not first into the Church,
neither does Irenaeus report any such thing.

Since his Majesty's speech with us, I have examined the place alleged by M.
Crompton out of Irenaeus, and I find that Irenaeus affirms no such thing as
is fathered upon him. Valentinus the heretic was not the first inventer or
author of the sign of the Cross, but our arch Cartewritist, or raith
Catherist Parker, was the first inventer of this slanderous untruth: it seems
M. Crompton plowed with Parkers lame heifer, which drew his plough-share awry.
This Parker in his book, which he arrogantly and affectedly intituleth,
Scholasticall discourse against symbolizing with Antichrist in ceremonies,
especially in the sign of the Cross, page 75. says, we use Valentinus his
Cross; I call it his, because he was the first that used this figure the very
first that made account of it: and a few lines after, Valentinus the heretic
being the first deviser of it: and he quoteth (for proof of this his bold
assertion) Ireneus in his first book against heresies. But how grossly herein
he abuses Irenaeus, will appear by setting down Irenaeus his own words,
which are these, Adhuc etiam de Horo suo, quem pluribus nominibus vocant, duas
operationes habere eum ostendunt, confirmativam, and seperativam, and secundum
id quidem quod confirmat and stabilit Crucemesse, secundum id vero quod dividit
and distinguit Horum esse: Further he relates of his fantastical Aeon, that
he has diverse names according to diverse virtues and operations, and gives
instance in two, the virtue of establishing, according to which he calls him
Cross, and a virtue of severing, according to which he is called Bound or
Term. Irenaeus here speaks not of Christ's Cross, but of the fantastic
Aeons Cross; nor of the sign of the Cross, but of the name of the Cross:
Neither says he so much, as that Valentinus was the deviser either of the
name, or of the sign, but only that one of his Aeons had two names: the one
(...), Term or Bound, the other (...), or Cross: And if we may not make the
sign of the Cross, because one of Valentinus his fained Aeons was called
Cross, by the same reason we may not make any bound in our fields, nor
definition of anything, because the same Aeon was called by the heretics
(...), that is, bound or definition. And by M. Parkers Logique, one of his
Majesty's Pursivants must abjute his own name, and be no more called Cross,
lest he symbolize with Valentinus, or offend his god Aeon (...) seculum crux:
yet this is one of the least absurdities in that book of Parker. No Scholar
ever spilt so much wit and learning as this braine-sicke Amsterdamian does in
his Treatise of the Cross: wherein he lays all his wit and learning upon it,
to prove that the making of the sign of the Cross is the breach of all the ten
Commandments. He is not content to write of the Superstition and Idolatry of
the Cross only, which are notes we have often heard sung by the Martines
brood; but he spends 18. whole Sections in discoursing of the hypocrisy of
the Cross, and a whole large book of the Injustice of the Cross, chap. 5.
and of the Murder of the Cross, chap. 6. and of the Adultery of the Cross,
chap. 7. and of the Wrong of the Cross, chap. 8. and of the Slander of the
Cross, chap. 9. and lastly, pour fair un bon bouche, of the concupiscence of
the Cross, chap. 10.

For proof of these his prodigious conclusions, he so detorteth Scriptures,
and depraveth ancient and modern Writers, that what was said by the witty
Epigrammatist of Gretzers book De adoranda cruce, may be applied to this
book of Parkers De abolenda cruce.

Dignum authore opus est, dignus at ille opere est, nempe cruce.

It will be here said, if this escape in M. Cromptons book were so gross, how
came it to pass, that it escaped my censure in perusing and licensing the
same? my answer hereunto is direct, That it did not escape me, but I took
notice thereof in reading that Chapter, and both corrected it in that place,
and afterward. In that place I inserted these words (as some report,) thereby
giving the Reader to understand, that I avowed not the thing there reported,
but branded it with suspicion: and page 84. I determined the clean contrary in
the conclusion of the Chapter, in these words following line 9. To conclude
then it is most certain, that the sign of the cross was first invented and
practiced against Pagans, who used to make it only in derision of
Christianity. The Valentinian heretics after abused the Cross to a
fantastical end, etc.

2. TOuching Women's baptizing in case of necessity, his Majesty in part
disliked that which M. Crompton delivers, page 95. that for a lay man, and much
more for a woman to baptize in case of necessity, in S. Austines opinion it is
a pardonable sin: though pardonable, yet a sin, and the usurping of
another office. The answer hereunto made, as I take it, by M. Crompton, (for I
remember not that I spoke any thing at all to this point) was that in the
Conference at Hampton Court women's baptizing was utterly condemned: and that
thereupon an alteration was made in the Book of Common Prayer: and whereas
before women were allowed to baptize in case of necessity, in the book set out
by his Majesty, baptism in private houses in time of necessity is restrained
to the Minister of the Parish, or any other lawful Minister that can be
procured. Against this answer his Majesty excepted, That neither in the Common
Prayer book set out by King Edward, nor in that by Queen Elizabeth, there was
any mention of women's baptizing. In King Edwards Common Prayer Book printed
Anno Dom. 1540. in the Rubricke before private Baptism we read of them that
are to be baptized in private houses in time of necessity:

First, Let them that be present call upon God for his grace, and say the Lords
Prayer, if the time will permit, and then one of them shall name the child,
and dip it in the water, or power water upon it, saying these words, N. I
baptize thee, etc. and let them not doubt but that the child so baptized is
lawfully and sufficiently baptized. King Edwards book reformed anno Dom. 1552.
has the same rubric verbatim: Queen Elizabeth's book has likewise the same
words: The book set out upon the conference at Hampton Court, has altered it
on this wise: Of them that are to be baptized in private houses, in time of
necessity, by the Minister of the Parish or any other lawful Minister that can
be procured, First, let the lawful Minister, and them that be present, call
upon God for his grace, and say the Lords prayer, if the time will suffer, and
then the child being named by some one that is present, the said lawful
Minister shall dip it in water, etc.

In all which passages, in all the several Impressions of the books of Common
prayer, there is nothing said of a woman's baptizing, neither to warrant it to
be done, nor to condemn it when it is done. Neither does S. Austine simply
condemn a Lay man or woman baptizing in case of necessity, as a sin, but
says, either it is no fault, or a pardonable. His words, Tom. quarto, lib. 2.
contra. Epist. Parmenionis, are, Nulla cogente necessitate si fiat, alieni
muneris usurpatio est: si autem necessitas urget, aut nullum, aut veniale
delictum est; sed etsi nulla necessitate usurpetur et a quolibet cuilibet
detur, si datu^ fuerit non potest dicinon datum, quamvis recte dici
potestillicite datum. And this said his Majesty was the sum of the
resolution at Hampton Court in this point, howsoever some have mistaken it.

3. TOuching some kind of ignorance supposed to be in Christ according to his
humane nature; His Majesty disallowed Master Cromptons peremptory resolution,
set down page 23, viz. That Christ as man was subject to some kind of
ignorance, and this was the Primitive truth taught by St. Austine, and
maintained by the Church of England. I cannot endure (says his Majesty) that
my Savior should be said to be ignorant of any thing. For in him the divine
nature was hypostatically united to the humane, in one person; and that person
being divine, could not, nor cannot be subject to any kind of ignorance. Here
I humbly beseeched his Majesty to be pleased to hear what might be probably
alleged, in defense of M. Cromptons opinion. The rather because Iunius in his
answer to Bellarmine, Iunius resp* ad Bell. contr. 2. l. 4 Humanitas profecit
in se tum effasione spiritus tum acquisitione scientiae.
and D. Field, a worthy writer of ours, in the 5. book of the Church, cap. 14.
deliver the same doctrine in effect; as M. Crompton does in this section. Field
of the Church, cap. 14.
These authorities satisfied not his Majesty, It may be said that Christ grew
in wisdom and knowledge, non quo ad habitus essentiam and extentionem, sed
quo ad actualem cognitione^t not according to the essence of the habit, but
according to actual knowledge.
who said, that he would not that we should ground our judgment upon later
writers, especially those beyond the Seas, which were not well acquainted with
the Tenets of our Church: and moreover differed from us in discipline and
judgment, touching the decent, ancient and laudible Ceremonies used in our
Church. Upon this occasion, his Majesty gave M. Crompton and Me many most
useful instructions in our study in Divinity, agreeable to those Directions
sent heretofore to the Universities, which deserve to be written with the
point of a Diamond, for the perpetual use of the Church, and advancement of
sacred knowledge and learning. For these Directions, having given his Majesty
thanks, and promised to follow them, I propounded those words of our Savior,
Mark 13. 32. But of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels,
neither the Son, but the Father; Which, as I conceived, made for M. Cromptons
opinion, viz. That Christ, according to his humane nature, might be said, if
not subject to ignorance, yet to a nescience of some particulars, such as that
which is mentioned in the Text; for, as for the Jesuits interpretation of that
Text, (viz.) That Christ knew not the day of Judgment, [ad dicendum nobis,] to
tell us; I never could like of it, because it is forced, and serves to give
support to the doctrine of Aequivocation. Neither do I, said his Majesty,
allow of the Gloss of the Jesuits, but you must observe, said he, that Christ
said not, that neither the Son of God does know, but neither the Son himself.
And he was the Son of God as well as the son of man; and though as man, or
by his humane nature he knew not the day of Judgment, yet as the Son of God
he knew it. In this exposition of his Majesty's, according to the
interpretation of the ancient fathers Ambrose and Cyril, Ambros. in hunc locum,
temporu^ finem non per naturam hominis, sed per naturam Dei novit.
we rested both satisfied, and I humbly desired his Majesty that he would
be pleased to resolve us in what sense those words of Saint Luke 21. 52.
Cyril. non dicit spiritum sanctu^, sed Angelos, and filium; nec filium Dei, sed
filium solummodo, de seipso loquens ut homine; nec sibi derogans ut Deo. scit
enim, ut Deus, quod ut homo ignorant. He knew the end of time, not by the nature
of man, but by the nature of God. He says not, the Holy Ghost knows not,
but that the Angels know it not, nor the Son: neither does he say, the Son of
God knows not, but only the Son knows not; speaking of himself as man,
and not derogating from himself as God, for he knows that as God, which as
man he is ignorant of.
were to be taken; And Jesus increased in wisdom, and stature, and favor
with God and man. For if Christ increased in wisdom and knowledge, he had
then more knowledge in his riper years, then he had in his Infancy; and if he
had less knowledge in his younger years then in his elder, it seems that we
may without any disparagement to his omniscience, according to his divine
nature, attribute comparative ignorance, or rather nescience to him, according
to his humane nature. This knot his Majesty thus dexterously untied. In the
same verse, says his Majiesty, it follows, That he increased in favor with
God: now says he, was not Christ always in highest and greatest favor with
God? Did God favor and love him more at one time then another? Doubtless not,
yet is he said truly to increase in favor with God, because God more
manifested and declared his love and favor unto him by the effects, and outward
tokens thereof; as he grew in years, so likewise may he be said to grow and
increase in wisdom and knowledge, because he more manifested and declared his
wisdom and knowledge, as he came to riper age. To this observation of his
Majesty, I replied; I could not imagine any thing that might with any color be
objected against it, save only that it is said in the same place, That Jesus
increased in wisdom, and stature, but his growth and increase in stature was
not only in appearance to the world, but in truth and properly, and therefore
his growth, and increase in wisdom might be conceived to be real, and in
inward habit, and not only in outward manifestation thereof.

To this his Majesty said, that these words, He increased in wisdom, may as
well be interpreted by the other, He grew in favor, as by these, He grew in
stature, yet said he, Christ might also be said truly to increase in wisdom,
and knowledge in himself, as he did in stature; If we speak of
experimental knowledge, whereof S. Paul says, Heb 5. 6. That he learned
obedience by the things he suffered; but from this increase in experimental
knowledge, none could infer any ignorance at all in Christ, because, though
he knew not some things experimentally in his Infancy, which he knew afterward
in his riper years, yet he knew the self same things before otherwise by his
divine knowledge, and by his habitall infused humane.

The last point questioned by his Majesty in M. Cromptons book, was his
undertaking to vindicate St. Augustine from the imputatioon of being durus
pater infantum, a hard censurer of poor children dying unbaptized; whom he
excludes from all hope of salvation. Although says his Majesty, I like it
better especially in a young Divine, to endeavor to defend an ancient Father,
where the truth will bear it, then like Cham to seek to discover the
nakedness of the Fathers; Yet I like not your defense of Saint Augustine in
this particular, because it is a known error in him, and you ought to have
observed three Caveats in reading of Austine, and other ancient Fathers works.

First, You should observe what they write out of their private opinion, and
what they deliver as the Judgment of the Church. When any of them go alone,
it is not so safe following them, but where we have their unanimous and joint
consent in any material point, we may more securely rely upon them. All the
Jesuits in the world shall never be able to produce the unanimous consent of
the Fathers against us; or for themselves in any substantial point of Faith,
as I have maintained in my books against them.

Secondly, That you should distinguish what the Fathers write dogmatically, and
what rhetorically: For sometimes they may strain somewhat too far in flourish
of exornation and we ought to make the best, not the worst of their sayings.

Thirdly, You should observe what they deliver in rofessed discourse, and for
positive doctrine, and what they write in heat of opposition; wherein
sometimes through too much vehemence they over strain in their polemicall
tractates against Heretics; For instance, in this very point S. Austin in his
worthy treatises, extant in the seventh Tome of his works, in vehemently
oppuguing those Heretics, that agree with our Arminians, (to wit) the
Pelagians, who denied original sin in Infants and consequently the necessity
of Baptism, was so far transported to urge the necessity thereof, that he
excludes all Infants dying unbaptized from all hope of salvation.

Whether his Majesty received these Observations from any ancient Father, or
late judicious Writer: Or whether the same spirit which directed them
immediately, instructed him, I know not. But after I took a note of these
Cautions jointly from his Majesty's mouth, I found the^ severally delivered by
diverse renowned Authors. The first by Vincentius Lirinensis adversus hareses.
Tunc operam dabit ut collatas inter se majorum consulat, interrogetque
sententias eorum duntaxat, qui diversi licet temporibus and locis in unius
tamen Ecclesiae Catholicae communione and fide permanentes, magistri probabiles
extiterunt, and quicquid non unus aut duo tantum sed omnes pariter uno eod
^mque consensu aperte, frequenter, perseveranter tenuisse, scripsi^e, docuisse
cognoverit, id sibi quoque intelligat sine ulla dubitatione esse credendum.

The second Caution is so necessary that even the most learned among our
Adversaries subscribe unto it. (...).
Sixtus Senenses says, Sae^e monuimus non esse concionatorum verba semper
^origore accipienda, quo primum ad aures auditorum perveniant. multa enim
declamatore per Heperbolen enunciant, and hoc interdum Chrysostomo contingit.
If C. Bellarm. and others of Sixtus Senensis profession, had well observed this
Caution of his, they would never have grounded any Article of Faith upon flowers
of speech, and Rhetorical exornatio^s in the Fathers as they do in the point
of invocation of Saints, which they build upon an Apostrophe: nor the carnal
eating of Christ with the mouth, upon the Hyperboles of some of the Fathers,
viz. Nazianzen, and Chrysostom.

In the last Caution his Majesty co^curreth with great S. Basil, who notes it
of Dionysius, that he gave the first occasion and birth to the Error of the
Anomaei, by certain speeches that fell from him, (...). Not out of any evil
mind he had to broach a new Heresy, but out of an over vehement desire to
contradict and confute Sabellius. Sixtus Senenses, and Vasques ingenuously
confess, that many of the ancient Fathers, in opposition to the Manichean
Heresy of fatalitie, spoke too freely of men's freewill. And does not St.
Jerome in heat of opposition to Vigilantius, who too much undervalued
Virginity, run somewhat upon the other extreme, by too highly extolling the
same, even to the disparaging (in some sort) of holy wedlock? It cannot
likewise be denied, but that Saint Augustine was carried too far in the point
in question, (...): Not out of any evil meaning; but out of opposition to
Pelagius his Heresy. In censuring Pelagius his Heresy, he goes so far in
urging the absolute necessity of Baptism, that he holds all children dying
unbaptized in the state of damnation. For which his severe censure of poor
Infants, he is called durus pater Infantum. And this, said his Majesty, I
learned when I was but 22. years old, and therefore marvel that a Doctor of
Divinity, and a Writer against Papists should be ignorant thereof. My answer
hereunto was, I was not ignorant, that no children dying unbaptized, according
to S. Austines opinion, ordinarily were, or could be saved. And in this
regard, he might justly be called, durus pater Infantum. But yet I could not
think S. Austine so severe against poor Infants, as to deny, but that some
children dying without Baptism, especially borne of religious parents, might
by the extraordinary mercy of God be saved, as the Thief was upon the Cross,
without receiving that, or the other Sacrament, and for proof of this my
opinion touching St. Austine, I alleged these words out of his fourth book de
baptismo contra Donatistas, ca. 24. Sicut in illo latrone quod ex baptismi
sacramento deficerat complevit omnipotentis benignitas, quia non superbia, aut
contemptu, sed necessitate defuerat; sic in ijs infantibus, qui non baptisati
moriuntur, eadem gratia omnipotentis implere credenda est. Of this place of
Saint Austine, his Majesty said, That the words were misalleaged, that Saint
Austines words were not, [Sic in infantibus, qui non baptizati moriuntur,] but
sic in infantibus, qui baptisati moriu^tur, eadem omnipotentis gratia implere
credenda est. Hereunto craving leave to speak what I could, with submission
yet to his Majesty's better Judgment, I said, that I thought, the former
reading was the truer, because there was never any question of the salvation of
Infants borne of faithful parents, which dyed being baptized; Neither seemed
there to me any good correspondence between the parts of the similitudes, If
we read the words without the negative particle thus: As the thief upon the
Cross by the extraordinary mercy of God was saved without baptism, so Infants
are saved dying with baptism by the mercy of God. Moreover the reason which
S. Augustine here urges to prove the thief on the Cross was saved without
baptism, because he contemned not baptism, makes as strongly or more strongly
for infants, who questionless cannot be thought any way to contemn baptism.
If necessity excuse the thief on the Cross, it seems that the same
necessity in S. Augustines judgment might excuse Infants for the want of
baptism. To this his Majesty answered, That the similitude in S. Austine
stood thus, That as the thief on the Cross was saved without baptism,
because the want thereof was of necessity, and not of contempt, so also
children that are baptized are saved by the extraordinary mercy of God, without
actual faith and confessing thereof. And to prove this to be S. Augustines
meaning, he commanded my Lord of Durham to read the words immediately
following, which are these: Quod non ex impia voluntate, sed ex aetatis
indigentia, nec cord credere ad justitiam possunt, nec ore confiteri ad
salutem. Which words, when I heard read, I confessed that his Majesty had more
exactly viewed the place, with the several editions, than I; and that not
only the Authors, but the Licensers of books were subject to mistaking,
especially in variety of Editions of the same Author.

And here as I began to entreat his Majesty's favorable construction of what
I had said in all this defense of my self and M Crompton, my Lord of Durham
prevented me herein, and his Majesty graciously reached me out his hand to
kiss; and thus with fatherly admonitions, and benedictions also, he dismissed us
both.

FINIS.
THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader, this Relation enclosed in a Letter to the D. of W. was
showed to King James our late Sovereign of blessed memory and order was given
by his Majesty for the present printing thereof: it was licenced for the
Press, and entered for my Copy, Ian. 19. 1625. with an Epistle Dedicatory
prefixed to his most excellent Majesty that now is, shortly after his
Coronation. Since which time (the Author not urging the printing thereof) I let
it lie by me, and employed my self in printing diverse other books which were
then more sought after; whereby I hoped in some measure to repair that
exceeding great loss which I sustained by Fire, in the burning of M. Elton his
book on the ten Commandments, and Lords Prayer, the greatest loss (in that
kind) that ever any Stationer received: for I had taken from me almost nine
hundred books, bound and in quires. which (with my Albeit for my releasement I
was and will acknowledge my self much obliged to a great and reverend Prelate
in this Church.
Imprisonment, and other charges) cost me above threescore and ten pounds.

And though I have since been beholding to my good friends for some good
Copies, that would have helped to make me whole again, (if they might have
passed freely without check or rub) yet I found, to my great disadvantage,
that the Informer, who so persecuted M. Elton after his death, held on his
course to calumniate the writings of my friends living, and to procure them
either to be altogether suppressed or to be so gelded and mangled, that the
sale of them thereby was very much hindered: Neither was he content to do me
and my friends this wrong while he hovered here about London for such preyes,
but since his flight into the North, he triumphed and boasted at the table of a
great personage, that he had procured Pelagius Redivivus to be called in, and
utterly suppressed; and that 300. of them were taken from the Printer. But
herein he was not his crafts-master, but was Cousened himself: for though a
great number of the Copies of that Work were taken from me, upon his clamor,
and delivered to the Bishop of London that then was, yet they were all given me
back again: and by the stir he made about them, they were much more
inquired after and sold the better, being called for even from the remotest
parts of Scotland.

As for this Relation, I fear not his, nor any others mis information, which
had (three years ago) not only the approbation of diverse reverend Divines*
but also of the most learned Prince King James; there being nothing contained
in it, but that which tends to the glory of God, and the honor of that
religious King; who showed his constancy in the true Religion established, and
his Zeal for it, as well against the Papists, as other Heterodox Opiners even
to the death.

Robert Mylbourne.


