FAMES ROVLE: OR, THE NAMES of our dread Sovereign Lord King CHARLES, his
Royal Queen MARY, and his most hopeful posterity: Together with, The names of
the Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Bishops, Barons, Privy Counselors,
Knights of the Garter, and Judges.

Of his three renowned Kingdoms, England, Scotland, and Ireland:
Anagrammatiz'd and expressed by acrosticke lines on their names.

By Mistress Mary Fage, wife of Robert Fage the younger, Gentleman.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Oulton, 1637.

TO THE MOST High and Mighty Monarch, Charles by the grace of God, King of
Great Britain, France and Jreland, Defender of the Faith, etc. his most Royal
Consort our most gracious Queen Mary, the High and Mighty Prince Charles,
Prince of Wales, the most illustrious Prince James, Duke of York, the High and
mighty Princesses Mary and Elizabeth, the Royal posterity of our Sovereign
Lord King Charles: And to his Majesty's most Illustrious Allies, the most High
and Mighty Prince Christerne King of Denmark: The high and mighty Prince
Charles Prince Electour Palatine: The high and mighty Prince Henry Prince of
Orange, and the most Illustrious Prince De Lorreine Duke Chereuze.
PArdon powerful Princes and potent Potentates, my presumption, in pressing
into your presence: Impute it to nothing but zeal. It was a law amongst the
Persians, that whenever any man met his Monarch, he should forthwith present
him with somewhat as a te^^imony of that duty always owing unto Majesty. One
meeting the Persian King on a time, by the suddenness moved, and having no
better for the present, took up one handful of water, and prostrating
himself presented the same to the King; which the magnanimous Monarch
gratefully accepted, and liberally rewarded him for the same. Take this most
magnificent Princes, as a bowl of water from the fount of Helicon; where it
comes short, let my desire of perfectness supply. And you most noble Princes
of the Netherlands, finding you participators of our English honor, I have
made bold likewise with you, presuming upon like hope of pardon, minding your
many weighty occasions I remember Virgill, Cum canerem Regibus, Cynthius aurem
vellit: Wherefore with all possible duty to your Majesty, and the rest of you
mighty Princes, casting my self at the foot of your Majesty, I rest,

Your Majesty's Faithful Subject and honourer of Your most Princely virtues,
Mary Fage.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS Princes, James Duke of Lenox, George Duke of
Buckingham; The Right honorable John Marquess of Winchester, Thomas Earl of
Arundell and Surrey, and other the Earls, Anthony Vicount Mountague and other
the Vicounts; The Right Reverend Father in God, William Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury and other the Archbishops and Bishops, The right honorable Henry
Lord Clifford and other the Barons, Sir Thomas Edmonds and other the Knights of
the Privy Counsel; The Right honorable Sir John Brampton Knight. Lord chief
Justice of the Kings bench and other the Judges.
I Have Right noble and worshipful, adventured to present each of you with a
glimps of his own glory naturally innated in your Names: Great assayes need
great patronage, and this I know will be deemed as a bold deed, if not borne
out by your Noble and worshipful Tutelage, for which I have chosen each of you
as my Mecaenas, countenancers of learning and industry; I shall not need
apologize for my self; your names of honor pleads my pardon for your own
honors sake; and you Right worshipful, think it an act of most worship to
patronize and pardon, remembering the old said saw, posse, nolle, nobile: I
know you have power to frown, but to abstain is truly noble; wherefore
adventuring to stand to your several doomes, who are able to Judge of all
disadvantages, either of sex or want of learning, I take leave and rest,

The honourer of your virtues in my Cell, MARY FAGE.

FAMES ROVLL.
(1) TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY. CAROLVS STVARTE. Anagramma. AV!
SOL'S TRV TRACE.
CHARLES our great Monarch, on my bended knee,
AV! much-admiring at your Majesty!
Render I to your sacred Personage
Of your most Princely virtues, this true gage:
Lustrous your beams of brightness, like true Sol,
Vailes the beholders eyes, or dazels all,
Shining in glory over all the Earth;
Showing your light unto the greatest birth:
The several planets of our firmament,
Virtues nobility, their luster lent,
AV! have from you, our true and lively Sun,
Releeving with your heat, where ere you come.
Thus just true fervor in your person pace,
Enlivening all things in your SOL'S TRV TRACE.
AS Elizeus great, did erst inherit
Blessed Elia's graces, doubled spirit,
Charles our dread Sovereign, such a crown does wear,
Decked with the glory that did ere appear,
Ever on any worthiest Charles to be:
For Charles the great, in our great Charles we see:
Great Charles the bald, gross Charles, what grace they had,
Has not our Charles the same to make us glad?
In Charles the simple; his simplicity
Keeps your wisdom but in memory:
Like ground of black, which better does illuster
Many fair works, that thereupon do cluster.
Now Charles the Duke of Loraine, Charles the Earl
Of Flanders, Pebles are to our true Pearl.
Put Charles Valerius, Charles Vngarius too;
Quenched are their light, when you true luster show.
Right Charles le Beau, the Earl of March may be
Some glimmering figure, representing thee:
Then comes in Charles the Duke of Florence, and
Valorous Charles Lurielberg, with his band,
With Charles John, who Constantinople had:
And to the number, Naples King let us add,
By Writers called Charles, one Andrews son,
Charles called the wise, let also here have room:
Doubtless but a Medietated part
Even of the wisdom in our Charles his heart
Fell to his share. Charles then his son had reigned
Great King of French, whose son the same attained.
High Charles the Duke of Burgundy his grace,
Inthroned Charles the eight, who had the place
Kingly to sit, over the French to sway;
Live all revived in our Charles this day.
May Charles the fifth not here be pretermitted;
Not long ago who with Spaines Realm was fitted,
On whom likewise, according to his merit,
Placed was the Emperors Crown, for him t'inherit.
Queld may their virtues seem, when yours in sight
Royally glister, giving radiant light,
Showing their graces, double double spread,
Truly descended on your Kingly head:
Valor and wisdom, piety, and all
Well have conspired, to crown You Capital.
(2) TO THE MOST GRACIOUS MAJESTY of the Great MARY. MARIA STVARTE. Anagramma.
MET RARA AVIS.
Magnanimous great SOL, as he did pace,
A RARA AVIS MET, in his true trace;
Regarding of YOUR virtues gracious Queen,
Innated in your breast, A Rare Bird seen,
And SOL'S true lively Bird, an Eagle high,
Striving aloft, even unto SOL to fly:
The Phoenix rather, then the which no more,
Vives on the earth, save one, the only store;
And YOUR unsampled graces so abound,
Rightly proclaim, SOL has this Phoenix found:
This does your goodness show, truth grants it,
Entering but this SOL RARA AVIS MET.
(3) TO THEIR MOST EXCELlent Majesty of Great Britains Monarchy.
CAROLVS-MARIA-STVARTE. Anagramma. AV! VESTA, TRAC SOL, MARRY.
Cheerly firm Vesta, clad in verdant green,
AU! is an emblem of our glorious Queen;
Rendering a stable, fast, well knitted heart,
On our great SOL placed, thence not to depart:
Likely an higher Goddess cannot be,
Vesta like, ruling in her chastity,
Shining in virtues gracious increase.
Much glory has this Vesta, but no peace,
Au! does to her true soul at all remain,
Returning till she does her SOL retain;
In whom she does delight, whom in her pace,
Admiring she does follow in true trace.
So Vesta traceth SOL, and did not tarry,
Till their united graces they did MARRY,
Virtues conjoined thus, SOL in his heat,
And Vesta in her chaste, and plenteous great
Rare right increase, does truly multiply,
Thrusting so forth a great posterity,
Ever to last unto eternity.
(4) TO THE HIGH AND Mighty Prince, CHARLES, Prince of Wales. CHARLES STVARTE.
Anagramma. SVR' A SELECT HEART.
Choice the foundation is, whereon elect,
Heavens choose to build, as SUR A HEART SELECT.
Arts there will flourish, learning will increase,
Religion fructify, and blossom peace,
Live then most happy Prince, thy HEART SELECT
Ever will bear a glorious Architect;
Sciences here, both moral and divine,
Structure may have, making the building fine,
The Arts will greatly your great soul adorn,
Virtue will highly elevate your horn,
And like great CHARLES, fit you for peace, or War,
Revealing good to choose, the Ill to bar.
Thus SUR A HEART SELECT will learning flourish,
Enriching you, your Contrymen to nourish.
(5) TO THE MOST Illustrious Prince, JAMES, Duke of YORK. JAMES STVARTE.
Anagramma. AV! I SEEM A STAR.
I SEEM A STAR Au; may your grace well say,
Amongst our glorious STARS, who light display,
Making all Europe to behold your light,
Evermore fixed fastly in their sight,
STARS, when the Sun appears, lie hidden then,
Shrouding their light, until the night again,
This STAR does with the Sun his light display,
Vesper-like, ushering the glorious day
As out, so in; and though his light appear
Rather to glimmer yet, then to shine clear:
That he is now a STAR the world may see,
Each day his light increasing gloriously.
(6) TO THE HIGH AND Mighty Princess, MARY, eldest Daughter of our Sovereign
Lord King CHARLES. MARY STVARTE. Anagramma. A MERRY STATV.
Mirth may with Princes very well agree,
A MERRY STATU then, fair Madam, be;
Rightly 'twill fit your age, your virtues grace;
Yielding A MERRY STATU in your face.
Smile then, high Lady, while of MIRTH write I,
That so my Muse may with alacrity,
Unto your Highness sing without all fear,
And a true STATU of your virtues rear:
Reaching whereto, that she may higher flee,
Thus humbly beg I on my bended knee,
Ever A MERRY STATU be to me.
(7) TO THE HIGH AND Mighty Princess ELIZABETH, second Daughter to our
Sovereign King CHARLES. ELIZABETH STVARTE. Anagramma. AH; BEST TY TRV ZEAL.
ELIZABETH, whose highness name declares
Lively Gods oath, which he to's people swears,
In memory keep great Eliza still,
Zealously running up to virtues hill:
AH! the BEST TY, TRUE ZEAL will always be,
Best, firmest, fastest that uniteth thee
Either to God, who in a ZEAL most true
Thy gracious heart honors with service due,
Honoring God by A TRUE ZEAL, BEST TY,
Suing the BEST with his great Majesty;
Then if unto your Sovereign Parents dear,
Virtuously, a TRUE firm ZEAL you bear,
A great deal better, faster you are tied
Rightly, then by the bands whereby allied
Thou art to them by nature. So likewise
Ever BEST TY, TRUE ZEAL, thy Country cries.
(8) TO THE HIGH AND Mighty Princess ANNE, third Daughter of our Sovereign
Lord King CHARLES. ANNA STVARTE. Anagramma. A NV NEAT STAR.
A STAR remain you in our Firmament,
Newly sprung forth, having the luster lent,
Neatly wherewith your excellence does shine,
(Ah still increase you) from that SOL of thine.
STAR does your birth denote you, and your youth
Truly averreth you NU STAR in truth:
Very much likewise does your little brow
Actively set you forth A NEAT STAR now;
Reflecting then upon your Excellence,
That shows your radiant and sweet influence,
Each one does grant you A NU NEAT STAR hence.
(9) To the most Illustrious Prince, GEORGE, Duke, Marquess, and Earl of
BUCKINGHAM, and COVENTRY, Viscount VILLERS, Baron of WHADDEN. GEORGIUS VILLERS.
Anagramma. RYS, GORGEVS IVELL.
Great gracious Duke, borne unto high advance,
Ever be rising by the gracious glance
Of thy dread Sovereign, who selected thee,
Right Gorgous Iuell, his great Pearl to be.
Graced by high birth, and his resplendant grace,
In solace with your Prince to have a place.
Virtue then Gorgeus Iuell, still possess,
Suting well with your Graces happiness.
Valor and worth of your great stock inherit,
In striving to your Honor, to have merit.
Lively still casting forth such radiant rays,
Letting the world this Gorgeous Juell praise.
Ever still sending forth more glorious light;
RYS still O GORGOUS IUELL, to be bright:
So shall thou be thy Sovereigns great delight.
(10) To the right Honorable JOHN Marquess of Winchester, Earl of Wilts. and
Lord St. John of BASING. JOHN PAWLETT. Anagramma. WHAT PILE NOT?
In you who look, and view your grace awhile.
Oh honored Marquess, doubtless sees a PILE,
Heroic virtues, Piled on an heap,
Never leave their Mansion in your soul to keep.
Placed here is valor, manliness that is right,
Admitting of a sober wise delight,
With gravity and wisdom so expressed,
Let any show you What should be redressed.
Ever increase, and let the Pile still grow,
That still your graces may a great Pile show,
There Is in your Pile what not the world will know.
(11) To the right Honorable THOMAS, Earl of Arundell and Surrey, Earl
Marshall and Primier Earl of England, Knight of the Garter, and one of his
Majesty's most honorable Privy Council. THOMAS HOWARD. Anagramma. OH WARD
MOST-HA?
Thou Englands Marshall, who great sway do bear,
Having received it from our Sovereign here,
Oh ward, defend, maintain, ensased be
Most from all hazard, or affront by thee,
And as a Marshall, Marshall in array
So well thy men, that they may win the day.
Ha! as true Marshall be a ward to most,
Oh! still repress the evil in your host,
Well as you are, continue such to be,
And Englands Marshall is advanced on thee;
Respecting whose true worth, a challenge here
Does follow with the Ho, your foes to fear.
(12) To the right Honorable ABRAH, Earl of OXENFORD. ABRAH VERE. Anagramma.
HEAR; BRAVE.
Ah thou Brave Hero who in youths young years,
Bravely advanced art amongst the Peers,
Rare plant of Veres true stock, oh may you have,
Active young Spark, a time to grow up Brave,
Hear what the Muses wish you, oh Brave Sir.
Virtue as a Brave Vere, do you prefer,
Each one that knows you then, will daily crave
Rare Earl, that after you have here been Brave,
Eternal joys in Heaven that you may have.
(13) To the right Honorable Algernon, Earl of Northumberland, Lord Poynings,
Fitz Pain, and Brian, Knight of the Garter. ALGERNON PERCIE. Anagramma. PIERCE
ON, ENLARG.
Ah honored Peer, Pierce with your virtues, which
Lively abounding in you, make you rich:
Great to the Ears of all who hope to hear
Each several grace, does mutually appear
Reared in your breast, as trophy of your worth,
Nor though the beams thereof have often come forth,
On great Northumbers foes casting a terror,
Nere cease to Pirce on still, so be a Mirror.
Pierce on your friends with admiration still,
Entire who love you with a firm good will;
Repress your foes, by Peircing on with grace,
Choosing still virtue, spite of envies face:
Your fame Enlarge you so by peircing on,
Ever so honor you will attend upon.
(14) To the right Honorable GEORGE, Earl of Shrewsbury, Lord Talbot,
Furnivall, Verdon, and Strange of Blackmere. GEORGE TALBOT. Anagramma. O GREATT
GLOBE.
GREATT GLOBE, which many honors comprehend,
Evermore many virtues so intend.
On whom Great Britain then casting an eye,
Reviewes your worth, and O Great Globe does cry.
Great are the honors, which by birth transcending
Entire are on your head, virtue attending.
Thus honor honors grace, and grace again
A mutual honor does not thence restrain.
Letting the world see, that who grace does honor,
(Blessed soul indeed) has still transferred upon her,
On her who honors grace, honor again
Thus round, O Great Globe, still thou do remain.
(15) To the right Honorable HENRY, Earl of Kent, Lord Ruthin. HENRY GRAIE.
Anagramma. REIGN HYER.
Here high advanced sit you an high Earl,
Ever adorned with true virtues pearl,
Never had you reached the honor, had not worth,
Regarding of your honors noble birth,
Yielded a fruitful shower of virtues dew,
Gracing with virtue, honor fallen on you,
Reign Hier though, here Sir you would not rest,
As a great Eagle higher build your nest.
Ye Reign your heart up Hier wherein heaven seated
Eternally dwells He who you created.
(16) To the right Honorable, WILLIAM, Earl of Derby, Lord Stanley, Strange
of Knocking, and of the I Will of Man, Knight of the Garter. WILLIAM STANLEY.
Anagramma. ALL SAINT ME WILY.
Well may you be a Saint, whose innocence
In your Progenitors, without offense,
Lived fast unto their Sovereign, and did still
Love them with hearty, and a firm good will:
In you abides their nature, as their blood,
And you as ready are in doing good;
Manly indeed as any Stanley, if
Such cause should be your Prince should need relief;
The which even God forbid should e're befall.
Admiring at your Grace, they Saint you all:
Nathles they know, that as a Dove you are,
Likewise does Wily wit in you appear;
Even practicing what Christ commanded you,
Your Wily wisdom Saintlines ensue.
(17) To the right Honorable Henry Earl of Worcester, Lord Herbert of
Ragland, Chepstow, and Gower. HENRY SOMERSET. Anagramma. HE IS NERE STORMY.
Happy's the Land where patient Nobles sway,
Ever delighting in it every day,
None are more wise then such as wisely can
Rule the distempers, and the storms in man,
Yielding a quiet comfortable rest:
Storms raging, whereby reason was oppressed
Of several passions being kept in awe,
Mutinize not, but yield to reasons law;
Entire in such soul does reason sway,
Rightly to reason actions do obey;
Such soul are you, the Muses me relate,
Entire within who keep a glorious state,
Thus He Is never Stormy, oh great Potentate.
(18) To the Right Honorable GEORGE, Earl of Rutland, Lord Rosse of Hamelake,
Belvoir, and Trusbutt. GEORGE MANNERS. Anagramma. NOR AS GREEN GEM.
Great honored Peer, and Rutlands Noble Earl,
Ever in virtue shining like a Pearl
Over all Europe, adding to your birth,
Radiant bright beams of your true honored worth;
Gem great and precious, see you are remaining,
Ever the rays of virtues beams retaining,
Making all Europe stand amazed quite,
And wonder much at Rutlands glorious light.
Nor as a Green Gem let your lus^re be,
No, greenesse here betokens Levity.
Evermore as a precious Gem remain you,
Red, or some orient color still retain you;
So nor as Green Gem, will the world proclaim you.
(19) To the Right Honorable FRANCIS Earl of Cumberland, Lord Clifford,
Westmerland, Bromfleet, and Vessey. FRANCIS CLIFFORD. Anagramma. FANCY'S CLIFF
ORDER.
Fair Music has a Cliff, and that does guide
Rightly the song, who marks not that, sings wide:
And there is a proper Cliff to every thing,
Not cared for, an ill event will bring.
Chose whatsoever enterprise you will,
Ensue the Cliff, or be unlucky still,
Seek every thing to act in his right key,
Choosing at first the end well to survey:
Lustrous bright rays of beauty then will shine
Into that heart, who is so true divine:
Fancy has each man then, and who does steer
Fancy to a right end, does wise appear,
Ordering his Fancys Clyff on virtue set,
Rightly till he a good event has met;
Doubtless so order Fancys Cliff do you.
(20) To the Right Honorable EDWARD Earl of Sussex, Viscount Fitzwalter, Lord
Egremont and Burnell. EDWARD RADCLIFFE. Anagramma. I WARD FREE, FED, CLAD.
Evermore may there riches great increase
Double to you, who so acts righteousness;
Warding the poor, who want a sure defense;
And well regarding oppressed innocence,
Rightly proclaiming you a Noble Peer,
Devoted unto works of mercy here,
Ever hereafter that you may shine clear.
Run on blessed soul, who as a Ward most Free
Advances forth, the poores defense to be:
Doing all freely evermore remain,
Cloud-like retaining to distill the rain,
Letting it fall upon the thirsty ground,
In watering earth, which Husbandmen do mound
Free Ward you are not only, but you Feed,
Feeding the needy, you clad those who need:
Ever may numbers of such Nobles breed.
(21) To the Right Honorable HENRY, Earl of Huntington, Lord Hastings,
Hungerford, Botreaux, Moeles, and Molyns. HENRY HASTINGS. Anagramma. SING HE,
HY STAR.
Hy Star you are, in that you placed stand,
Enranked as an Hero of the Land,
Near to our radiant Sol, in Firmament
Radiantly shining: with the beams that lent,
You have from that most Peereles orient light.
Hy Star that thus to glister has delight,
Advance the gifts which nature, and thy birth
So liberally bestowed on thy worth:
That his great honor may be sounded out,
In honor that has brought it so about,
Now as a Star, that honored are you.
Give him the praise thereof, as it is his due,
Sing so, Hy Star, blazon his praises true.
(22) To the Right Honorable EDWARD Earl of Bathe, and Lord Fitzwarin.
EDWARD BOVRCHIER Anagramma. DOVE, BE RICH REVVAR.
Ever where Dove-like innocence does bide,
Does rich reward well happen to betide,
Who is an innocent and harmless soul,
Ah who is it his honor would control!
Rather who would not set his helping hand,
Desiring such were great ones of the Land,
Endeavoring safe to be in their command?
But yet if innocence should honor want,
O honor there would be nathles not scant;
Virtue is such a peereles precious thing,
Rightly it honor with it self does bring:
Choose whether men will honor it or no,
Honor it self it is, where it does go:
Innocence Dove-like is a Rich reward.
Evermore then your soul who it regard,
Rightly may be in blessed Elyzium starr'd.
(23) To the Right Honorable THOMAS, Earl of Southampton, and Baron
VVriothesley of Tichfielde. THOMAS VVRIOTHESLEY. Anagramma. HAS MET WORTHY
SOIL.
Thou Britains Island, who this Soil possess,
Has met a Soil most full of worthiness;
On which the seed of honor being sown,
Much fair increase of virtue will be grown,
And sprouting forth from that most worthy ground:
So worthily a worthy Soil that is found.
VVorth, happy is the Land that here has met,
Regarding a fit place for virtues set
In it to grow, and flourish with delight.
Oh, will the world say then, worthy soil right!
The weeds of wickedness not here are found,
Here piety does only root in ground.
Evermore may your Soil worthy remain,
Seeds of true worthiness still to retain,
Let them increase, and into numbers grow;
Ever the true worth of the soil so show:
So height has met a worthy soil, we know.
(24) To the Right Honorable FRANCIS, Earl of Bedford, and Lord Russell.
FRANCIS RVSSELLE. Anagramma. EN! SCYLLA'S REFVS'R.
From danger must that prudent heart be free,
Rightly that them beforehand will foresee.
A wise man sees the plague before it come,
Not to be hurt thereby, the fame will shun:
Chiefly intending how to go aside
In wisdom, from the trap his foes do hide:
So Shipmen, as they pass upon the Seas,
Regard, and so avoid the Rocks with ease
Vanity it is to fall into the pit,
So by that means to get quite out of it.
Such one, right honored Lord, you are not, for
Ever the Rocks of danger you abhor.
Let those who know you then, truth but confess,
Lively I you Scylla's Refuser guess,
En does an admiration but profess.
(25) To the Right Honorable PHILIP, Earl of Pembroke, and Montgomery, Baron
Herbert of Cardiffe and Shirland, Lord Parr, and Roosse, of Kendall, Fitzhugh,
Marmion, and St. Quinton, Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household, Knight of
the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Counsel. PHILIP
HERBERTE. Anagramma, HY, BET; HELP RIPER.
Placed in Hy honor, since your honor now
Has free access to him who maks us bow,
In titles who has honored you full high,
Lustring your ancient honor so thereby,
Inrich't with virtue, finding you to be,
Placed you are in's Councels secrecy.
Help then must needs your goodness (as I said)
Eternally advanced, be riper made,
Reaching forth still a most melifluous hand,
Blessing with comfort, poor men in the Land;
Ever may good men (one your honor is)
Rare honors great increase still, never miss:
The more Hy you, and such as you are, rise,
Ever the poor Bet, riper help comptise.
(26) To the right Honorable William, Earl of Hartford, and Baron Beauchamp.
WILLIAM SEYMOVRE. Anagramma. I AM MORE IEVV'LLS, VY.
With noble Jewels of the inward mind
Indu'd should these be, that from noble kind,
Lively descend. And the more noble still,
Let ever covet most his soul to fill,
Enriching it with this most lasting Pelf,
And sure these Jewels will out-last on's self,
Making one live again when he is dead.
Seymoure, great Hertfords Earl, most nobly bred;
Ever you show, that you do well pursue
Your Predecessors, Jewels, which in you
Most lively acted are, so that thereby
On you more Jewels daily fructify;
Virtue in you is so incorporate,
Rightly more Jewels are you for the State,
England calls men to Vy in you her fate.
(27) To the right Honorable ROBERT, Earl of Essex, Viscount Hereford, and
Bourchier, Lord Ferrers of Chartly, Bourchier, and Lovaine. ROBERT DEVEREVX.
Anagramma. BE DVX, OR REVERT.
Right Earl of Essex, warlike Devereux son,
O you a Captain rightly are become;
Blessed by the Muses, who will have it so,
Enjoining that you for a Leader go;
Raised unto honor, and your Fathers merit;
That you Son-like, his virtues may inherit.
Dux be you still, and so continue ever,
Entending in your valor to persever.
Valorous worth descend upon your head,
Even from your Predecessors, who though dead,
Rightly alive may in their son be said;
Envy by virtue making so afraid;
Virtues great Champion be, or you are reverting,
Xanthus-like, from your Cadmus mount departing.
(28) To the right Honorable Theophilus, Earl of Lincoln, and Lord Clinton.
THEOPHILUS FINE. Anagramma. HO! PVLS HE FINITE?
Thou Lincolns Earl, in honors high advance,
Honor those, on whom you cast a glance,
Enlarging virtues diverse, manifold,
On you resplendant, and by fame inrol'd,
Placed in your heart, and they have placed you
High above others, as it is your due,
In which estate you honor virtue so,
Let any judge herein, whether or no
Virtue or you is more advanced thereby:
Sent by the Muses, though to you am I.
Finite to tell you, that all honor here
Indeed is, though it do not so appear.
Now make the world then, who your virtues know,
Ever demand, what, Pulls he finite? ho!
(29) To the right Honorable Charles, Earl of Nottingham, and Lord Howard of
Effingham. CHARLES HOWARD. Anagramma. HARD, LOW SEARCH.
Choice Piece of worth, your nobleness does show,
Hard it is to search out sin with awful brow,
And ne'rethelesse a low mind to retain,
Rightly he comes of a noble strain,
Laboring as he 's set above on high,
Even so on sin to have a watchful eye;
Searching it out, lest that it should increase,
Having withal an humble Lowlines:
Oh Hard is this to search, and yet be Low!
Well, natheles your honored self does so:
Armed so against sin, with a search so pure,
Rightly iniquity cannot endure.
Drawing those hearts by lowlines I Am sure.
(30) To the right Honorable, Theophilus, Earl of Suffolk, Lord Howard of
Walden, Knight of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Counsel. THEOPHILUS HOWARD. Anagramma. HOST HE HELP YOU WARD.
The great Jehovah who did e'rst create
Heaven, earth, and all, and all does gubernate,
Ever He help you ward the Host, within
Of honored graces, that the world has seen
Placed in the Cabinet of your true heart:
He help you ward them, he teach you the art,
Into your heart who did the grace instill,
Lively your heart with new supplies to fill.
Virtue will so a-ward most sure make you,
Saving your Country, as a Peer most true.
He help you ward the Host, if need there be,
Of armed Soldiers, and that destiny
Will that the malice of our foes beat back,
A sure defense of men we do not lack,
Rightly will he help you to ward the Host,
Dear honored heart, whose name implies most
Entire firm love to God, the surest Post.
(31) To the right Honorable EDWARD, Earl of Dorcet, Baron Buckhurst, Knight
of the Garter, Lord Chamberlain to the Queens Majesty, and one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel. EDWARD SACKVILE. Anagramma. LIVE,
WARDED CASK.
Ever may you (a Cask or cabinet)
Decked with rich precious stones, (which therein set
Worthily do adorn your worthy mind)
A long and lasting life for ever find;
Rightly a Noble Cask you are, wherein
Dwells Jewels that full long in you have bin.
See what heroic virtue does excel,
And you shall find it in this Cask to dwell:
Cask noble then, our Royal virtuous Queen
Keeps well in memory what you have been,
Views well your virtue: and does honor you.
Your honors great King Charles too does pursue;
Live then O warded Cask, which warded been
Even as by virtue, so by King and Queen.
(32) To the right Honorable WILLIAM, Earl of Salisbury, Viscount Cramborne,
Baron Cecill of Effinden, Knight of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Counsel. WILLIAM CECILL. Anagramma. WILL CLIME CLAY.
Well, view you all the world and find it Clay,
Enjoyed honors you see fleet away;
Loss is all riches, in your wise account,
Likewise there is nothing here does loss surmount;
In earth find what you will that had may be,
Alas, alas, it is brittle Clay you see;
Many great Monarchs, who have born great sway,
Clothed now are with ignorance in Clay.
Even this your honor seeing, does provide
Climing on high, a surer State to bide;
In virtue so you fix so firm a stay,
Lasting estate you have will not away,
Lively proclaiming, that you will clime Clay.
(33) To the right Honorable WILLIAM, Earl of Exeter, Baron Burghley, Knight
of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
WILLIAM CECILL. Anagramma. WELL, I CLYM, I CALL.
Well may you stand upon an hill on high,
In whom habitual goodness we epsy:
Lively you that express, who Clym so well.
Lustring forth graces, which in you excel.
In honor many stand, which not well gained,
Admits not long by them to be retained;
Many examples of it we might find
Chronicles ancient bring unto our mind,
Eternizing, that honor is a blot,
Cursed to such men as deserve it not.
In you nathles, who honor well did clym,
Lively pourtraying grace to after time,
Live and call others to like fate of thine.
(34) To the Right Honorable, ROBERT, Earl of Somerset, Viscount Rochester,
Baron of Brasepath, and Knight of the Garter. ROBERTE CARRE. Anagramma. RERE'T,
ORB-RACE.
Rare Orb-race of the world, wherein grace set
On honored birth, is Earl of Somerset;
Bright shining prudence, like the Suns beams clear,
Ever disperse; and in your acts appear.
Rare Stars do Emblemise the several graces
That in your soul inhabit several places,
Even shaming of your foes unto their faces,
Choosing your soul to think on Heaven I see,
And in your body, earth it seems to me,
Rightly unto the life is represented
Rere't, orb-race then, so may thou be contented,
Earth, Heaven, and all are never from thee absented.
(35) To the Right Honorable JOHN, Earl of Bridgewater, Viscount Brackley,
Baron Elesmere, Lord President of Wales, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Counsel. JOHN EGERTON. Anagramma. ON HY, NOT EGER.
In honor seated, though you are on hy,
O You pursue the same not egerly;
Hy though you are, your thoughts are humble still,
Nor can your greatness you pride with ere fill.
Ever more Hy, the more your lowlines,
Greatly unto your honor, you express,
Egerly seeking Noblenes to show,
Rather then greatness, to the peoples view.
Titles you like not, truth you do affect:
On Hy, not eager, shows a heart select,
Not built for less then a great Architect.
(36) To the Right Honorable ROBERT, Earl of Leicester, Viscount Lisley,
Baron Sidney, of Ponshurst. ROBERTE SIDNEY. Anagramma. ON YE BEST RIDER.
Regard does true Nobility still cast
On such disports whereon true honor's placed,
Being less loss of time, more common good
Ever achieved. Thus does true Noble blood.
Rare sport of all is worthy horsemanship,
That does true valor in remembrance keep:
Entered is valor in a Horses crest,
Such is the fortitude of that brave beast,
Ye Rider then, who place therein your joy,
Delight in it still; it is Noble, not a toy:
Never leave off an exercise so good,
Ever so fitting to a Noble blood:
Ye rider best, on with your manly-hood.
(37) To the Right Honorable SPENCER, Earl Northampton, Baron Compton of
Compton. SPENCER COMPTON. Anagramma, ON PRESENC COUNT.
Sure it is the greatest honor of a Peer,
(Presuppose that excepted, makes him bear
Ensigns of Honor above other men:)
Nere to the presenc Chamber to be then,
Charily eying of his Sovereign Prince,
Ever beholding him, without offense,
Regarding which, the Peers who virtuously
Choose above others to walk worthily,
O they enjoy the presenc of that Sun
Most gloriously, from whence their luster come.
Press then into the presenc, and regard
That M^jestie, which you does so reward:
On presenc Count, his estimation high;
No man but Kings advance to dignity.
(38) To the Right Honorable ROBERT, Earl of Warwick, and Lord Rich of Leeze.
ROBERTUS RICH. Anagramma. SO BE TRVER RICH.
Rich (honored Sir) I know in wealth you are,
O but my Muse enjoynes another care;
By too much earthly care, (the souls annoy)
Even this sweet care men utterly destroy:
Rich be in graces moral, and divine;
Thus to be Rich, is truer then in coin,
Virtue may last when all your wealth may fleet:
So be you truer Rich, is Counsel sweet.
Rich thus you are, O but remember yet;
In vain to run, unless the Crown to get:
Choose to run on the Race you did begin,
Hence to be truer Rich indeed you win
Even then the greatest Monarch, without sin.
(39) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Earl of Devonshire, and Baron
Cavendish, of Hardwick. WILLIAM CAVENDISHE. Anagramma. SV MY LIVELY ADVANCE.
With virtue now, sucked in, in tender years,
Innated in you, like to other Peers,
Lively advance, Su forth; that as years grow,
Likewise may honor to your honor flow:
In tender years that every man may view,
Admiring it, Lively advance you Su;
Making still have on virtues path to tread,
Choosing a life that never will be dead,
And such an honor too, as all beside
Virtues true honor, will not long abide,
Even riches likewise virtue is the best,
Nothing but that will bring so sure a rest.
D^sirest then a life that long will last?
In honor permanent, wealth not to waste?
Seek after virtue then, and find it true,
Honor attendant will be still on you,
Ever then lively your advance thus su.
(40) To the right Honorable JAMES, Earl of Carlisle, Viscount Doncaster, and
Lord Hay of Sauley, JAMES HAY. Anagramma. I AM HY SEA.
I am hy Sea, may you say very well,
Advanced unto honors that excel,
Made admirable to the peoples eye,
Ever who gazing see your dignity;
So as in admiration Hy you stand,
Has grace to be admired in the Land;
And as Hy Sea, in honor, so likewise
Your virtues streams let to Hy Sea arise.
(41) To the Right Honorable WILLIAM, Earl of Denbigh, Viscount Fielding, and
Baron of Newnhampadox. WILLIAM FIELDING. Anagramma. LIVELY MAN, GVID LIFE.
With manlines who art so well indu'de.
Innobled in your soul with fortitude,
Lively man needs must be; and that is the man
Lively who guide his life in perils can:
In quiet wether, sans tempestuousnes,
A life to guide sets forth no manlines;
Manlines does in stormy winds consist.
Fierce when storms rage then quietly to rest:
In perils to be pressed with manlines
Ever to last, and not endure repress,
Lively man, shows he is, he life can guide,
Duty performing whatsoever betide;
Enriched with a gracious content
Never decaying, for it is permanent.
Go on then lively Man, guide life so well,
Each one may say none Denbigh could excel.
(42) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Earl of Bristoll, and Baron Digbye, of
Sherborne. JOHN DIGBYE. Anagramma. BY HY GIDEON.
In sacred stories we recorded find
Of Gideon poor, also in humble mind,
How God raised him, and set him up on Hy,
Newly his Israel so to save thereby.
Doubtful he was, his faith God did increase,
In wetting and in drying of his fleece.
Great Lord, since you are then advanced Hy,
Be hy in grace, in Gideons valiancy,
In courage let your Magnitude appear,
Ever to be accounted, great, good, Peer.
(43) To the Right Honorable, LIONELL, Earl of Middlesex, and Baron
Cranfielde of Cranfielde. LIONELL CRANFIELD. Anagramma. LION-RACE, LEND, FILL.
Lion race in your true Nobility,
In fortitude, and magnanimity;
On whom reflecting, we must needs behold
New acted, many virtues that are old,
Ever though like a Lion fierce you be,
Live honored, let your true humanity;
Lend let your mercy luster to your life,
Choose Lion courage, against these, who brief
Raging against you, would your hurt attempt;
And Lion-like have such in great contempt,
Nevertheles as Lions will not kill
Fiercely, those who are prostrate to their will,
In pity pardoning and supplying them;
Even so you must releeve the needy men,
Lending to some, and filling other too,
Doubtless from hence a great reward will flow.
(44) To the Right Honorable, CHARLES, Earl of Anglesey, Lord Daventrey.
CHARLES VILLERS. Anagramma. CHARRES ALL IVELS.
Charres very well all Jewels, may be said,
Hearty firm love has your true honor made;
A most entire affection in your Sier
Regarded well our King, whom all desire;
Long life may long unto his reign succeed,
England of him has evermore great need:
So well we love him, that we much affect,
Very much loving, where he does select.
In you then finding, for your fathers sake,
Largely delight our Sovereign does take,
Loving him so entirely as we do,
Ever true honor we do wish unto,
Rare Imp of worth, your heart to honor pressed,
Seated in Charres all Iuells, so to rest.
(45) To the Right Honorable, HENRY, Earl of Holland, Baron of Kensington,
Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, Justice in Air of all his Majesty's
Forests, Chases, Parks, and Warrens on this side Trent, Constable of the
Honor and Castle of Windsor, Groom of the Stool, Lord high Steward of the
Queens Majesty's Revenews, Gentleman of his Majesty's Bedchamber; Knight of the
Garter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel. HENRICUS
RICH. Anagramma. RECH RICH VINES.
Heroic Sir, my Muse presents you
Even with this counsel, which to say but true,
Nobly your worth does practice; Rech rich Vines:
Reching implies laborious high designs;
Join Rich thereto, not aiming at base dross,
Choose to Rech rich Vines, wherein is no loss.
Vines rich do many virtues tipifie,
Spreading, and branching to the heavens high.
Rather these Vines branches of Christ may be;
In whom dwells all grace; for a Vine is he:
Christ then select for yours, and you shall win
Hereby to Rech rich Vines, as you begin,
Eternising the grace you now are in.
(46) To the Right Honorable JOHN, Earl of Clare, Lord Houghton of Houghton.
JOHN HOLLIS. Anagramma. OH! ON HY HILLS.
In virtue when I see you make such speed,
Oh it does then no admiration breed,
Hy, on hy hills of honor that you stand;
Nature commands virtue such a band.
Honor on virtue ever should attend,
Oh on hy hills you may for ever wend,
Loving of virtue, which does shine so clear;
Likely it is you Earl of Clare appear:
Ensue then well what you have well begun,
So on hy hills to stand you well have won.
(47) To the Right Honorable, OLIVER, Earl of Bullingbrooke. OLIVER SAINT
JOHN. Anagramma. NO IL VY, REACH HY STONE.
Oh he that sees your virtues manifold
Lively expressed, with courage wisely bold
Indeed admires, and stands at gaze; and yet
Vieth no il, virtue commanding it:
Ever still virtue in a new succession,
Rightly in you express a new progression.
See how your mind aspiring, not proud tho,
Admits not of a resting here below
In earth your soul places no sole delight,
Never relying here, to do her right,
Choosing a loft to be, and Reaching hy,
Thy heart shows plainly set on sanctity,
Ever hy precious Stone thy mind reach still.
I mean a sure foundation, and no il,
O then no il vy in this peereles Saint,
Hy Stone reach he, he may without restraint,
Never shall such building so firm placed faint.
(49) To the Right Honorable, Mildemay, Earl of Westmerland, Lord le De
spencer, and Burghwash. MILD MAY FANE. Anagramma. IF A MILD MAN.
Mild man if you indeed be, noble Sir,
Yield then a courteous smiling glance, on he
Led by the Muses, that does here present you
Duty obsequious, let it then content you.
Mildeman to be nobility befits;
And he that Mildnes gains, true honor gets
Your honor, whether with this Mildnes graced,
Feign would I had the Muses truth have traced:
Ah they will not reveal't, but bade me say,
Now If a mild man, that you are, display
Ere long upon their maid some radiant ray.
(49) To the Right Honorable HENRY, Earl of Manchester, Viscount Mandevile,
Lord Kimbolton, Lord Privy Seal, and one of his Majesty's most honorable
Privy Counsel. HENRY MOVNTAGVE. Anagramma. RENV YOU GEMTHAN.
High fith you are, in honors high advance,
Entered into your Sovereigns gracious glance,
Never to be wed out; since innocence
Regarding, you live pure without offense;
You as a precious Gem, in peoples eye,
Making a luster far off we epsy:
O your fair Justice in your Court admiring,
Virtue we praise, are still your like desiring.
Now since that virtue graceth you so much,
The same pursue, let all men know y' are such;
And still O Gem renu you luster, than
Great as you are; to be termed a good man:
Virtue and grace will Chronicle your name,
Entering it written on the Roll of fame.
(50) To the Right Honorable THOMAS, Earl of Bark-shire, Viscount Andover,
and Lord Charleton, Knight of the Garter. THOMAS HOWARD. Anagramma. OH, DRAW
MOST. HA!
Thy true Nobility, of ancient blood,
How it draws most men to thee that love good!
Oh that is true Nobility, which well
Most lively shines, in actions that excel;
Admired virtues evermore affecting,
Showing indeed that they are worth selecting.
HA! such an one your Noble self I see:
Oh that is the reason most draw then to thee,
Well viewing of thy virtues, seldom seen
Attained in age, in thee had though but green.
Rightly indeed they may with admiration
Draw most to thee, and joy thy exultation.
(51) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Earl of Cleveland, Lord Wentworth of
Nettlested. THOMAS WENTWORTH. Anagramma. AH MOST WORTH WENT.
Those who your worthiness have in their eye,
How can they choose but worth indeed espy!
Oh those that view your worthiness, must say,
Most worth indeed you do to life portray.
Ah most worth, when you come, to us is lent;
So, when you go, we say, Ah! most worth went.
Worth excellent, unto the life portrayed,
Entirely in your life is well bewrayed:
Nature it self, even most habitually,
Thrusts forth worth to view exceedingly:
Worth in you does not in concealment bide,
Oh you your virtues labor not to hide;
Rightly your worth in several virtues spread,
Thrivingly is most worth, in orient red.
Ha most worth went! will be when you are dead.
(52) To the Right Honorable, EDMOND, Earl of Mulgrave, Lord Sheffield of
Butterwike, and Knight of the Garter. EDMOND SHEFFIELD. Anagramma. HE FILLED,
FEDD MONES.
Ever may Mulgraves Earl, if Muses write
(Darling unto the poor) of your but right,
Make all the world admire in seeing thee,
On high an Emblem of true charity.
Now we may see how charity does grace
Duly great men, who use it in their place.
See how much greater still a man does rise,
He may the same still the more exercise:
Eternize then your greatness you do mean.
Filling and feeding those that hungry been:
Filling and feeding them, and you thereby
Increasing of your store most gloriously,
Ever regarding of the poor, whose moan
Lively does pierce your heart; their inward groan
Doubtless has made you fill and feed each one.
(53) To the right Honorable, HENRY, Earl of Danby, Lord Danvers of Dantsey,
Knight of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel.
HENRY DANVERS. Anagramma. SE, AND RVN HIER.
Hier to run, argues a mind that is Hy,
Entirely fixed on Nobility,
Never that is contented with a stay,
Runs on still in virtues beaten way;
Yet lest that headlong, in a precipis,
Devoide of care a man may run amiss,
And climing steep may venture up so high,
Neerehand he may in danger be thereby:
Virtue advises us before to se,
E're that too hastily we runners be.
Run thus you do, who se, and then run hier,
Sans pride who unto noblenes aspier.
(54) To the Right Honorable, ROBERT, Earl of Monmouth, Lord Carry of
Lepington. ROBERT CARYE. Anagramma. CARRY BET ORE.
Right honored Peer, of Caries honored Stem,
O by your virtues seek to honor them:
Bet is the honor that true virtue brings,
Ever then birth, though destini'd for Kings:
Rare is the wealth, and more enduring suer,
That virtue brings; that always will endure.
Carry then virtues ore, a treasure Bet
Ah then the ore that is untryed yet!
Rightly this, though it has in fire been tri'de,
In which a treasure true it did abide,
Even Carry this bet ore, what e're betide.
(55) To the Right Honorable, HENRY, Earl of Malerburgh, and Lord Ley of Ley.
HENRY LEY. Anagramma. HIER LINE.
Hier your line is then the common sort,
Each one the reason easily may report;
Never shall learning, virtue, justice, and
Righteousness e're unrewarded stand.
Your mind, as with these graces it is indude;
Lively is Hier then the multitude:
Evermore as it grows more divine,
Yields it forth still a more Hier Line.
(56) To the Right Honorable, EDWARD, Earl of Norwich, and Lord Denny of
Waltham. EDWARD DENNY. Anagramma. IN END VVARDED.
Ever may he without all hazard go
Devoid of fear, that is warded against his fo;
VVarded with such a certain sure defense,
As in the end will guard his innocence;
Right Noble Earl, then in your end you are warded,
Danger therefore you well leave unregarded.
During your life, see what a ward you have,
Ensafing you till tombed in your grave;
Nay you are warded in your tomb most sure.
Now God and King, you both your wards procure,
You in your end are warded most secure.
(57) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Earl Rivers, Viscount Colechester, and
Lord Darcy of Chich. THOMAS DARCIE. Anagramma. AD O RICH MAST.
Thy Ship is fraught with all things worth esteem,
Having what ever men do precious deem:
O therein, as in Storehouse, plenteously,
Made full of all things by capacity,
As on the bords of memory, from Seas,
Showing oblivion, vertu's kept at ease.
Does a mast want to lead your Ship along?
Ad a rich mast unto your ship so strong.
Repelling hazards, that the same may glide
Close to your haven of Heaven, where you would abide:
You Will then arrive, then do as a rich mast,
Encountering here, with every stormy blast.
(58) To the Right Honorable, ROBERT, Earl of Lindsey, and Lord Willowby of
Eresby, Lord Great Chamberlain of England, Knight of the Garter, and one of
his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel. ROBERTUS BARTTVE. Anagramma.
VERTV'S ABBETTORR.
Right noble Peer, great Lindseys honored Earl,
Of England the Great Chamberlain, a Pearl
By Virtue ah so truly your delight,
Even placed are you in the peoples sight,
Rarely to shine, and glister in their eye;
Thus destined is it by high Majesty:
Virtue since you affecting love so well,
Suer ( Vertu's fair abettor) you will excel.
By you is Virtue acted, not alone
Admiring it your self; but every one
Regarding Virtue, you so far abet;
That none e're craved a defense more bett.
Thus happy time, that we such worthies see,
Vertu's abbettorrs, are right noble ye:
Evermore still Vertu's abbettorr be.
(59) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Earl of Newcastle, Viscount Mansfield,
Lord Boulsouer and Ogle. WILLIAM CAVENDISHE. Anagramma. I CAME WELL, HEAVENLY
DY'S.
With happiness may you for ever pass
Entire the minutes of your honors glass:
Letting the world see, that full well you came,
Lively to live, upon the Roll of Fame.
In craggie uneven paths you did not strive
Attaining honor, in it to survive;
Making unhonourable honors seat:
Care to be good you took, not to be great:
Advanced to be to honor for desert,
Virtue affecting, like a noble heart;
Every way thus your heart, in so good frame,
Needs must I say full well to honor came,
Doubtless who so well honor did attain,
I 'th end a sweet epitomy shall gain.
So holy living, heavenly needs must die;
Heaven truly living unto each man's eye,
Ever in your well poys'd nobility.
(60) To the Right Honorable, HENRY, Earl of Dover, Viscount Rochford, and
Lord Hunsdon. HENRY CARRY. Anagramma. CRY, EARN HY.
Heroic heart, your virtues we descrying,
Earn hy you do, are evermore in crying:
Near we will deny, that virtue gets on high,
Rightly deserving unto heaven to fly:
Your virtues honored Carry, then does make
Choice of your noble self, and you hy take.
Admire we nothing then, that you so great,
Retain unto your self so high a seat:
Your virtues earning, that reward did get.
(61) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Earl of Peterborough, Lord Mordant of
Turvey. JOHN MORDAVNTE. Anagramma. AD ON, HY MOVNTER.
In honor hy you are a Mounter well;
On hy mount on: in goodness still excel,
High mounter, so that every man may see
Not honor clyming as in virtue thee.
Mount thus you do, O but remember tho,
On toylesom voyage you on hy must go,
Run may you down a Hill, but up again
Doubtless will labor, pain, and sweat constrain.
Ad then more strength, on hy, more hy to mount,
Virtue will you reward, and you may count,
None that shall see you but will say the truth;
That there proceeds, an hy mounting youth,
Ever replenished with just true ruth.
(62) To the Right Honorable HENRY, Earl of Stanford, Lord Gray of Groby,
Bonvill and Harington. HENRY GRAYE. Anagramma. HIER GAINER.
Hy though you are in honors favor set,
Ever a hier gainer be, more get.
No covetous desirethe Muses mean,
Regarding an affection far more clean,
Your true Nobility, though near so great,
Greater may be, if hier gainer yet.
Rightly though many Monarch's you should sway,
A hier gainer you may be this way.
Your noblenes does rightly this pursue;
Ever a hier gainer, to each view.
(63) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Earl of Winchelsey, and Viscount
Maidston. THOMAS FINCHE. Anagramma. AH! FECH IN MOST.
The deep foresight, which, noble Earl, in thee
Heroickly remaining each may see,
On virtue having pitched your noble eye,
Making account without it, misery,
Although proceeded from most noble stem,
Secure to be, you fech in most, of them.
Faith firmly fixed, has to Heaven an eye;
Enjoying hope, an anchor sure thereby
Never will fail; but yet to be more sure,
Charity a true trial does procure.
Ha then, your soul is well, feching in most
Enduring treasure, whereof you may bost.
(64) To the Right Honorable, ROBERT, Earl of Kingston upon Hull, Viscount
Newarke upon Trent, and Lord Perpoint of Holmes Perpoint. ROBERTE PERPOINTE.
Anagramma. O PRY! NO BETTER PEER.
Rare Peer we pry you, who your virtues see,
O pry no better Peer, we say then thee.
Better Peer none can be, true worth affecting,
Ever found out then you, virtue selecting,
Rightly declaring you a Noble Peer,
Treasuring virtues, shining in you clear,
Ever a lasting treasure so retaining:
Peerles you will be, by so Peerles gaining,
Eternising your name and memory,
Record remaining to posterity.
Peerles is virtue, and does make a Peer,
In whom resplendant graces shine most clear;
Your self an Image, rather the self-same,
Not raised but by virtue to your frame;
That all the world, seeing your virtues raised,
Entend to pry no better Peer to praise.
(65) To the Right Honorable ROBERT, Earl of Carnarvan, Viscount Ascot, and
Lord Dormer of Wing. ROBERTUS DORMERE. Anagramma. BE-ERR METRODORVS.
Rare Metrodorus, we recorded find,
One of them had a most assured mind,
(Blessed who has such a friend) fast to his friend;
Evermore who did faithfulness intend:
Recorded we do find another was
Truly endued with a most neat phrase,
Very much eloquence he did affect,
So, nor Philosophy he did neglect.
Do they excel as much as e're they can,
O you are the more true accomplished man.
Recorded in your breast I do espy
Most fast affection, dwelling constantly:
Ever Philosophy has taken rest,
Resting it self within your noble breast,
Even Metrodorus you be-err in jest.
(66) To the right honorable MOVNT-IOY, Earl of Newport, Lord Mount-joy of
Thurveston. MOVNT-IOY BLVNT. Anagramma. I BVILT ON MOUNT.
Mounts high above the Earth, are free from wet,
On which who builds a sure foundation set,
Verily standing firm against each storm:
Nor does the Mount leave truly to perform,
The right condition of a good foundation,
In one estate that ever keeps its station:
Oh happie's he, whose house builded thereon,
Yields not in storms the fall of one poor stone.
Builded have you thereon, which causes it
Lasting to stand, no part thereof to fleet,
Virtue is the firm Mountain, honor is,
Newly reard as an house; the end is bliss,
That you who so sure builded shall not miss.
(67) To the right honorable PHILIP, Earl of Chesterfield, and Lord Stanhop,
of Shelford. PHILIP STANHOPE. Anagramma. POSTEN HAPPILY.
Placed within your breast I do epsy,
High ensigns of most true Nobility,
In you I see that virtues fair increase,
Lively acquires unto your soul great Peace;
In you nobilliti's most noble Rays,
Place still most lively your immortal praise.
So then most happily you posten on,
That you may be a most selected stone,
And virtue happily has posten you,
Now to receive reward that is but due
Howerly to your deserts, which virtuously,
On high affecting, ought to be on high.
Posten you have then happily in deed,
Invited thereto by fair virtues seed.
(68) To the right honorable NICHOLAS Earl of the I Will of Thanet, and Lord
Tufton of Tufton. NICHOLAS TVFTONE. Anagramma. HEON LOFTY NVC AST.
New is your Cast, not new the virtues tho.
In honor Lofty you exalts so:
Choice graces you did long ago affect,
High honors they did unto you select;
On you, which as a Cast, most suddenly,
Lighted upon your soul heroickly
Admiring it, since without your desire,
So nimbly unto honor you aspire.
Thus though no gamester but as virtue betted,
Verily you a lofty new cast fitted,
Fair game you needs must have, who so fair gain,
Thus so unlook't for, by one cast retain,
Oh he that virtue has to be his dice,
Needs must that man, without all question rise;
Even your nu lofty cast transcends twice sice.
(69) To the right honorable, RICHARD, Earl of St Albans, and Clanrickard
vicount Tunbridge, and Galloway, Baron of Somerhill, and Imanney. RICHARD DE
BVRGHE. Anagramma. RICH GVARDED HERB.
Rich needs must you be, who in honors seat
Installed was, Sir, by your virtues great;
Choosing the truest Riches, therewithal,
Honor did likewise to your Honor fall,
As Solomon, when wisdom he elected,
Riches, long life, and honor were selected,
Descendant on his head, to be his Crown:
Dear honored Lord, twill be your great renown,
Ever recorded, that ya'r rich in grace,
Best guarded thereby are you in your place,
Virtue will raise you, who are virtuous,
Rich guarded sure to be, and sumptuous,
Guarded like to an Herb that precious is,
Had in a garden that no walls does mis,
Even so Rich guarded herb you are borne to bliss.
(70) To the Right Honorable, JEROME Earl of Portland, Lord Weston of
Neyland. JEROME WESTON, Anagramma. O VVIN MORE REST.
In honor when your father seated high,
Ever he little rest acquired thereby;
Right noble Lord: but you his honored son,
O to your self mo rest then he has won:
More rest and quiet to your mind attained,
Ever then he in all his life had gained.
With honor is attendant care and pain,
Ever almost, who one, does other gain:
Such happiness is yours, to honor pressed;
That notwithstanding, you do win more rest.
O win mo rest still, till the heavens you gain,
Never desist for rest to take some pain.
(71) To the right Honorable ANTHONY, Viscount Mountague of Coudecy. ANTHONYE
BROWN. Anagramma. I NO NEW ROBE THAN.
Admired virtues, that in you are old,
Notes your ancient noblenes inrold;
That you a Viscount of most ancient blood,
Have as true greatness in you; so true good.
O with heroic virtues robbed are you,
Nor are the graces which you practice, new:
Your heart affecting in your ancient way
Ever to walk, nor ever thence to stray.
Bravely thus marching, never still to stay,
Robed thus, since your soul with virtue clear,
O well adorned, noble does appear;
Well may your body wear the robe not new,
Noting to all your honor to be true,
Ever so well clad, no new robe then sue.
(72) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Viscount Purbeck, Lord of Stoke. JOHN
VILLERS Anagramma. ON SILVER HILL.
In honors high advance, on silver hill,
O noble Purbeck, it is the Muses will,
Heaven, have confirmed it, and it so shall be,
(Never to be changed) that they have seated thee.
Virtue in thee abounding, like a mine,
Injoynes no further that we go, true coin
Lives here, I mean your virtues truly white,
Like unto Silver; nay it is the right:
Ever may you who such true wealth possess,
Rightly yet covet more, without excess,
Standing on silver hill, your happiness.
(73) To the right Honorable, WILLIAM, Viscount and Lord Sey and Seal.
WILLIAM FINES. Anagramma. IN SAFE MY WILL.
Well you Insafe, whose very will does so,
In letting still your native Country know,
Lightly there lives not any that more safe
Loves to see his Country live and laugh;
In vain it is not then, that you are raised,
Admired who are indeed, and therefore praised
Much that your will seeks to insafe your Land.
Firm is that Nation where such Lords command,
In the Lands safety let your will likewise
No sure Insafement want, which still supplies
Ever at every hand does will to frame,
Seeking t'insafe the Country by the same.
(74) To the Right Honorable, EDWARD, Viscount Wimbleton, Baron Cecill of
Putney, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel. EDWARD
CECILL. Anagramma. CIVEL CRAVED, LED.
Ever may you, who know full civilly,
Duly what is fit for true nobility;
With wisdom, and Civility to Crave;
Accordingly your full desire to have:
Rightly you knowing how to crave, may lead
Doubtless the King to grant you, what you need,
Ensuing your demands by wisdoms lore.
Choice wisdom sure you have, ne are you poor
In true civility; who wisely know,
Craving wherein the King will bounty show:
Ever respecting too what crave you may;
Long shall you not without a granting stay,
Letting the King such wisdom rare survay.
(75) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Viscount Rock-savage. THOMAS SAVAGE.
Anagramma. AV, MOST SAGE: HA!
That Lords and Peers, who come of noble blood,
Having heroic virtues in them good,
On the beholders casting admiration,
Mainly still eying of their most just station;
Au! that such men, those virtues were the less,
Sage most should be, that argues noblenes.
Sage is an herb which comfort the heart,
And solid wisdom rests in that part:
Virtue so much does in good sage remain;
Admired wisdom does its name retain:
Great honored Lord, thy virtues shows thee,
Evermore Au! a most sage Lord to be.
(76) To the Right Honorable, EDWARD, Viscount Ragley in England, and Viscount
Killnltagh in Ireland. EDWARD CONVVAY. Anagramma. ONCE VVARDED WAY.
E'rst noble Conway, you once warded way,
Drawing unto our Sovereign without stay;
With pity, and with mercy rare excelling,
Ah poor complaynants, who for grief were yelling,
Relying upon you, to you they pray,
Drawn by your pity, you ward them the way.
Charles our great Monarch, when with nimble eye
On you reflecting, pity he did spy
Naturally within you to abide;
VVarding the way; no longer he would hide
A way from you his gracious inclination,
Your worth deserving, straight your exaltation
Ensued by a glorious constellation.
(77) To the Right Honorable, PAUL, Viscount Bayning of Sudbury, and Lord
Bayning of Hookesley. PAVL BAYNENING. Anagramma. AV! BEGINN PLAIN.
Plain low beginnings, though but low they seem,
Au! come in time to be of great esteem:
Very small drops, by dropping on and on,
Long time it is not before they pierce the stone.
By a small cole once kindled, may succeed
A mighty deal of water they may need:
In the beginning one poor couple then,
Now fructifi'd, is numberles of men.
Ever your solid wisdom then in sight,
Not without cause wherein you take delight,
I cannot but admire, to do it right:
No high but plain beginning you affect,
Great will be then the ensuing Architect.
(78) To the Right Honorable, EDWARD, Viscount Camden, and Baron Noell of
Ridlington. EDWARD NOEL. Anagramma. LONE VVARDED.
Ever secure may you for ever bide,
Doubtless, who such a ward have by your side,
VVarded not only by vour virtues rare,
Admired at in you they should appear,
Rightly so acted to the life in you,
Declaring your Nobility most true.
Now this is a defense and sure great ward:
O ne'rthelesse you have another guard,
Ever inricht by virtues ward, that you
Lone-warded are, and truly rich to view.
(79) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Viscount Wentworth, Baron of Wentworth
Woodhouse, New-march, and Overfley, Lord President of the North, Lord Deputy of
Ireland, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel. THOMAS
WENTWORTH. Anagramma. WE THAN MOST WORTH.
Thou noble Spark, indeed we must confess,
Have in thee a great deal of worthiness:
O! none that knows you, but if truth he says,
Mildnes he must without all question praise,
As one fair virtue that in you has place,
So adding unto you a lustrous grace.
With wisdom likewise, as a pearl, your soul
Endued is, blind folly to control:
No bitterness in you; yet such a rate
That men may set a true high estimate,
(Waying the virtues that are in you rare,)
On you, and so not to offend you, dare:
Rightly his Majesty does this epsy,
That made him place you Irelands Deputy;
Ha! needs must we than, most worth in you eye.
(80) To the Right Reverend Father in God, William, Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan, and one of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Counsel. WILLIAM LAVD. Anagramma. VALV, MYLD, VAIL.
With greater place, with greater grace should he
Inly be clad, who would Christ's Scholar be,
Lowlines loving; yet not living so,
Like these obscure, who forth no light will show,
Indu'd with mildnes should a Bishop be,
And ever vaild with true humility,
Mild veiled thus, he valu tho should have:
Lo, these bright graces make a Bishop brave;
And your mild carriage, truly Bishoply,
Vaild with the cover of humility,
Du valu of your worthiness descry.
(81) To the Right Reverend Father in God, Richard Lord Archbishop of York,
Primate of England, and Metropolitan, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Counsel. RICHARD NEILE. Anagramma. RELY HY ARDENCE.
Reverend high Prelate, well may we rely
Indeed upon your hy flamed ardency,
Choosing in ardent, truly fervent zeal,
Heaven fixed high, who striveth to reveal,
According as it is Gods sacred will,
Right things to men, thereby their hearts to fill,
Doubtless hy ardency thereby declaring.
England for Doomsday by Gods Word preparing.
Now such should Prelates be, ardent on hy,
Ever should move men on them to rely,
In you since such hy ardency we find,
Laboring to reveal to us Gods mind
Ever our hearts relying there we bind.
(81) To the Right Honorable, the Reverend Father in God, William, Lord Bishop
of London, Lord high Treasurer of England, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Counsel. WILLIAM IVXONE. Anagramma. NE, YOU VAIL MY LVX.
Why should a woman, who is frail and weak,
Into the praises of your virtues break,
Londons great Prelate, whom true virtues lore
Lively proclaims, thee rich within, not poor;
Ensuing which true riches, Charles our King
A meet Bird thinks thee in his Church to sing;
Marking the just accounts 'twixt God and thee,
Intrusteth thee with his high Treasury:
Very well may thou counsel good be giving;
Xenophon like, Philosopher-like living;
O! I confess, the Muses lend a light,
( Ne, you vail my lux tho: to do you right,)
Ever to those who in their laws delight.
(82) To the Reverend Father in God, Thomas, Lord Bishop of Durham. THOMAS
MORTONE. Anagramma. HO! TO MAN MO REST.
The word which you from Gods own mouth afford,
Ho! unto man does bring a resting word;
On which who do perpetually rely,
May ever in perpetual rest aby:
A sinner has a load, but Gods Word blessed
Sends unto him a comfortable rest.
Many men seem to rest in sin; but than,
O, settled rest, they none at all attain:
Resting in death the same is like, much rather
Then any true rest that such ones do gather;
Oh, unto man the word does bring mo rest:
Not letting conscience be by sin oppressed;
Ever then in thy preaching we are blessed.
(83) To the Reverend Father in God, Walter, Lord Bishop of Winchester.
WALTER CVRLE. Anagramma. CALL TRUE RVLE.
Well learned are you in Gods sacred lore,
Ah, who for the true rule does still implore,
Leaning on nothing but on Gods blessed Word,
That guidance truest, surest does afford:
Ever when as the Carpenter does square,
Regards he a true rule, good work to rear:
Call for the true rule still then, whereby youth
Virtuously may be trained up in truth;
Regarding which, right Reverend Father dear,
Let none go forth without this rule, to rear,
Ever at all any foundation here.
(84) To the Reverend Father in God, John, Lord Bishop of Worcester. JOHN
THORNBVRGHE. Anagramma. HE BIN ROVGH THORN.
In Gods Word, as there is most precious balm
Of the true Gilead, sins hot heat to calm,
Having refreshment for the soul that is weary,
Never leading of the poor and solitary;
There is so likewise in Gods blessed Word
Heartbreaking terrors, that do fears afford,
On them who sin affect with sole delight
Rending and tearing so the heart to fright,
Not leaving still to prick the same with fear
By godly sorrow, as if thorns were there,
Until the conscience once affected rend,
Resolving never more on sin to attend:
Great Reverend Prelate, thus Gods Word by you
Has power as a rough thorn, to say but true,
Ever bin he rough thorn, the Muses sue.
(85) To the Reverend Father in God, John, Lord Bishop of Chester. JOHN
BRIDGEMAN. Anagramma. HEDGE IN MAIN ORB.
In hedge the main orb by your diligence,
O reverend Father, with true vigilance,
Having Gods Word so perfect in your mind,
None may with fond excuses from you wind.
By learning sound, and eloquence divine,
Rays of true light let to the heathen shine;
In vain let Turks fond Mahomet bethought,
Declare then to them what good Christ has wrought:
Greatly the Jews by Gods great Word confound,
Ever revealing Christian doctrine sound:
May carnal Gospellers too be converted,
And showed the good they get when sin's departed:
Now hedge in the main orb thus holy hearted.
(86) To the Reverend Father in God, George, Lord Bishop of Saint David's.
GEORGE MANNERING. Anagramma. MEN-GRANGER, GO NIGH.
Granger is one who has a numerous stock,
Ever rejoicing how to feed his flock;
O Reverend Father, you the Granger are:
Regard then well those sheep, we to your share
Granger committer are by the great Pastor,
Ever the Bishop of our souls, your Master.
Men though you feed, and over them are placed,
A Granger by that God who you thus graced,
Now men, like sheep, some wander from the way,
Nor ever cease (until brought back) to stray;
Ere then too far from the commandment
Running they stray, Granger, their steps prevent
In holy zeal pursue them, and go nigh;
Nor leave them off till they are brought back thereby,
Granger of men, then feed them plenteously.
(87) To the Reverend Father in God, JOHN, Lord Bishop of Lincoln. JOHN
WILLIAMS. Anagramma. Win Holy Alm's: or, Holy Alm's Win.
In holy alms should Cleargymen excel,
O take this Motto then which fits you well;
Holy alms win: alms they are holy gain:
None bu^ the holy, holy things retain.
VVin holy alms then, and be sure of this,
In holy alms you win a holy bliss:
Like to the widow, who though all she gave,
Lost naught thereby; but thereby all did save,
In holy alms proceed; holy alms win
A lasting expiation from all sin:
May then our Clergy learn which way to get,
Storing up heavenly, earthly wealth will fleet.
(88) To the Reverend Father in God, JOHN, Lord Bishop of Salisbury. JOHN
DAVENANT. Anagramma. NO HEAD IN VANT.
In gifts excelling, though you do excel,
O you declare nathles, your soul right well
Has learned in the School of Christ, that you
Not of your self have grace, but for it sue.
Decked though your mind be then with many graces,
And they inhabit in you, several places,
Very well filling of your inward heart,
Ever that soundnes then does us impart;
Nathles the jewel of them all possessing,
Admire I do at Salisburies great blessing,
Not puffed up, no head in vant you rear,
Thus humble, lowly, still your self you bear,
(89) To the Reverend Father in God, ROBERT, Lord Bishop of Coventry and
Lichfield. ROBERT WRIGHTE. Anagramma. RIGHT TRUE ROBE.
Rightly you Robed are, who do possess,
On you the Robe of inward godliness,
By outward courage in your life expressed,
Ever declaring you most truly blessed:
Rightly that Bishopric is blessed likewise,
That having you, so great a light does rise,
With true sincerity, and learning pure,
Rightly advanced you have Right robe and sure,
In that you set forth nothing but what is true,
Greatly the true Robe does belong to you.
Having here Righteousness to you obtained,
The white true Right Robe you have rightly gained.
Ere long in heaven, to which you are attained.
(90) To the Reverend Father in God, MATTHEW, Lord Bishop of Norwich. MATTHEVS
VVREN. Anagramma. WE HAVE TRV MEN.
Men that they may be holy, true appearing,
Attend you preaching, they attend their hearing,
That so with have the Prelacy may make
Those that have had false hearts true hearts to take,
Hasting to make all false, true, uneven even;
Ere-long that so they may attain to heaven:
Very much hasting by Gods powerful Word,
Surely to frame them true unto the Lord.
Working their hearts so by contritions frame,
Rightly to have to truth, embrace the same.
Ever thus hasting may you still remain,
Nor may you cease true men of false to gain.
(90) To the Reverend Father in God, GODFERY, Lord Bishop of Gloucester GODFREYE
GOOD MAN. Anagramma. GOOD GOD! J FREE MAN.
Good God it is, who does his grace distill
On us, that we may well obey his will;
David when Israel with pleasing heart,
Free offering did unto the Lord impart,
Returned the praise to God, who such hearts gave,
Ever requesting, that they like might have,
Yea that God would in their Imagination
Ever keep it in their determination.
Good God! say you, when as your self you view,
On that great Bounty looking which you show,
On him you look, who is the God of Grace,
Denoting all Good in him to have place,
Making such like him free, whom he selecteth,
And I free man, Good God, say you, affects,
No doubt that heart whom he so well directs.
(91) To the Reverend Father in God, FRANCIS Lord Bishop of Ely. FRANCIS WHITE.
Anagramma. WITH FAIR SENSE.
Fair is the soul, white with fair Innocence,
Rightly that does expound the Scriptures sense,
And void of all adulterating guise,
No sense will give but such as edifies,
Choosing that sense that most does sin destroy,
Inviting of the soul to heavenly Joy,
So taking off the black and stain of sin,
With former beauty does the soul begin
Heroickly to shine, and glister white.
In deed who thus expounds hits it right.
Thus be you Reverend Father, with fair senc,
Expound Gods Word, showing your innocence.
(92) To the Reverend Father in God, JOSEPH, Lord Bishop of Excester. JOSEPH
HALL. Anagramma. OH! IS AL HELP.
Is help to your own soul, by Theory
Of the well practiced divinity;
So help to others souls you do afford,
Ever revealing to them Gods blessed Word,
Publishing it, that all men who attend,
Hearing may thereby save thee in the end.
Help unto some your books do well afford,
And unto others, like a Reverend Lord,
Lively your bounty in their wants appear,
Letting such know, that Oh all help is here.
(93) To the Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM, Lord Bishop of Landaff. WILLIAM
MVRRAYE. Anagramma. LIM A MERRY LAW; VY.
With the Laws terrors that the heart affright,
Ensuing him that follows not aright,
Living sans guidance of that holy Law,
Living without all conscience, fear, or aw,
In threatening wise him from his sin to drive,
A mingled balm of mercy, to revive,
Much terrified thereby, the drooping heart,
My Reverend Lord, thou do full well impart.
Very well Law and Gospel mingled right,
Rightly the Gospel heals, as Law does fright.
Righteousness most straight does Law require;
And Gods good Gospel no more does desire,
(You preach it well) then good will to descry,
Ever you Lim a merry Law, we vy.
(94) To the Reverend Father in God, RICHARD, Lord Bishop of Chichester.
RICHARD MOVNTAGV, Anagramma. GVARD A RICH MOUNT.
Rich are you in the graces that appear
Inhabitant, and shining in you clear,
Choicely delighting thereby every ey,
Heartily loving you so Bishoply;
Admiring in your virtues that proceed,
Rightly declaring that you are rich indeed;
Daily go on, as you have well begun,
Mounting still nearer to our glorious Son:
Oh as a mount above the rest; so high,
Virtue has made you over the vulgary
Now as a mount, you nearer to the Sun,
Thereby unto your self more heat have won;
And as a rich mount, if a guard you need,
Guarded you are by innocence, and heed,
Virtue security will truest breed.
(95) To the Reverend Father in God, BARNABAS Lord Bishop of Carlisle. BARNABAS
POTTER. Anagramma. SABA BORN, REAPTT.
Before your birth, you holy in the womb,
A Bishop destined were to become;
Rightly as Jeremy, who sanctified,
Never but did an holy man abide:
And you once borne, the sweet delightful Thus,
Born on the mount of Saba, reaptt for us.
Admired Frankincense an emblem right,
Showing how prayer mounteth to Gods sight.
Pestilence, thus on embers put, the steame,
Of it ascending clears from the same,
The Emblem of true prayer from fervent heart,
That makes all evil from the soul depart,
Ever may you and all our Clergy than,
Reap the Sabean Frankincense for man.
(96) To the Reverend Father in God, JOHN, Lord Bishop of Saint Asaph. JOHN
OWEN. Anagramma. HOE, WIN ON.
In your pursuit, right worthy Prelate you
O may win on; grace having to ensu:
Hoe though let the learned Muses you excite,
Never to leave off thus in doing right.
O still by Gods Word full of power and strength,
Win on till the elect be Won at length:
Ever be winning still, of souls to bless,
Never cease winning; it is your happiness.
(97) To the Reverend Father in God, JOHN, Lord Bishop of Rochester. JOHN
BOWL. Anagramma. HONEY BLOW.
In you the Sacred sweets of Gods blessed Word
O settled comfort truly does afford;
Having its sweetness from the God of grace,
Never that from repentance turns his face.
By the breath then which does proceed from you,
O you do seem to blow an honey dew:
With comfort lightning from sins miseries,
Like as the honey Jonathan in's eyes
Entire enlightened with true joys supply.
(89) To the Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM, Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells.
WILLIAM PERCE. Anagramma. PIERCE, LIM LAW.
With terror thundering to affright the heart,
Inbred corruption you caused to depart,
Lively you pierce, and to the bottom dive,
Letting sin know, he must not there alive
Inhabit longer; in each corner you
A search most diligently do pursu,
Making the sword of Gods blessed spirit pierce,
Passing unto the heart with vigor fierce,
Even limning so the law unto the life,
Reviving up again the ancient strife,
Cur'st sin with grace that was of yore maintained,
Encouraging fair virtue, sin restrained.
(100) To the Reverend Father in God, JOHN, Lord Bishop of Bristoll. JOHN
SKINNER. Anagramma. SIR KENN ON HY.
In your late exaltation I espy,
O Sir, that you indeed do ken on hy,
Having a nimble, sharp and ready wit,
Notable things to note, and how they fit.
Sir you do ken on hy, hy mysteries;
Kenning a searching knowledge does comprise,
In which your diligence is well set forth,
Noting you a laborious Bishop, worth,
Not to be pretermitted in that place,
Excellently your self you then do grace,
Rendering you kenning Sir, so Reverend face.
(101) To the Reverend Father in God, GEORGE, Lord Bishop of Hereford. GEORGIUS
COKE. Anagramma. O SVCKE GREGORY.
Gregory's learning, though a Pope he were,
Ever no shame it is at all to bear:
O then you suck that fount, whence graciously
Rightly came learning unto Gregory;
Greatly you study that same sacred Law,
In Gregory that bred so great an awe,
Very well waying what in him was good,
Sucking that in, but leaving rotten food.
Choice learning in this worthy Prelate rested,
O he Romes Primacy full sore detested:
Know let the Papists then, not yet the luck
Ever they had Pope Gregory to suck.
(102) To the Reverend Father in God, EDMOND, Lord Bishop of Bangore. EDMOND
GRIFFETH. Anagramma. Does mend grieff: or Grieff does mend.
Eternally without or blot, or stain,
During may you in memory remain;
Making the tears be pearls, which men do weep,
O teaching them in their right ford to keep,
Not for the world to mourn, thence no relief
Does then ensue, thy word does mend our grieff.
Godly's the sorrow, whereto you exhorting
Require us, from the wordly care, dehorting,
In such a wise, that when this grieff we take,
Fairly grieff does us mend and better make,
Fearing to sin this grieff in us does breed,
Ensafing us thereby against sin at need:
Thus as thy Word does mend our grieff, even so
Heavens have ordained that grieff does mend our woe.
(103) To the Reverend Father in God, FRANCIS, Lord Bishop of Peterborough.
FRANCIS DE. Anagramma. A FENCED SIR.
Fenced are you first with your innocence,
Respecting which you love without offense;
And then Gods Word is a sure fence likewise,
Not suffering sin your conscience to surprise,
Christ lastly is a most sure fence indeed,
In due time ready helping you at need,
So fenced is that soul, who fencing her,
Does Innocence Gods word and Christ appear,
Ever may you be then a fenced Sir.
(104) To the Right Honorable, HENRY Lord Clifford, only son of Francis
Earl of Cumberland. HENRYE CLIFFORDE. Anagramma. FRIEND OR HY FLEEC.
High honored Lord, and Cumberlands sole heir;
Ever may you to poor men Friendship bear,
Noting whose inward virtues of the mind,
Rightly a worthy friend indeed we find,
Your honored self, whose truly virtuous heart.
Ever does Friendship unto all impart.
Charity lively pourtraid is in you,
Lively expressed in figures very true,
In you is nobleness, and Noblemen,
Friends best are to the poor and needy then,
Free is your heart, the Freeman is best Friend,
On whom the poor most often do attend,
Respecting which I wonder not, when as
Doubtless your worth does Iasons fleece surpass,
Excel it highly although Gold it was.
(105) To the Right Honorable HENRY, Lord Abergavenny. HENRY NEVILL.
Anagramma. ERNN HY JVELL.
Heroickly your virtues truly worth
Ernn, an hy Iuell unto your great birth;
Nor can he very well the truth declare,
Rightly whether your birth or virtues are,
(You Peer of worth) the greatest to our view.
Nor is it that the Muses do ensue,
Eternising your memory nathles,
Virtue, the Muses say, will so you bless,
Ensuing it, as you do bring about.
Like a true Hero, you will ernn no doubt,
Lustrous hy Iuels, so your fame set out.
(107) To the Right Honorable, HENRY, Lord Paulet, one of the Sons of John
Marquess of Winchester. HENRYE PAWLET. Anagramma. I LET HAP RENEW.
Here in the world all do hap hazard live,
Each where to every man will fortune give,
Now a fierce frown, then a fair smile again,
Respecting still mutation to maintain,
Your greatest floods will have their ebbs, and then
Each ebb will wait to have a flood again.
Placed are we thus in a troublous world,
About that by inconstancy is hurld;
Well then may your most firm and constant mind
Let hap renew, waiting a better wind,
Ever revolving in your head, that when
The storm's most fierce, calm's like to come again.
(108) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Lord Matravers, eldest Son to Thomas
Earl of Arundell. JAMES HOWARD. Anagramma. DRAW HOME SAY.
In you, our Marshals Son, a Warrior borne,
Admired virtues seems to be worn;
Making such luster that your graces shine,
Ever declaring you a most divine,
Sage, prudent Peer, whose virtues in the way
Home draw you still, and so of you men say:
On heaven you fixed are, and that your home,
With grace thus guided will at last become,
And then a Trumpet of your noble name
Rung out a loud will be by la^ing fame,
Drawing still home till to your hav'n you came.
(109) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Lord Strange, eldest Son of William.
Earl of Derby. JAMES STANLEY. Anagramma. SEE MANLY STAY.
In your most noble virtues, honored Lord,
A manly stay you very well afford;
Manlines seems conveyed unto you
Even from the root from which your life you drew,
Stanlyes did ever show such manlines:
See then a manly stay you well express,
True manhood is a prop, an help, a stay,
And sure defense where e're the same does sway.
Not to the man alone, who does possess.
Lively true fortitude, and manlines
Ever entire, but that sweet Land is blessed,
Yielding to see a manly stay their rest.
(110) To the Right Honorable, Charles, Lord Delaware. CHARLES WEST.
Anagramma. SHEVV'ST CLEAR.
Clear honored heart, whose virtues all admire,
How unto clearnes does thy soul aspire?
And admirably, as a noble Peer,
Rays of your many virtues thou show clear:
Lustrous be still, that every man may see,
Ever true Clearnes does abide in thee,
So showing of your Crystal clearnes here;
When on the earth you cease to be a Peer,
Entered shall you be then on heavens clear roll,
Showing all clearnes, yea a Crystal soul,
Thus shall you ever bide without control.
(111) To the Right Honorable, GEORGE, Lord Barkly, Baron of Barkly Castle.
GEORGIUS BARKLY. Anagramma. LVRKE BY GORGIAS.
Great honored Peer, your worthiness in sight
Ever does breed the Muses great delight:
O then ensue your ways, in virtues path
Running, in which you make your allies laugh.
Greatly your greatness then by gifts advance,
In your true learning show, that ignorance,
Virtues great Peer, cannot in you be found:
So Lurk by Gorgias learnedly profound.
By accurat wel-stiled declamations,
Accompanied with learned grave Orations,
Rarely did Gorgias, the Philosopher,
Know how his learning wisely to prefer.
Lurk then by Gorgias, since a noble man,
You best express the learned Muses can.
(112) To the Right Honorable, HENRY, Lord Morley, and Mounteagle. HENRY
PARKER. Anagramma. ERN HYER PARK.
High are their honors who great Parks possessing
Esteemed are on Earth to have the blessing;
Now you, great Lord, in honored estimate,
Rightly are prised at a noble rate,
Yielding you pleasures that nobility,
Partake of may, as it is your dignity:
And ne'retheles your worth and high desert
Rightly does earn an hier Park; your heart
Keeps virtues fair enclosed within the same:
Earn you an hier Park then, nobler game
Rightly then those who noblest beasts keep tame.
(113) To the Right Honorable, RICHARD, Lord Dacres, Baron of Hurstmonseux.
RICHARD LENNARDE. Anagramma. LEND, RARE, CHARY END.
Renowned Lord, in honor fixed on high,
In great advancement, and true dignity,
Choice piece of worth, lending with noble hand
Help to the poor, in need thereof who stand;
Advance still forward, let your charity,
Rarely extend it self, though rare it be;
Doubtless the stars great glory it is, that they
Enlighten all things with their lustrous ray.
Lend then, magnificent, and noble Lord,
Ever your bounty to the world afford,
No end there will ensue to one so chary,
Nobility advancing truly wary,
According to your worth, but a rare end
Rightly upon your bounty will attend;
Declaring bounteous great nobility
End rare shall reach to, who lives charily.
(114) To the Right Honorable, Edward, Lord Bewchamp. EDWARD SEYMOR. Anagramma.
IS MORE WARDED.
Ever right honor, and true noblenes
Declared in your virtues, you express,
Warding your self with more then common ward,
According to your birth, which high regard
Rightly draws to your self, so that withal
Doubtless you are warded with a double wall.
Seeing your high and truly noble birth,
Each one confess you are warded well on earth:
Your worthy virtues when we have in eye,
More warded you are then by birth, we cry:
O, then pursue still in the virtuous trade,
Rightly whereby more warded you are made.
(115) To the Right Honorable Henry, Lord Matravers. HENRYE HOWARD. Anagramma.
HE HERE, WARD NY.
Heroic Sir, whose virtues Heroize,
Enriching you with honors dignities;
Ny needs a ward must be, when your desert,
Registered you an Hero, whose high heart
Your great immortal honor does preserve,
Enabling you most Hero-like to serve.
Heartily still in virtues way proceed,
Oh then a Ny ward we shall never need;
With your rare virtues there is such a guard,
As hardly can there be a better ward:
Rightly which viewing, each one loud will cry,
Doubtless he Hero, we a ward have ny.
(117) To the Right Honorable, PHILIP, Lord Herbert, Son and heir of Philip
Earl of Pembrooke and Mountgomery. PHILIP HERBERTE. Anagramma. HELP HY BRITE
PEER.
Pembrok's most peerless son, a hi brite peer,
Heroicke Lord, dayne me to call you here,
I know the birth from which you are descended,
Lively proclames you hy, this height attended,
Is with bright rays of brightness which shine clear,
Peerelike which sets you forth a high brite peer.
Hi though you be, yet daine you nerethelesse,
Even bowels of a true Peer to express,
Regarding of the poor and sending forth
Brightly on them, the brightness of your worth,
Each one may say then very well,
Rightly do Herberts hy bright peers excel.
That in your very name, help hy bright peer,
Expressing forth your bounty shining clear.
(118) To the Right Honorable, HENRY, Lord Stafford, Baron of Stafford. HENRY
STAFFORDE. Anagramma. AFFORD HIGH STERN.
Hi noble Stafford, who from Buckingham,
Eternally deserving nobly came,
No flattering lines the Muses you afford,
Respecting truly whose worth honored Lord,
You well deserve more then can well be said.
So then, Right noble Lord, afford your aid,
That your high stern may rightly placed be,
As is your true deserved dignity:
Firm then will say, Stafford did honor earne,
Freely when he Afforded an high Stern,
O may your honor with your age increase,
Resplending forth your truest nobleness.
Do then, High Stern, afford true happiness,
(119) To the Right Honorable, EDWARD, Lord Dudly, Baron of Dudly-Castle.
EDWARD SVTTON. Anagramma. TEND STOVT WARD.
Ever may England in it those retain,
Duly regarding, that a most stout vain,
VVarding the poor from wrong and violence,
Admiredly possessed with Innocence,
Rightly indeed may a Stout ward befriend him,
Duly his country it at all times sending.
Stout ward are you Sir, therewithal indu'd,
Virtuously by manly fortitude:
Tend then for ever, as a most stout ward,
That nation which has nourisht you, it guard.
O let your Stoutnesse it so bravely tend,
None may exceed your Nation to befriend.
(120) To the Right Honorable, EDWARD, Lord Stourton, Baron of Stourton.
EDWARD STOVRTON. Anagramma. NOTE VVARDED TOVRS.
E^naunter malice, with her mischief fell,
Does against thy ennobled virtues swell,
Warded are you, and Tours of great defense,
Are naked, if no strength they have from hence,
Rightly of warded Tours you are the strength,
Declaring them most safe to be at length,
Else when the fortitude of men they want,
Stones and rare buildings are defense but scant,
Thus when the Muses worthily do quote,
On which reflecting every one may note,
Virtue is an impregnable defense,
Repelling fiercely every dire offense.
Thus warded Touers by fortitude are warded,
Of you, and such as you be, who true guarded,
Note every one such should be well rewarded.
(121) To the Right Honorable, JOHN Lord Darcy, and Mennell. JOHN DARCIE.
Anagramma. ON HY ^^ARED.
In each estate there is sower as well as sweet,
On high with heat, below with cold we meet:
Heaven only is exempted to be free,
Not having trouble or Calamity.
Dear heart, I do not then with admiration,
Admire that in your high, and lofty station,
Rough ragged cares, your nobleness do vex;
Crowns have their cares which do their hearts perplex.
In very truth then you may rightly cry,
Ever admired Lord, I cared on high.
(122) To the Right Honorable EDWARD Lord Vaux, Baron of Harrowden. EDWARD
VAVX. Anagramma. ADV VEXED WAR.
Ever that state, that free from war in rest,
Does happily repose, is still most blessed,
War evermore delights in broils and blood,
Assuredly therefore cannot be good;
Rather it very hurtful is indeed,
Destroying quite the noble humane seed,
Vexing the heart with fearful care, and grief,
And never yielding any sweet relief.
Vexed war adue then, we most blessed are,
Xerxes nere knew this blessing to declare.
(123) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Lord Windsor, Baron of Bradenham.
THOMAS WINDSOR. Anagramma. HOW MAN'S STORY'D.
The Chronicles and histories record,
Heroicke acts of each most honored Lord,
On which the Ages that succeed do view,
Magnanimously noble to pursue,
And follow rightly in the honored trace,
Such worthy wits of the true noble Race.
Well weigh you this, and in your deep foresight,
In history you place a great delight,
Noting therein how man is storied,
Declared as alive when he is dead,
Sir, in the path of virtue, since that you,
O noble peer, so nobly do pursue,
Recorded fair your worth will Clio show.
(124) To the right Honorable, WILLIAM, Lord Eure, Baron of VVhitton. WILLIAM
EVRE. Anagramma. WEAR MY JVELL.
Who has a Jewel excellent and rare,
In a triumphant manner will it wear;
Letting all see, who view his noble dress
Lively pourtrayd in Him is nobleness;
In you a Jewel of high estimate,
Admired Lord, nay of excessive rate,
Making these nobles who the same possess,
Ever resplendeth, and your happiness
Virtues brave Jewel, it is indeed to wear,
Rightly which to your honor does adhere,
Ever so let that Jewel thine appear.
(125.) To the Right Honorable, PHILIP Lord Wharton, Baron of Wharton. PHILIP
WHARTONE. Anagramma. WHYL IN HOPE RAPT.
Placed on high seat of honors dignity,
High in true virtues graced nobility,
Indeed your virtuous life to all afford,
Live evermore a most admired Lord,
In your so hope of happiness, and Joy,
Peace be to you, freed from all annoy.
With this sweet hope, your soul so ravished,
How forward in a virtuous path you are led,
Advance still forward, till in hope possessed;
Rapt up in hope, you are so heavenly blessed.
Thus with your hope, as ravished out of breath,
O you do live, as one not fearing death.
No, while in hope rapt thus, for your reward,
Ever you still a virtuous life regard.
(126) To the Right Honorable WILLIAM Lord VVilloughbey, Baron of Parham.
WILLIAM VVILLOVGHBEY. Anagramma. TY HE ALL MY BIG VVILLOVV.
Well may the Willow grow big in your soil,
Enriched well with virtues Dewes, the while;
Lightly the Willow with her leaves pale green,
Lively in the spring rejoices like a Queen,
In summer prime takes her great delight,
And it loves not, to speak of it aright,
Most noble Lord, on barren soil to grow.
With beauty excellent i'ts palm does show
In it, although no fruit there is of worth,
Lightly it still delights to bring forth.
Live then, good Lord, still by the dew of grace,
O evermore still fructify apace:
Verses cannot the praises to you render,
Great Peer, that I of Right to you should tender,
Honoring you, within whose Parham hall
Branched forth that Beech, which did to me befall.
Ever I Will therefore pray that all may vi,
Your great big Willow greatly fructify.
(127) To the Right Honorable WILLIAM, Lord Paget, Baron of Beandesert.
WILLIAM PAGET. Anagramma. I WILL GET A PALM.
Well may the Palm be yours, whose learning high
Indeed sorts well with your nobility.
Logic, with Grammar, Retorick, Music rare
Lively indeed a noble mind declare,
In whom nobility does truly rise,
Admired Sr, for noble qualities;
Marking which in you, I must needs confess,
Plainly the truth, almost a Peer peerless,
And here withal the valor, which in rest,
Great Paget, does within your noble breast,
Ere you have said the truth, you will get a palm,
It Is got already, and to you befalne.
(128) To the Right Honorable DUDLY Lord North, Baron of Carthlage. DVDLEY
NORTH. Anagramma. HY LOVED, TENDER.
David-like, Sir, your Love your fix on hy,
Virtue thus gracing with your dignity,
Declaring of your Love to Godward fixed,
Letting the same with Charity be mixed,
Ever still tender bowels do possess,
Yielding help to the poor and comfortless.
None more, great Sir, will trumpet out your fame,
O then poor folks, who when but heard your name,
Running about in every place sound forth,
That the Lord North is one of noble worth:
Hy must his Love be needs, who thus below,
Extends his Love, a tender heart to show.
(129) To the Right Honorable, GEORGE, Lord Shandos, Baron of Sudley. GEORGE
BRIDGES. Anagramma. SO BIGGER REDGE.
Great honored Lord, So great your worthiness,
Ensuing it I cannot well express,
O noble Sir, your body cannot do
Rightly those works your soul would reach unto;
Go on, although I cannot well declare,
Entering your virtues lively, yet they are rare,
Bigger the redges of the heart must be,
Right noble Sir, that comprehending thee;
In figure to the life can set thee forth,
Declaring of your nobleness and worth;
Great store of virtues still, and of great grace,
Ever remarkable are in your face,
So bigger redges to contain your race.
(130) To the Right Honorable, ROBERT Lord Peter, Baron of Writtle. ROBERTUS
PETER. Anagramma. O TRV PEER-BREST.
Raised unto honor which you do inherit,
O noble Sir both by your birth and merit,
Blessed may we term you, who possess a Breast,
Enjoying peere-like qualities which rest
Repleatly there; so that we find it true,
That there remains a true peer-Brest in you,
Virtues most peerless peerelesly abound,
Showing that a true peere-Brest here is found.
Parley then practice like a peerless Peer,
Each day to make your peerless virtues clear,
Then will each one O you true peer breast call,
Expressing of each grace in several,
Rearing a Trophy of your worth withal.
(131) To the Right Honorable, DVTTON, Lord Gerard, Baron of Gerards Bromly.
DVTTON GERARDE. Anagramma. DV REGARD TO TEN.
Duly regarding with your noble eye,
Virtuously affecting mercy hye,
The stream of your compassion does extend
To ten, their need with mercy to befriend;
On which I show with a just Du regard,
Not heddy. rashly, you do such reward.
Greatly your wisdom hereby you express,
Enclining rightly to those in distress,
Regarding such with pity and compassion,
According to your noble inclination,
Rightly does ten to life your noble worth,
Decipher rightly, seeing it sets forth
Each figure comprehended, you, all earth.
(132) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM Lord Spencer, Baron of VVormleighton.
WILLIAM SPENCER. Anagramma. EN SAP WILL RECLYM.
With blustrous winds though storms a while do rage
Ensuing comfort, Muses do presage,
Likely to follow; for the storms once past,
Likely calmes come to comfort us at last:
In winter sap within the roots as hiding,
Admits no show of Joy to trees betiding,
Making them drop their leaves, and comfortless
Stand for a time as if without redress;
Perceiving of the spring though back returning,
En which attendant does require from morning,
Now will the sap reclime with Joy again,
Cheerly will each tree leaves thereon retain;
Even so your handmaid prays, my winter past,
Rightly serene my summer days may last.
(133) To the Right Honorable CHARLES Lord Stanhop, Baron of Harington.
CHARLES STANHOPE. Anagramma. OSTAN, REACH HELPS.
Charities Emblem in your Anagram,
Heroic Sir, the Muses make your name
As other men when suitors come, do pace
Running away as if they ran a race.
Like them the Muses would not have you be,
Enjoining you to stan emblemikely,
So fitter plaints of poor distressed to hear.
So that a noble help you may appear,
Thus reaching forth your truly noble hand,
According to your place, their helps command.
Never shall fame then cease to trumpet forth,
High honored Lord, the trophies of your worth.
O then stan still, reach helps and be not weary,
Pleasing that God who helps the solitary,
Ever you shall not unrewarded tarry.
(134) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS Lord Arundel, Baron Wardour. THOMAS
ARVNDEL. Anagramma. RVN; AH LEAD MOST.
Thou honored Arundel, in virtues blessed,
Have therein still a progress, and no rest;
O none the Muses with thee in thy pace;
Much rather they respect you run the Race,
Ah that you run and never do give over,
So Heaven the Goal, at last you will recover.
As honored Sr, your worth set up on high
Resplendant is, and in much peoples eye;
Virtue cannot be hid in you who great
Now stand, as if a mountain were your seat.
Do then, most violently seem to tread
Ever the path of virtue, and you lead:
Lead so the most, and be their demi-head.
(135) To the Right Honorable CHRISTOPHER, Lord Tenham, Baron of Tenham.
CHRISTOPHER ROPER. Anagramma. HO PEER RICH'R, TRORS.
Choisely pourtraid, in Noblenes I find
Heroic Trops, or trophies of the mind,
Roper then Tenhams Baron, you a Peer
In nonage though, do very well appear
Shining in virtues, that your Ancesters
Truly did carry with them to the hearse:
O noble Peter, the muses you excite,
Peer-like in your young age to have delight:
Ho summoning up all your gifts together,
Ere to excel your kin, and be best liver,
Rather indeed as a true noble Peer,
Richer by far let trops in you appear:
On whom when Ropers favorers shall look,
Perceiving written in you, as a book,
Eternal trops of your true noble name,
Rightly your honor they will loud proclaim.
(136) To the Right Honorable CHARLES, Lord Cranborne, son and heir of
William Earl of Salisbury. CHARLES CECILL. Anagramma. CALL RICHES CELL.
Choice virtues that remain within your breast,
Heroicke heart, show here true riches rest.
Armies of graces mustred in array,
Ruling within your soul, and bearing sway,
Lets the world know plainly, that in you
Enricht do abide the riches true:
So that the world may you call riches cell,
Choicely repleat with grace, in you that dwell;
Enricht with riches, wherein you abound,
Charily treasure in your heart profound
Is truer Riches tho, which there does dwell,
Living in virtue which in you excel,
Letting all truly call you riches cell.
(137) To the Right Honorable, ROBERT Lord Rich, son and heir of Robert
Earl of Warwick. ROBERTUS RICH. Anagramma. RECHTO HER RVBYS.
Renowned Lord, Ingenuously I grant,
Of an high birth you very well may vant,
By high attempts your high births graces grace,
Ever at virtue aim, in chiefest place
Reach to herrubys. They are not below:
It Is an high hand, high things must reach, you know:
Vainly receive not then Rubbish on earth;
Since you may rubys reach, to fit your birth.
Reach to her rubys then, let them be hers,
I mean fair virtue, whom true worth prefers;
Choose Charity, of feigned ones beware:
Hers be true rubys; reach them, and do not spare,
Ever show hereby that you noble are.
(138) To the Right Honorable, BASIL Lord Fielding, Son and heir of
William, Earl of Denbigh. BASIL FIELDING. Anagramma. FAIGN LILLYS BED.
Blessed is the soul, who still affecting right,
As Lillys bed, arrayed is in white,
Suting full well with true nobility,
Inricht to be with Lillys purity:
Lyllis, says Christ, wear such a brave array,
Loved SOLOMON was nere so fine as they.
Faigne after Lillys then, your noblenes,
Innated true nobillity express;
Endeavoring, as you are noble borne,
Lilly-like purity so not to scorn.
Doing so purity, the greater grace,
Innobling so thereby your noble race:
Nor will one Lilly your fair soul suffice,
Greatly on the whole bed who fix your eyes.
(139) To the Right Honorable, OLIVER Lord Saint John, Baron of Bletsoe. Son
and heir of Oliver Earl of ^ullingbrooke. OLIVER SAINT JOHN. Anagramma.
LEARN TO CHVSE, IN JOY.
O happy soul, enjoying Joy, and yet
Learning in Joy a greater Joy to get,
Enjoying honor, honoring nathlesse
Virtue, as chiefest Joy, and happiness:
Ever in Joy, learn so your Joy to use,
Rather the heavenly Joy indeed to choose.
So in your honor you have learned right,
Aiming at heavenly Joy, yet I Will excite,
Injoyning you, because my Muse does so,
Not to leave learning in the way you go:
Choose in your Joy to be a learner still,
To Learn the way to choose true Joy, which will
Ever your heart with Joy and comfort fill.
Enjoy this Learning, choose the better part,
O follow Maryes practice, honored heart,
Heavens then on you will lasting Joys bestow,
Nere to be lost, a Mary wishes so.
(140) To the Right Honorable, EDWARD, Lord Mountague, Baron of Kimbolton,
Son and heir of Henry, Earl of Manchester. EDWARD MOUNT AGVE. Anagramma.
MOUNT, WARD DVE AGE.
Ever are men in dignity set high,
Du ages ward that they may be thereby;
Ward then du age, since you to honor mounted,
Are worthily amongst the Heroes counted,
Regard age du, not every age regard;
Du age defend, be to du age award,
Mounted in honor therefore are you high,
O that you may help them in misery!
Very well by your place du age defending,
Never to let foes on their age be rending.
Thus well the power you have, you exercise,
And so du ages ward does well arise:
Go on still, for, du ages ward to be,
Very much honor so will come to thee,
Ever du age still warding gloriously.
(141) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Lord Carry, Son and heir of Henry Earl
of Dover. JOHN CARYE. Anagramma. I CHARY ONE.
In ^olomon I learn, who prudently
On his foresight depending, does foresee
How that the Plague will come, and wisely shunning,
Not to be hurt thereby, he shows good cunning.
Chary Just so you are, O truly wise,
Avoiding danger ere it you surprise;
Raising a fort of virtues for your fence,
Your Chary Buckler, wary Innocence,
Entirely shielding you from all offense.
(142) To the Right Honorable, CHARLES, Lord Andiver, son and Heir of
Thomas, Earl of Barkeshire. CHARLES HOWARDE. Anagramma. HE CHOSE AL REVVARD.
Choose well you may, for Chose you virtue have,
Heroikely true choice have you to save;
And he who does in any goodness grow,
Rightly may have a great reward you know
Let your firm heart then, by true virtue pressed,
Evermore in security find rest,
Seeking no further a reward to find.
Heavens ever will reward a virtuous mind,
On which rely, and for a truth know this,
With virtue is attendant endless bliss,
And whosoever Chooses virtue, he
Right way has found rewarded well to be.
Due is reward to virtue as a fee,
Ever Choose this, all true reward you see.
(143) To the Right Honorable, JAMES Lord Walden, Son and heir of
Theophilus Earl of Suffolk. JAMES HOWARD. Anagramma. OH I WAS ARMED.
Invisible may you be from all harms,
And there is great reason, for you are still in arms:
Manly you are, and wise, who heedfully
Evermore go with noble Armory,
So well avoiding all events may hap,
Having a Helmet for your safest Cap;
On every part besides well armed to proof,
Well, So may you remain secure enough,
And both your soul, and body, armed safe,
Rightly may stand your ground, at foes may laugh,
Deriding them, Oh! I was armed safe.
(144) To the Right Honorable, MONTAGUE Lord Bartue, Son and Heir of Robert
Earl of Lyndsey. MONTAGVE BARTVE. Anagramma. AV! BE IT ON A TRVGEM.
Many clear virtues in you, orient pearl,
O rightly show you son to such an Earl;
Naturally declaring you to be
The Image just of such another he.
Au! when your nobleness we do descry,
Great Peer, be it on a true I em straight we cry,,
Virtue so true in you must a true I^m,
Ever proclaim you, worthiest amongst men.
Be It cannot be, yet even so be it tho,
A true and precious Iem we ^a^ th^^ ^now;
Resp^^nd then forth the Rays o^ thy great light,
That we may see thee righ^ly to be bright,
Ver^ues true ge^ will e ch^^ne then confess,
Ever your merits make you, no whit less.
(145) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Lord Cavendish, Son and Heir of
William, Earl of Devonshire. WILLIAM CAVENDISHE. Anagramma. DIES, VVIL CLAYM
HEAVEN.
Well live you here, who ready still to dye,
Injoye the world yet, take no joy thereby;
Living to grace, and dying to all guile;
Lively so Christ does live in you the while.
In sweet perseverance then still abide,
And a crown excellent will you betide.
Many your virtues are, and their reward,
Clearing all scores, is worth a due regard:
Attend then in your good life to persever,
Virtue convaies a strength to live for ever,
E'ne when as strength, and nature in you dies,
New and true joys you then indeed surprise:
Die may the body; but your soul will aim
Indeed at hier things, and heaven will claim.
So, let your body die, your soul divine
Heaven still will claim, and never cease to pine
Ever until she lodges there, we fine.
(146) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Lord Wentworth, Son and heir of
Thomas, Earl of Cleveland. THOMAS VVENTVVORTH. Anagramma. O SVM THAT NVE
VVORTH.
Those (Sir) who eye your truest worthiness,
Hardly do know it at the full to express;
O in Arithmetic it is a great sum,
May then the ignorant sort overcome,
According to the Rules which they never knew,
Sum up the worth in you, that shines nue.
Well may they stand, and at your worth admire,
Entering to sum it up they will quickly tire;
Nue now it is what will be the imitation,
That grows now beyond all admiration.
VVorth, nothing else, no doubt, there is in you:
O send that nue worth then though it be new;
Right it is then sure, and super-excellent,
Truly extending to a large extent,
Having therein all possible content.
(147) To the Right Honorable WILLIAM, Lord Russell, Son and Heir of Francis
Earl of Bedford. WILLIAM RVSSELL. Anagramma. LVRE LYLLYS SVVARM.
Well does the Lilly to the life express,
In you the inbred natural pureness,
Like as the Lilly has a lively white,
Lively so shadows it your nature right:
In innocence not with your own content,
Aim you at pleasure in the innocent;
May still the number of such men increase,
Regard who gives wherever righteousness,
Virtue or grace they happen to perceive,
Seeing the example you unto them leave:
Such is your innocence, that you regard
Even swarms of Lillyes, purity reward,
Lure Lilly swarm, O do you ever still,
Lillys like living with a pure white will.
(148) To the Right Honorable, ROBERT, Lord Brook, Baron of Bewchamp-Court.
ROBERTUS GREVILL. Anagramma. TRVLY SVRER GLOBE.
Rare Globe, indeed a surer Globe are you,
O noble Sir, then all the world; it is true:
Behold the world, and every thing therein,
Each thing in great inconstancy is sin;
Respecting of your virtues, there I find,
That you retain in you a constant mind:
Virtue, your mind from worldly things estranging,
So brought about that in you there is no changing.
Greatly you thus the whole Globe do excel,
Right an epitomy thereof you are well:
Excelling tho in abstract the concreat,
Vailing in you the Globe, though never so great:
In you dwells God, who every thing did frame,
Living in you, a temple for his name,
Like surer Globe you truly then became.
(149) To the Right Honorable, EDWARD, Lord Mountague, Baron of Boughton.
EDWARD MOVNTAGVE. Anagramma. MOUNT. DRAW DVE AGE.
Ever may you, admired Sir, increase,
Drawing due age unto your happiness;
With wisdom walking in a wary way,
Admired Lord, that therein you may stay,
Rightly we therefore pray, you mounted high,
Due age may draw unto your dignity.
Mount may you still in years, as in your honor,
O virtue is your guide, you wait upon her:
Virtue has length of days in her right hand,
Nor does her left hand cease, but does command
Treasures, whereon the worldlings so do dote,
Advantage makes one cut another throat.
Grow unto age, and let due age increase,
Virtues great Peer, filling your heart with bliss;
Endless so shall abide your happiness.
(150) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Lord Graye, Baron of Warke. WILLIAM
GRAYE. Anagramma. I WILL LIM WARY AGE.
With wisdom warily you so proceed,
Ensuing which, a wary one indeed,
Likely you are to lim forth wary age,
Like a true wise man, wisely to presage
Ensuing evil, e're it be at hand,
And tasting wary wisely to withstand,
Making in health a preparation well.
Grief of hearts-eating sickness to expel:
Rightly in life fitting your self to have,
As one day sure you must a death, a grave;
You thus in life against all events prepared,
Ever lim forth a wary age well carried.
(151) To the Right Honorable, FRANCIS Lord Danecourt, Baron of Sutton.
FRANCIS LEAKE. Anagramma. I WILL SEA-FRANCK.
Franck is the Sea, which Rivers forth does send,
Running about unto its currents end;
And by its bounty Seas have never wanted,
Nor is the world of water ever scanted:
Choosing the bounty of the Sea in sight,
Indeed you hit to imitate it right;
So helping of the poor, by the great streams
Lively that issue from your noble means,
Eternal shall your store, like to the oil,
Abide to you, right noble Lord the while,
Keeping your Francknesse, like unto the Sea,
Ever that still repleat with store will be.
(152) To the Right Honorable JOHN Lord Roberts, Baron of Truro. JOHN ROBERTS.
Anagramma. REST ON HY ORB.
In honor seated, in the worlds eyesight,
O noble Lord, your worth has done you right;
Having had Truros virtue in their eye,
Noting a man fitted for dignity.
Retained virtue in your noble breast,
O truly noble Sir, does honored rest,
Being advanced in the dignity
Ever deserved, that descends on thee.
Rest may you ever on your hy orb still,
That bear to virtue such a firm good will,
So good men shall advancement have their fill.
(153) To the Right Honorable WILLIAM Lord Craven, Baron of Hamsteede
Marshall. WILLIAM CRAVEN. Anagramma. AM ANV IEW'LL, CRY.
With virtues ancient you are indu'd,
In honors seat you did not then intrude;
Likely your virtues lustring forth their light,
Lively provoke our King to do you right.
In virtues since you honors had deserved,
A peer for honor you might be preserved;
Most noble peer fith you a Jewel wear,
Charles our great Monarch, thought it fit to rear,
Rightly a trophy of your noble name,
And make this Jewel nu be borne by fame,
Very well certainly may you declare
Each several virtue, that within you rare,
Nu Jewel cries, and so does Englands court.
(154) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Lord Falconbridge, Baron of Yarom.
THOMAS BELL ASSISE. Anagramma. AM SOLE BLESST, AS ONE.
Those who your honor have within their Eye,
How can they but admire your dignity!
O noble Baron, you to hy advance,
Most nobly raised are by one fair glance,
Admitted unto you from our True Sol,
Such were the virtues did possess you whole.
Blessed as a sole one, may you say, am I,
Entered that are into such dignity;
Lustrously virtue in you do display,
Like to the shining of the stars, their Ray,
And so inlightning of your soul within,
So admirably did your fame begin;
Showing it self to call for honors then,
In eye of all, amongst the noble men,
So nobly you to seat that each may cry,
Even as soul Blessed look how he sits on hy.
(155) To the Right Honorable, EDWARD, Lord Lovelace, Baron of Hurley. RICHARD
LOVELACE. Anagramma. LOVED AL RICH RACE.
Rich race it is that you delight to run,
In which immortal honor you have won,
Choosing the path of virtue so to tread,
Ha! cry they, how he loved rice rach indeed!
Affecting nothing, but what truly rich,
Rightly indeed might noble hearts bewitch;
Declaring that he had a most Rich mind,
Love to Rich things that did so nobly bind;
On a race though you did affection set,
Virtues path treading forward so to get,
Ever you strive still on the getting hand;
Laboring forward, and never still to stand;
Aiming according to true nobleness,
Choycely unto the races end to press;
Ever loved all rich race, your happiness.
(156) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Lord Pawlet, Baron of Hinton St. George.
JOHN PAVVLET. Anagramma. AN HY PLOT WE.
In honor set on hy plot, meet for you;
O you advanced are to each ones view;
Having true honor on your head descended,
No foot from virtues steps that ever tended.
Plot of true honor, and high nobleness,
Admired Lord, you are I must confess:
Wrong had it bin unto you, if desert
Lustred forth bravely, had not proved hy heart;
Ever may you, seated on high retain
True plot of honor, ever to remain.
(157) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Lord Harvy Baron of Ridbroke, and
Baron of Ros in Ireland. WILLIAM HARVEY. Anagramma. AH MY WARY IVELL.
Well may you wary be, since you arise,
Enriched as a Iuell of great Prize;
Lustrous although you be, yet mine you are,
Love makes that each one has in you a share;
In which regard, as you a Iuell be;
And as each one does claim a share in thee:
More care a great deal is there to be had,
Heroicke spark, least all our hopes should fade:
And least the Luster of thy Jewel lost,
Rightly may each complain, how he is crossed,
Virtue then nobly still retain in you,
Evermore so a worthy Jewel true,
You shall not fear to stand to every view.
(158) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Lord Brudenell, Baron of Stouton.
THOMAS BRVDENEL. Anagramma. HE WILL LEND MOST BRAV.
That peer to be most brave may truly boast,
Having a noble heart, that will lend most.
O then most noble Brudenell, you are right,
Most men you lend, to walk by glorious light,
A good example, whereby they may tread,
Securely virtues steps, if taking heed.
Brave that you may be too, you well display,
Rightly compassions glorious helping ray;
Very much with your bounty such re eeving,
Devoid of comfort, who for want sit grieving;
Ever your bounteous heart does larger stretch,
Not resting till a larger bound it reach;
Eschewing so much as a misers thought.
Let still such bounty from your heart be brought,
Lending most bravely be of all men sought.
(159) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Lord Maynard, Baron of Estaines, and
Baron of Wicklogh in Ireland. WILLIAM MAYNARDE. Anagramma. VRAMA MYLD, VAIL ME.
Where liberal Arts, and Sciences divine
Enrich the heart, who in their knowledge shine,
Lives mildnes there; for the mild liberal arts
Lend, nay ingraft it on the gentle hearts,
In whom a residence they hap to gain:
And your innobled heart, where Muses rain,
Much of their mildnes doubtless does retain.
Many affirm, that Anagrams declare
A hidden nature of the man's whose they are:
If true in you, then you affect to be
Named in their Roules who loved poetry;
Amongst great Pollio, Gallus, Varus, e'rst
Rewarding Poets, yet themselves well verst:
Daigne then, if that Urania myld vail you,
Even me, her handmaid, but your favor due.
(160) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Lord Coventry, Baron of Aylsbrough,
Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, and one of his Majesty's most
honorable Privy Counsel. THOMAS COVENTRYE. Anagramma. HA SO EVEN: COM TRY'T.
Thinking of worthies, which in times have swayed,
Ha! what an one is here to be surveyed!
O! it is rare to see a Judge So even!
More justly guided by the laws of heaven,
Ah! then the present Keeper, who to view,
So ev'nly passes in a compass true!
Comtri't, who list, so even his beam does stand!
O! it is th'admired ev'nes of his hand!
Venture your life, it shall on no side sway,
Either to one or other, past the way,
Not what way pleases him; but what is just:
Then com and tri't who dares. To end, I trust,
Rightly an end according to the Laws,
Your so even justice, wondered at, will cause
Ere long to our long suit. And so I pause.
(161) To the Right Honorable, EDWARD, Lord Howard, Baron of Estericke.
EDWARD HOVVARDE. Anagramma. O WARD HE, VVARDED.
Ever may you, warded by innocence,
Doubtless true ward to keep from all offense,
VVarded by several virtues that defend,
As well as if the body armed did tend,
Raging fierce foes, who would the same oppress,
Doubtless be a sure ward in readiness.
Ha! honored Peer, since virtue is your ward,
O very well you may to ward regard;
VVarded that since you safely do remain,
A sure ward and defense we may retain:
Rightly of you, right noble Lord, who pressed,
Duly to ward, do rightly ward distressed,
Ever that by you we secure may rest.
(162) To the Right Honorable, GEORGE, Lord Goring, Baron of Hurst Perpoint.
GEORGIUS GORING. Anagramma. I GORGEOVS RINGG.
Great honored Peer, you as a gorgeous ringg,
Eternal honor to our Court may bring,
On which beholding how you are circle round,
Rightly no end unto your worth is found;
Greatly beset with Juels ringg like you
In many virtues make a glorious show:
Virtue the greatest Juell far excelling,
See then what Peers our English Courts has dwelling.
Guarded with virtues thus set in a ringg,
O noble Hero, your great honors bring:
Rightly it will be chronicled of you
In learned Poems, and who shall ensue,
Noting the worth that in you does remain,
Great Gorgeous ringg will rightly you proclaim.
(163) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Lord Mohun, Baron of Okehampton. JOHN
MOHVN. Anagramma. MO NV HONEY.
I honey make to be the sweet applause
Of many men, which due desert does cause;
Honey is sweet, and breeds great delight
Naturally, unto the appetite.
Mo honey then, right noble Sir, that is nu,
Of due applause is rendered unto you,
Having your due deserts, which does nu crave,
Virtue most rightly its deserts might have:
Nu honey then select, the world you gave.
(164) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Lord Saville, Baron of Pumfret. THOMAS
SAVILLE. Anagramma. HA! AS MOST IVELL.
The Peers that in our English Firmament,
Having their luster from our Sun then lent,
O as true Iuells, they each glister forth
Most radiant rays of true resplendant worth,
And each of them, as 'twere a several ray,
Several varieties of lights display.
Such are you too, right noble honored Lord,
And you your luster in the world afford,
Very well gracing of our English Court,
Iuell-like that with best of Heroes sort:
Live as a Mirror still, and as most, be
Lustrous true Iuell, that each one may see,
Ever with ha! admiring gloriously.
(165) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Lord Butler, Baron of Bramfield. JOHN
BVTLER. Anagramma. TRV BELL ON HY.
I hear me thinks your sound as a true Bell,
On hy ring out, in virtues you excel;
Hy honored Lord, whose fame proclaims aloud,
Noble although you are, you are not proud.
Bell-like your virtues thus does fame declare,
Virtues true Bell indeed who rightly are;
That ringeth forth a most loud peale, to call
Lovers of virtue, you to follow all:
Ever go on, like a true Bell on hy;
Rightly call men to true felicity.
(166) To the Right Honorable, FRANCIS, Lord Dunsmore. FRANCIS LEIGHE.
Anagramma. LIFE RECH GAINS.
Fair is the life, that is so true upright,
Reaching the true gain that does take delight,
Admired Sir, your honor does the same,
Nobly affecting a true noble gain;
Choosing while life does last, to reach that gain,
In death, and after, that will you maintain:
So you acquire the name of a wise Lord,
Like a true dear to best things you afford,
Each several minute of your life divine,
In which a Mirror to the world you shine;
Gains likewise you in earthly things do reach,
Here an example to the world you teach;
Ensuing in your Life both gains at once.
(167) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Lord Powys Baron of Powys. WILLIAM
HERBERT. Anagramma. HE WILL LIM A TRVE RVBY.
With sparkling fervor, who the virtues see,
Innated (Sir) that do remain in thee,
Lively declaring your nobility,
Lustreth your virtues by your dignity;
In which your virtues likewise act their part,
And luster forth your honor, honored heart,
Must needs confess you Lim a Ruby right,
Having so precious and true delight,
Ever on virtue the true Ruby rare,
Richly whereby your virtues dare compare,
Betokening a brave heart, that has not mixed,
Extravagant vain thoughts, but by death fixed.
Rubies, you know are precious, not a toy,
True Rubies Lim you then, such you enjoy.
(168) To the Right Honorable, EDWARD, Lord Herbert, Baron of Chierbury in
England, and Baron of Castle-Iland in Ireland, and of the Counsel of war.
EDWARD HERBERT. Anagramma. DVRED A TRVE HERB.
Ever an Herb though but a little seed,
Does vegetably grow apace indeed;
With sap of heavenly dew, you watered well,
A tree have grown, in virtues that excel,
Rendering you a still growing nerethelesse,
Duly till you attain true blessedness.
Herbs lively flourishing will still be gree
Ever so are your noble virtues seen:
Rightly does green, they say, yield to the eye
Best colored, that does help the sight thereby:
Ever your virtues lend a sweet delight,
Right virtuous Sir, unto that happy sight,
That must confess you dur'd a true Herb right.
To the Right Honorable, FRANCIS, Lord Cottington, Baron of Hanworth, Master
of the Court of Wards, and Liveries, Chancelour of the Exchequer, and one of
his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel. FRANCIS COTTINGTONE. Anagramma.
INGRAFT NOT CONCEITS.
Fair that your wisdom may to men appear,
Rather another man's opinions bear,
And rest your self you will then on your own;
Nevertheless you are not so careless grown,
Careless to think what may breed good event,
In other men's conceits to rest content,
So do not you, for a sharp wit you have,
Conceits to try, which sordid are, which grave,
On which as solid counsel to rely;
Then which, but as a fond conceit to fly.
Thus nether on your own, or others mind,
In flashie fond Conceits at all you bind;
Nor do ingraft them in your heart to be
Grave oracles of your prosperity;
The counsel, not conceit, which you have tried,
On which you find it best to have relied,
Now this your practice does a precept give,
Enjoining that, none on conceits do live.
(170) To the Most Illustrious Prince JAMES, Duke of Lenox, Earl of March,
Lord Darneley, Methuen, Saint Andrews, and Aubigny, Admiral, and Chamberlane
of Scotland by inheritance, Knight of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Counsel. JAMES STVARTE. Anagramma. MAY SERVE STATE.
In honor Duke Illustrious you sit high,
Admit of serving none save Majesty;
May your illustrious self yet nathelesse
Evermore serve Majestic Stateliness;
Soar's through unto the Earth they luster lend;
Serve unto Sol, and on his rays attend;
Thus though a Star you are in our great sphere,
Virtue commands, that you honor there
And serve, attendant with your radiant light,
Rightly that Sol who makes your grace shine bright.
Thus though your grace we highly estimate,
Each soul counts it your grace, you may serve State.
(171) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Marquis Hamilton, Earl of Arran and
Cambridge, Lord Aven, in Ordail, and Aberberth, Mr of the Horse to his
Majesty, Knight of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's Honorable Counsel.
JAMES HAMILTONE. Anagramma. MAY ON HY SEEM TAL.
I see your honor, Marquis honored,
And you may very well hold up your head,
Marquis admired, since you are on hy,
Entered aloft, on noble dignity;
So very well indeed may you seem tal,
Having transcendent honors you befall,
A Marquis high, in SCOTLAND of great blood,
Made Earl of ARRAN, and of CAMBRIDGE Lord,
Invested in three several Baronies,
Letting your honor yet still higher rise,
The Horses Master to his Majesty,
Of GEORGE a Knight you are heroikly,
Nor are you from the Privy Counsel barred,
Ever tal may you seem thus hy preferred.
(172) To the Right Honorable, GEORGE, Marquis Huntly, Earl of Enzi, and Lord
Strathbolgy. GEORGIUS GORDOVNE. Anagramma. O EGER SVRG ON; O GVID.
Great are the passions that in man remain,
Ever that strive past reasons bounds to strain:
O they are as an eger surge in seas,
Respecting no man but themselves to please.
Great Marquis then, within this Anagram
Enclosed is wisdom; do but act the same,
Very much rightly then you do surpass
Surely the greatest Prince that ever was.
Guide so the eger surges, that do swell;
On fairly that they may, repressed well,
Reason, as their due guide without delay,
Duly affections in you may obey.
O he is a Marquis rightly who this can,
Virtue will compass it or nothing than;
Nothing but virtue passions will confound,
Eger surg then O guide on in its bound.
(173) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Marquis Douglas, Earl of Angus, Lord
Douglas, and Kintire. WILLIAM DOVGLAS. Anagramma. I MAY WALL AS GOVLD.
Well is that land secured, which does hold
In it most noble Peers, who Wall as gould.
Likely when Famine comes, and sore distress,
Lovers of gould may be in heavines;
In whom though wisdom and the graces rest,
Ah noble soul, he cannot be distressed.
Marquis most noble then, happy indeed
Does that land rest who has you at a need;
O, a more sure defense it has thereby,
Verily then in greatest armory:
Great SOLOMON reports, how one poor man
Laboring wisely, free a City can:
And much more sure, then your defense must hold;
Sir, then the Country, if it were wholly gould.
(174) To the Right Honorable, ARCHIBALDE, Earl of Arguile, Lord Lorne and
Kintire, Chief Justice of Scotland by inheritance. ARCHIBALDE CAMPEBELL.
Anagramma. AL RICH, ABLE CAMP, BE LED.
An able man, which al be led so well,
Rightly you must be, and in gifts excel;
Camp of rich able men who can command,
Having intelligence to understand:
In which we rightly do perceive you are
Bedecked well with understanding rare,
And government likewise you have at will,
Leading a Camp which might a Country fill;
Doubtless you are a Iusticer indeed,
Ever that govern as you see the need,
Correcting, and instructing as the cause,
And reason deemes according to the laws,
Making the Country people so obey,
Placed as if in a Camp they kept array,
Ensue the course you have begun so well,
Best Chronicles your fame aloud will tell,
Entering, that you be led a Camp al able,
Lively (the after age will think a fable)
Like to a man, the work pursue you on.
(175) To the Right Honorable, GEORGE, Earl of Crauford, Lord Gleanes and
Finevin. GEORGIUS LINDSEY. Anagramma. I SEND GORGEVSLY, I.
Great noble Peer, and honored Earl of worth,
Entered upon the stage from honored birth,
O it is no wonder if your virtues send
Rays gorgeously, your noblenes attend;
Great virtues do you wait upon as Queen,
In whom is naught but gorgeously is seen,
Virtue displayeth forth the truest ray,
Shining far brighter then the brightest day.
Lustrous must needs the beams of virtues than,
In you so gorgeous, make a gorgeous man,
Nothing displaying but the rays of light,
Declaring noble Sir, that you are bright,
Sending forth so the rays of grace, that I
E'ne ^ust confess, you send most gorgeously,
You rightly fitted are to be on high.
(176) To the Right Honorable, FRANCIS, Earl of Erroll, Lord Hay, Baron of
Slanis, Constable of Scotland by inheritance. FRANCIS HAY. Anagramma. A HY
FAIR SENC.
Fair noble Peer, whose certainest defense
Rightly is you retain a hy fair senc;
A hy senc it is, when as by virtue led,
Nobly you seem so to be honored,
Choosing so, hy to lead your senc thereby,
In you we rightly a hy senc descry;
So for a fair senc, virtue is so fair,
How can the virtuous possible, but rare,
And fair hy beams of virtue to display,
Yield forth a fair hy senc, with wondrous ray;
Ever so do you, may I truly say.
(177) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Earl Marshall, Lord Dunotor Altre,
and Marshall of Scotland by inheritance. WILLIAM KEITHE. Anagramma. AL WIT
MEEKLY HY.
Wit noble Sir you very well express
In setting forth a mind with noblenes,
Lordly repleat that with advance so hy
Lively does meet with true nobility
In which nathles your meeknes so excels,
A Peer you are almost Peerless parallelleth,
Mighty great Lord, scarce any does the worth,
Kept in your noble breast which you send forth,
Expressing a sage wit in actions wise,
Intending still nobly to enterprise,
That which may savor all of wit, yet tho
High in esteem you are, you meek do show,
Ever all wit you meekly hy we know.
(178) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Earl of Sutherland, Lord Strachnaver and
Dun Robin. JOHN GORDOVN. Anagramma. GO IN HONOVRD.
In honor needs must you be, who go in
O honored Peer honored with what you win:
Honor you unto virtue do, the which
Now back returning honor make you rich.
Great honor you unto the godly do,
On whom your honor, honored Sir you show,
Rendering to those in goodness who excel
Due noble countenance, where ere they dwell.
On you when therefore they reflect their eye,
Very much honor and true dignity,
Never they cease to wish you honouredly.
(179) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Earl of Mar and Garioch, Lord Erskeine
and Breiching, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel. JOHN
ERSKEINE. Anagramma. SEE NO HIER KIN.
I cannot see a hier kin then you,
O noble Sir, are now allied unto,
Hearing Gods word does make you that you have
No terrene honor that is half so brave.
Ever says Christ, who hearkens to my word,
Recording it in's heart, and does afford
Such ear thereto, that he does seek thereby,
Keeping the same in grace to fructify;
Ever he has for his most heavenly kin,
In Heaven blessed Christ to wash away his sin:
No hier kin I see then yours excelling,
Ever in whom true noblenes is dwelling.
(180) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Earl of Areth, Lord president of the
Counsel of Scotland, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel.
WILLIAM GRAHAME. Anagramma. HAVVARY ALL GEMMY.
Wary you well may be, who do retain
Innated luster, like a gemmy vein;
Light will a gemme cast in the darkest night,
Likewise will your example do so right,
Inlightning men in virtuous way to tread:
And thereto by your gemmy luster led,
May you then wary be, lest that you lose
Great Peer, the gemme that you so wisely chose,
Respect the treasure and all wary still,
Avoid those thieves who seek to do you ill;
Hence bid them pack, lodge you no sin at home,
And so your precious gemme will not be gone:
May all the world then labor nere so much,
Ever they cannot show a gemme that is such.
(181) To the Right Honorable JOHN Earl of Rothes, Lord Lesley and Banbrigh.
JOHN LESLEY. Anagramma. SE HOLY LINE.
I honor you who have a wholly line,
O noble Lord, so nobly you incline;
Having a line of virtues in you bred,
Noting an Hero, to high honored bed.
Lives Prudence, Temperance, Justice, Fortitude,
Entered upon your soul wherewith indu'd,
So lively you do truly luster forth,
Like a great Lord, the trophies of your worth.
Entered in you there is besides in fine,
Your Faith, Hope, Charity, se holy line.
(182) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Earl of Morton, Lord Dalkeith and
Aberdour, Treasurer of Scotland, Knight of the Garter; and one of his Majesty's
most Honorable privy Counsel. WILLIAM DOVGLAS. Anagramma. AH I LIM GOVLD
WALLS.
Well may you be a Peer most excellent,
In whom true gould remains so permanent,
Living so truly nobly, that men see
Lively the luster of true gould in thee;
In which your mind so rich with grace beset,
Admits your body but a cabinet:
Much does the plenty of this gould abound,
Declaring you most nobly wise, profound.
O you do so much treasure thus possess,
Verily you are your Countries happiness:
Gould far excelling are your virtues, and
Like goulden walls they compass in your land.
Ah, so proceed and lim those gould walls still,
So may the land rest safely at her will.
(183) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Earl of Montros Lord Kinkairne, and
Mugdock. JEAMES GRAHAM. Anagramma. AM GEM RAYS, HAVE.
Indeed Sir, so should true nobility,
Actively show gemrayes that sublimely
Make bright the world with their light fulgour so
Each one may in its cleerenesse, clearly go,
Such one is set forth by the precious gemme,
Gracing a man as come of noble stem,
Respecting of his virtues that is the Rays,
Admiredly that lightens forth his days,
Ha! then may you say who both gems possess,
Stand Rays together, so your happiness
Mixed in one will reach eternal bliss.
(184) To the Right Honorable, ALEXANDER, Earl of Eglentone, Lord
Mountgomery. ALEXANDER SETONE, ALIAS MOVNTGOMERY. Anagramma. SO LEAD ENE ON AS
RARE GEM I EXAMIN'T STOVILY.
A valiant Captain and a noble peer,
Like a rare gemme should be in virtue clear,
Ever should he all other men excelling,
Xenophon-like have wisdom in him dwelling,
And so you rightly have, who lead so well,
None may your carriage in the Camp excel;
Doubtless a noble Alexanders spirit,
Even you right noble Earl do well inherit,
Respecting whom, though you no fortune have,
Such conquests to obtain as he did brave,
Ever his Manhood you may though retain,
That teaches nobly how to lend a train,
On ward E'ne lead them then as a rare Iem,
Never cease you to be admired of men,
E'ne so express you your true manliness.
And if that any thinking to express,
Look ^^^ruly big stoutly examining,
I let them do it, manhood, will soundness bring,
And you a captain beaten to the war,
S^^tably will your manhood true declare.
Mount you then forward on en' e lead the men,
O let your fortitude be tried then,
Virtues rare Iemme that you may rarely be,
Notably leading with a^d^city,
That so your manhood may not fear the trial,
Great worth you then possess without denial.
O then your manhood being tried so well,
May excellent be said, and twill excel,
Ever as gold abiding the true touch,
Rightly it shall appear that there is no such,
You that may lead on as a most rare Iem,
Examining abiding amongst men.
(185) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Earl of Casseils Lord Keneday. JOHN
KENEDAY. Anagramma. ONE HJ DAY KEN.
It is your hap who virtue love so well,
On high to be, because you high excel,
High virtues you do love, there place your heart,
Notable great reward that will impart.
Kend you have virtue that will bring about,
Eternal honor you shall have throughout.
Now you love virtue, afterward twill be,
Eternal high advance will fall to thee:
Decreed is honor, noble Keneday,
According to your worth on you to stay,
Your many virtues shall ken one hy day.
(186) To the Right Honorable, GEORGE, Earl of Carceynes, Lord Berredaill.
GEORGIUS SAINT CLARE. Anagramma. I GORGEVS CLEAR SAINT.
Gorgeous clear Saint your many virtues make,
Each one that sees you, Noble Sir, you take,
On you Pourtraied is unto the life,
Rightly a spirit meek without all strife,
Graced with fortitude that nobly pressed,
Innated is within your noble breast,
Very much understanding in you dwells,
Sapience too your honor that excels.
So innocence within you does abound,
Admiredly, there is few are like you found,
In faith you set a sample who divine,
Not without hope upon the earth does shine,
Charity too that those may sound be thought
Thou have a precious Jewel to us brought.
Clear that thy soul as Crystal does remain,
Lively true Saints clear image does retain,
Admiredly the world gazing on you,
Return you nothing but what is your due,
Entering that you are a gorgeous clear Saint true,
(187) To the Right Honorable, ALEXANDER, Earl of Glencarne, Lord Kilmauris.
ALEXANDER CVNNINGHAM. Anagramma. AH, RVN AND EXCELLING MAN.
Ah noble Alexander, you are coming
Lively indeed, you get the goal by running;
Ever full well you in your life express
Xerxes the Persian, whose great manliness,
An Emperor of Persia placed him.
Now Sir, your worth being of like esteem,
Doubtless may very well obtain the goal,
Endeavoring the same with noble soul;
Run in your race until the same you win,
Charity too excelling man be seen,
Virtuously unto the life expressed,
Nobly retained in your noble breast;
Now run on thus, and man excelling well
In grace, let none your virtuous self excel,
Nobly so you your foes shall manly quell:
Great as you are in Earth, so 'twill befall,
Heaven a reward for your great deeds you shall
Attain, and happily therein invest,
Make your abode in Joy for ever blessed.
(188) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Earl of Buchan, Lord Aughterhous. JAMES
ERSKEYNE. Anagramma. SE, SEEK, I REMAYN.
I do remain, implies your nature still,
A bides the same, and evermore so will;
Much what the same as heretofore you were,
Ever as fast and firm true love you bear,
Se then who does your nature, well may be
Encouraged good Peer to seek to thee,
Remaining truly nobly minded still.
Seek then to you we may, who with good will,
Keep ever still a mind most nobly bent,
Ever to help the honest innocent:
In you, you then seeing such a noble mind,
Noble brave Earl, the muses me enjoined,
Even seeing you to seek, remaining kind.
(189) To the Right Honorable, JAMES Earl of Murrey, Lord of Down, and St
Columbfynch. JAMES STVART. Anagramma. AM STARS VI'T.
I vi the luster which you forth are sending,
And that you are a star it is portending;
Many stars rather seem to be in you,
Entered aloft to every ones fair view.
Stars placed are within the firmament,
So those who noble gifts have to them lent,
Triumphantly aloft are set as they;
Virtue has made true radiant beams display:
And the resplendent stars, which in you shine,
Require each one to vy't to true divine.
^^is is true honor, and it is truly thine.
(192) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Earl of Athole, Lord Read Castle. JOHN
MVRRAY. Anagramma. MAY HVRRY ON.
In virtues path you hurry on so well,
O honored Peer, that rarely you excel;
Hurried forward in zeales chariot still.
Now he that hurries with an ardent will,
Making direct steps unto virtue high,
Virtue will make him hurry presently;
Raising him up in honor to transcend,
Rightly whose steps did so to virtue tend:
And you who hurried on in virtues way,
Yet higher still to honor hurry may.
(193) To the Right Honorable, ROBERT, Earl of Nithisdaille, Lord Maxwell,
Eskdall and Carleill. ROBERTE MAXWELL. Anagramma. MARBLE EXHORT WELL.
Rightly indeed your Marble Innocence,
O unexampled Peer, shows your defense,
Best placed in virtue is who purest white,
Ever but darkly figures, to speak right;
Rightly the firmnes of the Marble shows
The constancy, your virtuous heart pursues:
Exhort then Sir by your example well,
More then some Pulpit-Preacher, who can tell
A thousand things, but practices not one;
Xerxes his stomach in you well is shown,
With you remains Xenophons prudence,
Entered upon your Marble innocence:
Live still, and Marble innocence shall be
Lasting defense with sapience unto thee.
(193) To the Right Honorable, GEORGE, Earl of Winton and Lord Setone.
GEORGIUS SETONE. Anagramma. I SENT GORGEOVS.
Gorgeous indeed the same is which you sent,
Evermore still in virtuous steps who went;
O you who always walk in gorgeous trace,
Rightly in the end do get a gorgeous race.
Greatly your virtues so you make excel,
In which respect Fame forth your fame will tell;
Virtue enjoynes that you who gorgeously
Show virtue forth, should have your fame on hie.
Set forward still, and still send gorgeous rays,
Encouraging the Poets you to praise;
That so you who do live in virtues path,
On honored Trophies may live still and laugh:
Making the honor that to you is done,
Entered upon Fames Roll, when you are gone.
(194) To the Right Honorable, ALEXANDER, Earl of Linlithgon, Lord Kallender.
ALEXANDER LEVINSTON. Anagramma. ANNEX LEND A LVSTER.
^^^exed to the Roll of noble men,
^^^^ing a luster as the best of them,
(...) ^ging a Poets pen to write:
^^^ra^es ^ke, your virtues do excite,
^^nex ^u still more virtues on the Roll;
(...) heart, so to show a noble soul,
D^^^ring that as born of noble birth;
Enheriting great honors upon earth,
Rightly a fitted soul you do possess,
Lustring still forth the truest noblenes:
Ensue to do still as you nobly do,
Vayling most lights, when as your luster show
In virtues endless Schedule so annexed,
Nobly your virtues as a noble text:
Serve will the same to lend a luster brave
To your deserts, desert enough who have,
On which, who ever casting but one eye,
Notes, that we lead a luster gloriously.
(195) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Earl of Hume, Lord Donglas. JAMES HVME.
Anagramma. AH SVME ME HY.
I see your virtues, and I wonder not,
Admired Sir, that you so hy have got,
Many fair graces fixed in your breast,
Ever have vowed on high to make you rest;
Suming you hy, because you hy deserve
Honors requital, if here will not serve,
Virtues have vowed to sum you so on high,
Making your name last to eternity,
Entering your soul in Heaven most gloriously.
(196) To the Right Honorable, JOHN Earl of Perth, Lord Drumond and Stobhall.
JOHN DRVMOND. Anagramma. O MEN DVR'D ON HY.
I see a proclamation notably,
On you reflecting, that you dur'd on high,
Hy are your thoughts, which on high virtue set,
Never could lightly be accounted bet.
Dur'd high you then must needs, since so high mind,
Rightly not stained with pride I hap to find,
Virtue has evermore this quality,
Much to exalt them who affection hy,
On her as on their summum bonum place,
Now that unto you it may be more grace,
Does it call men to view your noble face.
(197) To the Right Honorable, CHARLES, Earl of Dum fermeline Lord Fyvie, and
V^quarte. CHARLES SETONE. Anagramma. HE IS NOT CARELESS.
Carelessness joined with greatness does not fit,
Honor requires we careful be of it,
And as a man that stands on steeple high,
Rightly by prudence guided Carefully,
Looking about and wary of each hand,
Endeavoring more safely still to stand,
So is it with him that is in dignity.
Secure he should not be and Carelessly,
Entending not in safety to remain,
True nobleness by Carelessness thus stain.
O you appear not careless though on mount,
Nobly you stand but do the hazard count,
Even millions so your honor does surmount.
(198) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Earl of Vigtowne and Cumbernauld. JOHN
FLEIMING. Anagramma. ME FLYING ON HY
In your deserts who so to virtue fly,
O noble Earl needs must you be on hy,
Hy virtue is, and as a Lodestone draws,
Nobly that soul that is guided by her laws.
Fly then on high, Fly after virtue still,
Loving the some you stand on honors hill,
Ensuing what great virtue, till on high,
In endless honor we shall see you fly,
More honor still will unto you increase,
In that you love so well a virtuous peace.
Nay, when as death unto you is in highing,
Greatly we then shall see you on high Flying.
(199) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Earl of Kingorne, Lord Glams. JOHN LION.
Anagramma. ON HYLY ON, or HONEY LION.
I am commanded by the Muses nine,
On on most gloriously who nobly shine,
Hyly to praise you hyly who affect,
Nobly to walk still in a way select.
Like to the Lion Sampson killed you are,
You having in you virtues honey rare,
On high you still and honored hyly fly
Nobly, until you reach eternity.
(200) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Earl of Abercorne, Lord Pasley. JAMES
HAMILTON. Anagramma. HA, A MAINE HOST LIM.
I see an host of virtues in array,
Army like that most nobly you display,
Many great virtues mustred like an host,
Entered within you are, you may well bost,
So that who sees into your inward soul,
He cannot choose but see without control
Armies of virtues, ranked, comely, well
Maine host indeed, all hosts which does excel
In you, you ly^ a maine host to the life,
Lively expressing virtues, that no strife
Truly maintain within themselves but one
On each depending, war at all there is none,
Now thus lim a maine host, ha nobly grown.
(201) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Earl of Louthian, Lord Newbotill.
JEAMES KERE. Anagramma. MEEK RAYS.
In meeknes rays of splendour do appear,
And a meek nobleman he shines most clear:
Meeknes the greatest on the earth does grace,
Encouraging the poor with smiling face.
Since then meekraies you do possess great Earl,
Keep still those precious Jewels, that rare pearl,
Excel with meeknes, and let a meek mind,
Rays of true meeknes always to it join;
Ever aver that Louthians Earl is kind.
(202) To the Right Honorable, PATRICK, Earl of Tillibarne, Lord Murray.
PATRICK MVRRAY. Anagramma. MY TRV PARK TRY.
Parks are a certain fenced part of ground,
A noble man for game with pales does bound:
True Parks your heart, the which is bounded in,
Rightly by Gods law, which immures from sin;
In Parks the beasts which in by pales are pent,
Choice several graces in you represent,
Kept close within your noble honored heart,
May (Dear Right noble Lord) this Park impart,
Virtues due honor nobly unto you,
Rightly, who do such heavenly game pursue,
Rightly indeed may those who see you hie,
According to your worth my true Park cry,
Your virtues each may joy in joyfully.
(203) To the Right Honorable, ROBERT, Earl of Roxburgh, Lord Sesford.
ROBERTE CARRE. Anagramma. ERECT RARE ORB.
Rare cunning builder you are, for you erect,
O honored Sir, a glorious Architect;
Building a whole Orb of a gracious frame,
Enliving virtue in your worthy name,
Rarely erecting a rare orb indeed:
The soul does stand for Heaven, where heavenly breed,
Entered therein as planets most divine,
Clearly indeed within the man do shine:
An Earth your body lively does set forth,
Replenished with truly manly worth;
Rightly thus building virtue you erect,
Ever a most rare orbs sure architect.
(203) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Earl of Kelly visc. Fenton, Lord
Dirilton, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel. THOMAS
ERSKEINE. Anagramma. O MEEK HAS HY REST.
The man that is exalted in his pride,
Has no foundation certain to abide.
Only by pride man does contention make,
Meekness true wisdom never does forsake,
Before destruction pride does go likewise,
So a meek heart before a man do rise.
Eternal honor then do you abide,
Retaining meekness, which does right betide,
Sir with due honor which does you embrace,
Keep meekness then, and keep a noble place,
Ever O yet a meek heart has hy rest,
In endless honors which will you invest,
Nay further, when as honor here is gone,
Eternal honor you will wait upon.
(205) To the Right Honorable WALTER, Earl of Buckleugh Lord Eskdaill. WALTER
SCOT. Anagramma. AL TRUE COST.
With true cost are you stored, whose delight,
Attends still upon the way that is right,
Living indeed with such a noble care,
That those who know you very well are ware,
Each of them seeing well that you may bost,
Rightly to be composed al of true cost.
So noble Scot, since you do so abound,
Cost truly true most trewly in you found,
O then you will easily pardon my amiss,
True cost al nobly in your honor is.
(206) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS Earl of Melrosse and Haddington, Lord
Byning and Byris, Lord Privy Seal of Scotland, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Counsel. THOMAS HAMILTON. Anagramma. HA MAN MOST HY LOT.
The more I look, the more I wonder still,
Having in sight how you stand on an hill,
On you how Earledoms t'wo at once conferred,
Most honouredly you are therein preferred,
A Lord two several Baronies you make,
Scots privy seal likewise you charge of take.
Ha man say I, you have a most hy lot,
And it is your virtues raised you, else not
Most noble Lord had you attained so hy,
Into such honored place and dignity,
Let now the muses give a caveat though,
That forward still in virtues path you go,
Onward, when you your races goal has got,
None ^ut will say, ha man most high by lot.
(207) To the Right Honorable, ALEXANDER, Earl of Galloway, Lord Carleis.
ALEXANDER STVARTE. Anagramma. AV! EXTEND AL STAR.
Ah, when I see the luster that you show,
Lively set forth true noble, you I know,
Extending sorth all Starry glorious light,
Xanthus I think himself to do you right,
Although his lines most silverly excel,
None of the poets that in the world do dwell,
Duly them weighing ever could them mend,
Eternizing your praise, his lines must lend,
Recording of a subject of that worth,
Such as his muse before did nere bring forth;
Then forward press and still extend all Star,
Very much luster making shine afar,
And as all stars your light extend you here,
Rays of true beams on you will so shine clear,
That your great name kept still in memory,
Eternally shall be in dignity.
(208) To the Right Honorable, COLLEN, Earl of Seafort, Lord Kintaile. COLLEN
MAC-ENZE. Anagramma. MENN ECHO ZEALL.
Charity now amongst men is grown so cold,
Of it to speak men many times are bold;
Lively, yet neretheles to Charactrize,
Love and to live thereby few men so wise;
Ensuing love and charity so well,
Nobly and perelike therein to excel.
Menn echo zeal within their mouths, but yet
A fair expression of it none can get,
Choice Peer, then I must praise you worthily:
Eternizing both zeal and charity,
Nobly expressed in your actions rife:
Zeal you do act unto the very life,
Expressing it by charity as chief.
(209) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Earl of Anandale, Viscount Anan
Lochmabine. JOHN MVRRAY. Anagramma. AV; MERRY HONEY.
I cannot choose Au! Sir, but much admire
On you, who do to honey sweet aspire:
Honey most cordial is unto the heart,
Natural heat that does thereto impart.
Merry does honey make, and such you are,
Virtue has made you merry honey bear;
Rightly is virtue the sweet honey dew;
Rightly the mirth figured thereby are you:
And so I find virtue true mirth does breed,
Yielding the greatest comfort at a need.
(210) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Earl of Landerdale, Viscount Maytland
Lord Thirilstone and Lyddington. JOHN MAITLANDE. Anagramma. MAN AN HOLY TIDE.
I see your zeal, and it is an holy tide,
Onward in good things you so forward guide,
Holiness does set forth a sanctity,
Never unfitted for nobility.
Man notes such an one as natural,
Attaining unto goodness cannot fall,
In him until an holy tide constrain,
To press still forward in a virtuous vain:
Lively a tide declares such a force,
As forces on unto an holy course;
Now this the Muses mean an holy tide,
Doubtless a noble man 'twas thee did guide,
Encouraged not from virtues path to slide.
(2^1) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Earl of Carricke, Lord Kinclenyne.
JAMES STVART. Anagramma. MAY SVTE STARS.
I see your worthiness is excelling,
Aided with virtues fit for heavenly dwelling;
Mighty great luster since you so display,
Eternally to suit the stars you may,
Showing forth luster, that so nobly high
Suited with nothing but nobility:
Then since your virtues make you fit for Heaven,
Very well may you to the stars be even,
And suit them well you do, for you display
Resplendently still a more glorious ray,
Thus you show rightly you the stars suit may.
(212) To the Right Honorable, GEORGE, Earl of Kinnowle. GEORGE HAY.
Anagramma. O HY EGER AGE.
Great noble Captain of the Scottish band,
Exactly virtue you do acting stand,
Of grave designs, which show you to be high,
Rightly well fitted for nobility:
Greatly may you your eger heart increase,
Egerly acting still true noble^^^.
High Lord, since you so highly do affect,
And virtues high things to your self select;
You egerly, O on hy age may get,
Entering on higher honor Sir with it.
(211) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Earl of Dumfreeis, Viscount Air, and
Lord Sanquhir. WILLIAM CRIGHTON. Anagramma. VVIN AL RIGHT COMELY.
Win all should valor in a noble man,
In whom true manhood is right comely than,
Living in gracing forth nobility,
Lively that said, without you cannot be:
In you the Muses, then true noblenes,
And valor spying thought fit neretheles,
Mighty great Lord, to lend a line or two,
Craving Sir nothing, but what now you do
Rightly indeed, who does persuade that thing,
In which a man is working praises bring
Greatly thereto, and it commends thereby:
Hence then right noble Lord, it is that I
Thus bold have bin your honor to excite.
O noble Crighton, it is most comely right
Nobly to win all, showing manly might.
(212) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Earl of Queenisbury, Viscount Drum
lauricke. WILLIAM DOVGLAS. Anagramma. ALL MAY GVYD SLOW.
Wilful precipitation is not good,
In which is showed more rash then noble blood;
Lively true valor, active manlines,
Loves sure, yet slowly, though it self to express
In rashness, counsel wants, when slowly done,
A thing to ripenes may by counsel come;
Marking of which extreme, I find it true,
Doubtless more slow, most safe we do pursue:
O then it is fitting, that who guides are made,
Virtue affecting, should be wise and staid;
Greatly he wisdom shows that bears slow sway,
Loose carriage fits not him on whom the stay
And welfare does depend of any land,
So as it does upon its nobles stand.
(213) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Earl and Viscount of Sterling,
Secretary of SCOTLAND, and one of his Majesty's honorable privy Counsel.
WILLIAM ALEXANDER. Anagramma. MY LEADER WAX IN ALL.
Warlike brave Douglas with a wise slow pace,
In the fore ward with valor great did trace:
Let Alexander come. And certainly
Lively you do expres nobility,
In all thing waxing stronger by degree,
And showing right that you a leader be:
May every one still in all goodness grow,
And waxing may a sample others show;
Lead you do valiantly advancing still,
Ever true wisdom rightly you fulfill.
Xerxes does seem to be revived again,
A^, you so lively follow in his vain:
Now to conclude my leader with delight,
Daily to war in all I will excite;
Eternity will then to you succeed
Right noble Peer, where warring shall not need.
(214) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Earl of Elgine, Lord Kinlosse. THOMAS
BRVCE. Anagramma. HAS BRVTE COM?
Those who do happen honou^'d Earl to view,
Honor transcended on the head of you;
On whom according to your high estate,
May grace in print, and honored estimate,
According to the glory now descended,
So on your head who goodness so intended.
Brute or some worthy may think very well,
Raised again from the Elisian cell;
Valor and noblenes so truly do
Courageously within your heart so flow,
Each where has brute com? cry men as you go.
(215) To the Right Honorable, DAVID, Earl of Southesk, Lord Carnegy of
Kinnard. DAVID CARNEGY. Anagramma. NAY VID GRACED.
Doubtless, who vies you, must in earnest say,
And very truly since you grace obey,
Virtue has graced you, and you a vid,
In grace and favor ever to abide:
Declaring sithence you love grace so well,
Clear honored Peer, in grace you may excel,
Admitted to be graced on the earth,
Respecting honor, worthiness and birth:
Nay vied grace in earth is not enough,
Enterpret not in pride I would you puff,
Graced great Sir, if here you shall remain,
Your great reward for grace, Heaven does retain.
(216) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Earl of Traquhair, Lord Traquhair. JOHN
STVART. Anagramma. UNTO HY STAR.
In your high honor meriting on high,
O noble Sir, unto high star you fly:
Hy your deserts most noble Lord admit,
No lower then among the stars you sit.
Starry your graces most resplendent are,
The light you show, makes me think you a star,
Virtue will cause eternally your name,
According to your merits raised by fame;
Raised aloft on high unto hy star,
Tryumphantly in virtues glorious car.
(217) To the Right Honorable, ROBERT, Earl of Ancram. ROBERT CAR. Anagramma.
ORB TRACER.
Rightly if that the muses hit it right,
O Sir, in travail you should take delight,
Betracing of the world about so well,
Even Drake the orbs late tracer to excel;
Rather indeed, you reading on a Book,
Tracing the orbs, in h's history you look.
Certes a great world in you needs must be,
Admitting the whole orbs placed within thee,
Registered all within thy head to be.
(218) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Earl of Weymes, Lord Weymes. JOHN
VVEYMES. Anagramma. SHOW MEN JOY.
In your great honor free from all annoy,
O truly noble Weymes you show men joy;
Having your virtues in their cleerer sight,
Nothing there is can breed them more delight.
With joy your wisdom so does men content;
Ever we pray it might be permanent;
Your virtuous life does breed so great delight,
Men wish you endless joy you to requite:
Eternal joy may unto you succeed,
Showing men joy, who do our comfort breed.
(219) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Earl of Dalhousie, and Lord Ramsey of
Dalhousie. JOHN RAMSEY. Anagramma. RAYS ME ON HY.
I cannot wonder that your virtues cry
Of you a noble Peer, raisme on hy;
Hy virtues where they dwell are not content,
Noble themselves in a low Battlement.
Raise who possesses virtue, virtue will,
Advancement that man sure shall have his fill,
Making him who has true nobility,
Surrounded still with higher dignity;
Eternity until the man do reach
Your honor, this I shall not need to teach.
(220) To the Right Honorable LUCIUS, Viscount Falkland. LUCIUS CAREY.
Anagramma. I LUCIUS RACE.
Lucius, their race is come on foot again,
Virtues of Consuls Viscounts will maintain,
Consul what ever Lucius can be found,
In any virtuous valor did abound:
Very well may you see it now revived,
Set in this Lucius to the life enliv'd.
Consulls they were the most, and this great Peer
A Viscounts place in Scotlands land does bear;
Replenisht were they with brave fortitude,
E'ne so is likewise Lucius here indeed,
You Lucius race may very right be read.
(221) To the Right Honorable, HENRY, Viscount Dumbar. HENRYE CONSTABLE.
Anagramma. HE ON IN BLESSED RACE.
How you in a most blessed race do high,
Each one may see that has but half an eye,
Near stand you still, but in the blessed race hying,
Rather you seem indeed to be in flying,
Yea and Heaven to attain by violence,
Entered thereto by upright Innocence.
Continue then in your most noble course
On in your blessed race, win Heaven by force;
Never give off, until the Crown that is due
Sir, for your virtuous life descend on you:
Then that you in a blessed race have run,
Ah noble Lord, by the reward is won,
Best will be understood an incitation,
Lively you will hereby give and provocation,
Enciting others to your imitation.
(222) To the Right Honorable, DAVID, Visc. Stormouth, Lord Scone. DAVID
MVRRAYE. Anagramma. AV ME? RVDDY RAY.
David was ruddy, and like so are ye,
A David rightly in the same you be,
V^rtue may by the counte^ance be seen,
In The face may be di^cerv'd, what one has bin,
Doubtless when as a ruddy comely ray,
Most noble Sir, a body does display,
Virtue not being in the soul within,
Rightly such one tr^e beauty has not seen,
Rightly you though in soul and body rich,
An ruddy rays do force most comely reach,
You well may be a David and may Reign
Eternally Gods praises to maintain.
(223) To the Right Honorable, GEORGE, Visc. Oboyne, Lord Gordon. GEORGJVS
GORDON. Anagramma. J GORED ON GORGEVS.
Gorgeus it is for noble men who grac ed
Express true manhood which in them is placed,
On goring of the foes which would oppress,
Rending a way a settled quietness,
Gorgeously your ancients gored, and hence,
I think you had your name whence does commence.
Virtue with valor likely mixed is,
So who has one, does the other hardly mis.
Go on then in your predecessors way,
On follow them, nor from their footsteps stray,
Rightly possess the valor that before
Decked with your predecessors ever wore,
O then we shall indeed but truth confess,
Noble you are and full of valiantness.
(224) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Viscount Kemnore. JOHN GORDON. Anagramma.
GOR'DON ON HY.
In honor a conserver of the Land,
O my Moecena^ you full well may stand,
High who although you are, not Idle been,
Nobly about the noblest works are seen.
Garding the country you have gored the foes,
On which true valor in you nobly shows,
Rays of true virtues you so well display,
Doubtless therewith you gore your foes away,
On gore them still although you be on high,
Nobly so be your Countries guard thereby.
(225) To the Right Honorable ROBERT Viscount Bell Haven. ROBERT DOVGLAS.
Anagramma. ART ORBS GOVLDE.
Rare Gold does true nobility contain,
O there is no truer treasure in the Maine,
Bost cannot all the earth of any such,
Eternally that will abide the tutch,
Rightly the Gold of Ophir nothing is,
To this which purchases the truest bliss.
Doubtless then thou art orbs rare gold indeed,
O noble Lord that does true riches breed.
Virtue is still the best security,
Garding most nobly when thy dignity,
Lively assisted Contrymen are safe,
And sitting peaceably they will smile and laugh,
So true orbs gold shall be your Epitaph.
(226) To the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN, Lord Archbishop of Saint
Andrews, Primat and Metropolitan of all Scotland. JOHN SPORSWOODE. Anagramma.
O SOWD NO HY PROSE.
In love and piety great Bishop hy,
O how you honor well the Deity;
How you do love the people and care so,
No prose so hy above their reach to sow.
Sow you do Gods blessed Word, casting the seed,
Preparing so that it increase may breed,
On the grounds strength or weakness, having eye,
Respecting not to please the sense thereby:
Seeking the true and Orthodoxall sense,
With plainnes and with simple Innocence;
On sowing not with high and lofty prose,
Only in teaching, seeking to win those
Do to Gods Word attend, thus it does fall,
Envy those split, Saint Andrew has a Paul.
(227) To the Right Reverend Father in God, PATRICK, Lord Archbishop of
Glascowe, Primat of Scotland, and Metropolitan. PATRICKE LINDSEY. Anagramma.
CLAY, KIND PRIEST.
Priest made of clay, a port that Gods blessed word
A training to, to the people do afford;
It Is a most honored title for a Priest,
Rightly, and in a proper sense is Christ,
In Gods Church, though there are Priests amongst men
Chosen, Gods secrets to reveal to them,
Keeping the name of Priest, which nothing more
Enterpreted, then elder does implore.
Like unto us such is Gods mercy, see
In's providence, he will these Priests to be,
Noting to us that so the works due praise
Duly belongs to God, is his always;
So then you clay Priest, still remember ye,
Even like to us made of the clay you be;
Your kindness to us therefore let us see.
(228) To the Right Reverend Father in God, David, Lord Bishop of Edenborough.
DAVID LINDESEY. Anagramma. SAY I LEND, DEVID.
Deviding of Gods word belongs to you,
A reverend Prelate who therein pursue,
Versed so perfectly in holy writ,
In readiness straightway to open it,
Declaring as the Apostle does injoyne,
Lending the sense in time and out of time,
In faithful manner dealing forth the bread,
Not out of order to whom should be fed,
Doubtless who thus does as your self does so,
Eternal honor unto him shall flow.
So to conclude, so lend and so decide,
Ever Gods blessed word that may betide,
Your commendations on the peoples side.
(229) To the Right Reverend Father in God, the L. Bishop of Galloway. BJSHOP
of GALLOWAYE, Anagramma. SAY FOLLOW A BIG HOPE.
Blessed is Galloway where you their Pastor
Instruct them still to follow Christ their Master,
Saying a big hope ever follow ye,
Hope still in God and never hopeless be,
O Gods most blessed word hope will maintain,
Putting the soul in Joy in midst of pain.
O then still preach, say follow a big hope,
Fitting your self to follow still Gods scope.
Great Prelate as you great are, so have care,
A great hope to commend you do not spare,
Letting the people know a hope that is big,
Lively on Christ set is the surest twig,
O it is a tree of a most sure defense,
Well will preserve a man so innocence,
And a plain honest heart with it conjoined,
Your big hope follow, you the fruit shall find,
Eternally abiding in Gods mind.
(230) To the Right Reverend Father in God, ALEXANDER, Lord Bishop of Dunkeld.
ALEXANDER LINDESEY. Anagramma. SIR, ANNEX YE ALL DEED.
As you are a learned Prelate and preach well,
Lively so strive, that your deeds may excel
Ever in action, doing what you preach
Xixtus like, then you Reverently do teach.
A Reverend Bishop, erst of Rhemes he was:
Nor did he one jot of the truth let pass,
Doing so bravely, that ere truth were lamed,
Even be himself would suffer to be maimed,
Receiving so the crown of Martyrdom.
Let then your deeds after this Bishop come,
In whose good parts, although you are proceeding;
None live so well, no exhortation needing:
Do then most worthy Prelate, let annexed
Ever all deeds be to your holy text;
Sir, still all deed unto your Word annex ye,
Envies foul haggs which do so much perplex ye,
You Will stop their mouths, and they can never vex you.
(231) To the Right Reverend Father in God, The Lord Bishop of Abordine. BISHOP
OF ABORDINE. Anagramma. O BE BOND OF HY PRAISE.
Bond of hypraise O reverend Father be,
Instruct your people very curiously;
Showing to them Gods sacred Testament,
How he his Gospel by his Son then sent:
On faith in CHRIST, if that they do rely,
Pleasing their GOD, they may be saved thereby,
Ever though mind them, faith is still requiring
Of those who have it, that some works respiring
Faith, may alive and not a dead faith show.
Always this Doctrine reverend Sir pursue,
Bestirre your self by your example too,
On ward to move them as you preach to do;
Rightly so you a Preacher always shall
Duly a Lecture read unto them all,
Instructing them more by your good example,
Noted by them, then by ten Sermons ample,
Ever bond of high praise on foes you trample.
(232) To the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN, Lord Bishop of Moray. JOHN
GVTHRIE. Anagramma. I GRV THE HONEY.
In sweetness far excelling honey you,
And those who hear you drop a pleasing dew:
Honey was never any half so sweet,
(No) as Gods word with which you them do greet.
Greeting them still with Gods true grace and favor,
Verting from them his wrath, their ill behavior
That they may mend, and so returning they
Have of that precious and sweet honey may.
Rightly then Sir, when you did preaching show,
Indeed you not till then the honey gru,
Evermore still this sweetness do pursue,
(233) To the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN, Lord Bishop of Rosse. JOHN
MAXWEL. Anagramma. AX LIM HEW ON.
I send you here an Ax, you must thereby
On hew until the wood you do descry,
How good and whether it will timber serve,
Noting the bad, and it to burn reserve.
May this Ax lym then well, it is Gods Word,
And will a difference easily afford,
Xerxes like, still pursuing in your strength
Well, till the trees be hewed at the length:
Each tree resembles men, the Ax GODS Word,
Lively that hewing on their hearts afford,
Lymming them out fit timber for the Lord.
(234) To the Right Reverend Father in God, THOMAS, L. Bishop of Brechen.
THOMAS SYNSORSE. Anagramma. MOST ROSY SEAS.
Thy soul is full of Matter most divine,
Having a Sea within the heart of thine,
O rather Seas within you do retain,
Most plenteously distill you as the rain,
And running forth into delicious rills,
Softly descending from the rocky hills:
So have you Seas but of a strange condition,
Yielding forth sweet a rosy disposition,
Nor is it in vain, for Gods word which you show,
Sweetly does seem learned Sir from you to flow,
O sweetly let your rosy seas afford,
Rivers enough still making a fresh ford,
So show you plainly Gods blessed word will be
Evermore still ere a most rosy Sea.
(235) To the Right Reverend Father in God, ADAM L. Bishop of Dumblane. ADAM
BALLANDON. Anagramma. ON AND DAM BAALL.
A Reverend Prelate stored with doctrine well,
Dam Baal and Idols, and the people tell,
Advertising them what the danger is,
Making of Idols how it hinders bliss.
Baall the Zidonians Idol does present
All manner Idols that are by it meant.
Let then the word of God be powerfully,
Lively declared with audacity,
And go you on still in your holy course,
Nor cease to dam all Idols with a force,
Dam Irreligion, Covetize condemn,
On as you do, proceed then amongst men,
None but will say you damned Baal well then.
(236) To the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN Lord Bishop of Catnas. JOHN
ABERNETHIE Anagramma. THINE BE HIGH ARON.
I wish the Vrim and the Thummim may,
On thee Right Reverend Bishop ever stay,
High Arons lot be thine. And may it be,
None in Religion that may out go thee.
About the Lords work diligently go,
Be careful that you be not over-slow,
Ever respect have to the flock of Christ,
Regarding them as Gods most holy Priest;
Neither then Aron be you less sincere,
Endeavoring still upright to appear,
That so when Christ your Blessed Master come,
Having his flock fed, you may have a room,
Into your Masters Joy to enter got,
Ever so have thou then high Arons lot.
(237) To the Right Reverend Father in God, GEORGE L. Bishop of Orhnay.
GEORGIUS GRAHAME. Anagramma. HA GORGEVS GEM RAY.
Gorgeous Ray which you illuster forth,
Expressing you a gemme of peerless worth,
O you send forth a most resplendant ray,
Rightly which you out of Gods word display;
Great gemme of endless worth that is and, make
It does of you a gemme, who pleasure take,
Virtuous good Bishop in that holy Book,
Seeking wherein for happiness you look.
Gorgeously, Sir, retain your gem ray still,
Repleat with light your diocese and fill,
All eyes that do behold you with the light,
Had from the word of God that gem most bright,
And of your luster lose not any Jot,
Make increment, decreasall make you not.
Eterne (hay gorgeous gem ray) is your lot,
(238) To the Right Reverend Father in God, ANDREW, L. Bishop of Ardgyle.
ANDREW BOYD. Anagramma. HAN DREW BODY.
Able wise Bishop your discretion so,
Notable is your task to undergo,
Doubtless that you by settled argument,
Rarely Drew Bodies to remain content,
Ever subjected most obediently,
With humble heart to serve God faithfully.
Body implies here a carnal man,
On whom Gods blessed word work wonders can,
You then handrew on Bodies carnal men,
Devoutly to serve God with spirit then.
(239) To the Right Reverend Father in God NIGEL, L. Bishop of Isles. NIGELL
CAMPEBOLL. Anagramma. LONG CLAP BELLAMI.
No better Anagram I can present,
Inserted with such beauteous true content,
Great Bishop of the Isles then this, for here,
Entire the beauty is that does appear,
Loving so well the gracious God of Love,
Likely the heart of the best sort to move.
Chaste love it is, and may without offense,
Admitted be to dwell with Innocence:
Most happy is the soul this Love has got,
Perpetual cursed is he has it not,
Enter may then this love and beauty well,
Beloved Prelate in a Bishops Cell:
O your great virtues Long has Cleeped you
Lively bestrewd with this Loves beauteous dew,
Long still to be Cleept Bellamie ensue.
(240) To the Right Honorable, GEORGE Lord Gordon, Son and heir of George
Marquis Huntley. GEORGE GORDONE. Anagramma. GO, GO, O DERN EGER.
Go on great Lord, and as you are a Peer,
Ever a Derner of the times appear.
O, it befitteth Peers indeed to be
Rightly times Derners, and infirmity
Growing with men's abuse, with care and pain
Ever by prudent wisdom to restrain.
Go on then, and as it befits you well,
O as a Derner of the times excel:
Rightly perform it Eger with affection,
Derne the abuses that by insurrection
On stage of this vast world have set their foot,
Nobly great Lord set but your hand unto't,
Egerly Derne, or else twill be no boot.
(241) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Lord Erskeine, son and heir of John
Earl of Mar. JAMES ERSKEINE. Anagramma. YE MAKEN YEARS.
I send unto you Sir, now this new year,
A new years gift the Muses bad me bear,
Meaning no more but that therewith from heart,
Ever unto you I should you impart,
Seeing the virtues which within your breast,
Entered most fayerly nobly there do rest,
Rightly declaring you a noble man,
Showing such graces as most truly can,
Kept in your hearts most closest cabinet,
Ever make honor still upon you set,
In earth the muses see your grace appear,
Nor cease to wish you maken many a year,
Enjoining me this message for to bear.
(242) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Lord Macgill, one of the Lords of the
College of Justice. JAMES MACGILL. Anagramma. CALL GEMM SAY I.
I viewing of the graces that innate,
Are as it were within you incarnate,
Making your luster lustrous amongst men.
E'ne must confess you to be a rare Jem,
So sure you are, for virtues precious still,
Make their abode within your heart and fill
A light disspreading all the Country round,
Charity choosing you a most profound
Gem of great price and excellency rare,
I cannot choose but must confess you are,
Lively your Rays display still shiningly,
Let all Call you a Gemme indeed say I,
(243) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Lord Lindesey. JAMES LINDESEY,
Anagramma. SEE YE MY ISLAND?
I see me thinks the places where you sway,
And how your honor causes to obey,
Much like unto an Island, which the sea
Ever surroundeth, so that such may be
Sea-compassed about with sure defense.
Likely it is that Country has a fence
Impregnable, where you do baronize,
Nobly then guiding under Charles the wise;
Doubtless more sure and safe they are therein,
Even then if Sea-surrounded they had bin.
See ye my Island? very well may ye,
Enquire then of men, seeing Sir you be
Your self a more sure fence, then is the Sea.
(244) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Lord Forbes. JOHN FORBES. Anagramma. OH
FINE ROBE!
I see the Robes of honor which you wear,
O nobly gracing you, fine they appear,
How well it fits that fine Robes should be fit,
Nobly your self who finer graces it.
Fine are the virtues which in you appear,
Ordered in brave array most noble Peer,
Replenished with faith, hope, charity,
Best ornaments for true nobility,
Ever may rightly then to you befall,
Such fine Robes Sir to grace you therewithal.
(245) To the Right Honorable ALEXANDER Lord Saltoun. ALEXANDER ABERNETHIE.
Anagramma. ANNEX BET; RENDER AL HYE.
Annex bet vertus still render all hye,
Lively troops still of true nobility,
Expressing bounty to the life so well,
Xenius great self your freeness does excel,
And none will say but true nobility
Nobly you show in liberality,
Declaring you a true Mecaenas right,
Ever rewarding worthily who write,
Render all high assayes and ever still
A noble man express you by your will,
Best by your actions full of worthiness,
Ever most truly noble you express,
Rendering all high as high you are I Am sure,
None then will doubt, your honor will endure,
Enterchange virtues still, and let one grace
Truly provoke another on apace.
Having your graces thus annexed then,
In honor you annexed amongst men,
Ever shall truly honored be amongst men.
(246) To the Right Honorable ANDREW Lord Gray, Baron of Fovils. ANDREW
GRAYE. Anagramma. WE REGARD ANY.
A noble man should be the poor man's ward,
Nor should he cease on any one regard,
Duly according to their several place,
Right nobly to extend himself to grace,
Ene showing so he is a most noble peer,
With true respect regarding any here.
Great Peer, such one are you, who due regard
Rightly extend to any them to ward,
Amy Moecenas great, regard but me,
You very rightly shall my Pollio be,
Eternize shall my Muse your memory.
(247) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Lord Ochiltry. JAMES STVART. Anagramma.
STAIN ART, MUSE.
If I Encomium of your praise should write,
As you great Sir, I Am sure deserve of right;
My Muse must then new art invent again,
Eternizing your name, old Art to Stain,
Such are the noble virtues which adhere
So nobly Sir, within the noble Sphere,
True Sphere indeed of your most inward soul,
Verily that indeed he should control,
Al arts and sciences men have invented,
Rightly that your worth may be represented.
Then with these lines I pray remain contented.
(248) To the Right Honorable, the Lord Cathcarte LORD CATHGARTE. Anagramma.
TRACT EACH LORD.
Lovely great Peer, the virtues in your view,
Of every Peerless peer you well pursue.
Rightly indeed thus like a Nobleman,
Do you set forth your souls true luster than.
Choice virtues which each several Lord does act,
Admiredly you follow in your tract,
Tracing along by virtue led so well,
Honouredly you strive for to excel,
Charily still tracing each several Lord,
And marking well what nobly they afford,
Resplendant honor in their Imitation,
Tracing each several Lord of every nation,
Expressing of their worths delineation.
(249) To the Right Honorable, JOHN Lord Zester. JOHN HAY. Anagramma. HE HAN
JOY.
I cannot say more than your Anagram,
O noble Hero, sets forth in your mind,
How you who virtues so well do affect,
Notably do Enjoy a Joy select.
Han signifies have, so you have than,
A Joy befitting a true nobleman.
Your virtue then pursue, and you shall see,
Ever you shall Han Joy assuredly.
(250) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Lord Semple. JAMES SEMPLE, Anagramma. YE
SAMPLE SEM.
In virtue you do walk so virtuously,
Accompanied with true nobility,
Most noble Lord that we must truly say,
Entering upon your virtues large survey,
Sem in uprightness and sincerity
Sample ye in your life most virtuously.
Erst he a holy father procreated,
Many good souls from him generated.
Placed in Canan were the holy seed,
Let then your virtues and true honored breed,
Evermore in Gods blessed Church succeed.
(251) To the Right Honorable HENRY Lord St. Char, Baron of Ravensheogh. HENRY
SAINT CHAR. Anagramma. AL CRY ERN HY SAINT.
Hy Saint in virtue and in admiration,
Ern still to be by virtuous inclination,
None that do live but earnestly desire,
Right true nobility should so aspire.
You are a nobleman in Scotland true.
Such great reward though will to you ensue,
Aiming at virtue, that your self shall be
Instald a Saint in truest dignity,
Nobler indeed you shall be then by far,
Chosen then if you were an Emperor,
Then let the cry of all sorts you exhort,
Crying to you, you keep a holy port,
Let their loud acclamations to you crying,
Into heaven force you as you were in flying,
And so you earning an hy Saint to be,
Raised shall be an hy Saint triumphantly.
(252) To the Right Honorable JOHN Lord Herries. JOHN MAXWEL. Anagramma. WAX
MEL ON HY.
In you I sweetness infinitely behold,
O! honey in your name is well inrold,
Having Wax too a full whole hive to make,
Nobly indeed which fates on high do take.
May you still Wax in honor more and more,
And to a higher pitch of greatness sore,
Xanthe the Nymph shall Chronicle your name,
With an acrostique and an Anagram,
Ever recording a Mellifluous Peer,
Lively true with your wax appear.
(253) To the Right Honorable, ALEXANDER Lord Elpingstone. ALEXANDER
ELPINGSTONE Anagramma. SPRING ALONE EXTEND AL.
Alone spring up in virtues, Al extend,
Letting each know that you are virtues friend,
Extend all virtues, extend charity,
Xanthus-like, which its color ^igardly,
As wretched misers gold, would never keep,
No, Aristotle says, that all the sheep,
Died are with red that washed are therein.
Extend then charity, and do begin
Religiously your bou^teous hands to s^read,
Ever shall virtue then lift up her head,
Like a true noble Peer you spring alone,
Peere-like indeed who are so virtuous grown,
Ensue then Charity and grow you still,
Nobly with bounty every place to fill,
Grow in your liberality, and see,
Stout noble Peer you will ever growing be.
Thus cast your bread upon the waters, and
O honored Lord you will find it in your land,
Nobly extend all mercy and you will see,
Even almost all alone you will spring a tree.
(254) To the Right Honorable, SIMON, Lord Lovat. SIMON FRASER. Anagramma. SO
IS MAN FREER.
So free man you are, is any found,
In works of Charity does more abound?
Making still forward a more good progression.
O nobly setting forth a disposition,
Naturally to freenes so inclined.
Few are can sample such a noble mind.
Repleat who is not with a mind that is Free,
A bondsman is, and for nobility,
So far it is from him that he knows it not,
Ever must you then who a most free Lot,
Retain be decked with true nobility.
(255) To the Right Honorable, JAMES Lord Ogilby. JAMES OGILBY. Anagramma. BY
GEMS AL JOY.
In whomsoever the true gems do rest,
A noble cabinet is his rare breast,
Most neately treasuring the gems of grace,
Expressing luster in his very face.
Such one great Sir are you who do express,
O noble and to life your ioyfulnesse,
Gems that are rare and superpasse excelling,
In your most noble soul enjoy their dwelling.
Let still your Joy increase, all your Joy set,
By these true gems increased be far bett,
Your Joy confesses them best gems to be.
(256) To the Right Honorable the Lord Borthwicke LORD BORTHWICKE. Anagramma.
WORK BY THE LORD.
Lustrous your works great Lord must ever be,
On Christ that founded are perpetually,
Relying then on a foundation sure,
Doubtless they must for evermore endure.
By the Lord Christ then work, without whose aid,
O withal is vain what ever can be said,
Regardlesse all is what ere can be done,
That will unto no prosperous ending come.
How happy then are you that work so well,
Working by Christ to make your works excel!
Ensue the work so well you have begun,
Christ you will win who does so nobly run.
Keep on your course and then you shall be sure,
Ere long your great reward Sir to procure.
(257) To the Right Honorable ROBERT Lo^d Rosse. ROBERTUS ROSSE. Anagramma. SE
TRV ROSES ORB.
Repleat with sweetness, Roses-like the sent
Of your fair virtues, is most permanent,
Being an orb where several graces luster,
Eve^ ^ike to Roses which on rose trees cluster,
Re^en^ing forth a sweet and pleasing smell,
That breeds a delectation does excel,
Virtue these Roses are, fame is the savor,
Sounding aloud their gracious good behavior.
Right noble Lord then since you so abound,
Odorously repleate with Roses sound,
Seeing an orb of Roses in you true,
Sweetly the smell of Roses lively show,
Evermore still that goodness yet pursue.
(258) To the Right Honorable ROBERT Lord Boyde. ROBERTUS BOYDE. Anagramma. O
BYDES TRVE ORB.
Round is the circle that your virtues go,
O noble Peer, if virtuous deeds do show;
Beloved with God indeed Sir that you are,
Expressing so your minds fair beauties rare,
Rare then must needs your fortitude abide,
True orb of graces whatsoever betide,
Virtue an orb inhabits within thee,
So thee an orb of virtue we decree.
Bide noble peer, and do but thou remain,
O as thou art, nor constancy do stain;
Your virtues then will make men doing right
Doubtless confess you bide an orb in sight
Ever most true, which breeds most sound delight.
(259) To the Right Honorable, John Lord Torphichen. JOHN SANDELANDS.
Anagramma. AH ON LANDS I SEND.
In honor worth so trumpets ou't your fame
O that you show to have a noble name.
Ha virtue makes that you on lands do send
Noble encomium of the way you bend.
So luster forth most noble (...) your worth,
And let it luster for^^ your noble birth
Nobly adorned wi^^ our v^rtues too,
Decking an high b^th, which does make them show,
Eternally man ^uch true honor grow,
Laud so will m^n your true nobility,
Adorned still with greater dig^ity,
Noting whose worth fame hy will send on land,
Declaring unto them to understand
E'ne that you do an higher state command.
(260) To the Right Honorable, ALEXANDER, Lord Spinny. ALEXANDER LYNDESEY.
Anagramma. ANNEXED EASILIER LED.
Annexed forces duly knit together,
Led are with case, albeit none know whether.
Each thing conjoined may do very well,
Xanthus streams severd straight the ford will quell.
Annex a sort of let^ers, you may fra^e
Neatly a syllable; disjoyne the same,
Doubtless they turn to letters bare again.
Each syllable annexed may well maintain
Rightly a sentence, and the sentence knit,
Lively may set forth the exactest wit.
In knitting things together thus we see
Naturally how firm the knot may be.
Doubtless you then in virtue who excel,
Expressing it by grace annexed so well,
Surely may led to heaven more easily
Encountering sin with great audacity,
Your life so Sir will reach eternity.
(261) To the Right Honorable, PATRICKE, Lord Londeres. PATRICKE LESLY.
Anagramma. LEAPS TRICKELY.
Pressed unto Acts of truest noblenes,
Admit sometimes from travels sore excess,
That you release your self and liberty,
Releeving of your nature take thereby
In manlines you though have such delight,
Choice are the pastimes that to do you right,
Keeping as noble mind in play as works,
Entering upon, shows where true manhood lurks.
Like then an active man you trickly leap,
Expressing what a manly strength you keep,
Showed in your trickly leap, yea too I see,
Laid in as your most true nobility,
You merry Peer with mirth and jolity.
(263) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Lord London. JOHN CAMPEBEL. Anagramma.
BEEN HOLY CAMP.
In fair Array your virtues mustred are,
O Sir, and do an Holy Camp appear:
Holiness fitteth true Nobility,
Nobly preparing for Heavens dignity.
Camp is your virtues, mustred in array,
And truly noble beams they do display:
Making one fitted with true heavenly worth,
Placed within him for to grace his Birth,
Exactly furnished with heavenly mirth,
Be as a noble Peer, and holily
Express the Purtrait of Nobility:
Lively you been an holy Camp we see.
(264) To the Right Honorable, Lord Balmerinoch. JOHN ELPINGSTONE. Anagramma.
PLY HY SONG SEEN ON.
In Musicks skill you surely learned are,
O very well the Muses do declare,
HY song you have, and the Altus you will sing,
Nobly so Fame a loud your fame does ring.
Expressing Altus, you show by and by
Lively you are raised to Altesie,
Placed on hy, that a low Base may be
In a far distance fifteen under thee.
Nobly ply on the part you have begun,
Go forward still until the praise you have won.
Song does imply a mind that is cheerely bent,
The high part shows one who exalted hent
On Honor set, is lifted up on hy:
Now seen on hy, ply you hy Song so well,
Eternally that so you may excel.
(265) To the Right Honorable JAMES, Lord Colveill. JAMES COLVEILL. Anagramma.
I AM A CLOSE IVELL.
Iuel-like Peer you a close Iuell rare,
Admiredly indeed your self declare;
Making your luster cause each one to grant,
Ever you may of a close Iuell vaunt:
So here is the rareness of the Iuell seen,
Close kept, that chary of the same you been.
O this close closet where this Iuell chary
Locked close the heart, is where it is kept wary.
Vertu's the juell that is kept so close,
Exceeding all nay none we can suppose
In Earth that can this juell rare excel:
Lustrousl^ such that none can parallel,
Light it sends forth, as Stars in sky that dwell.
(266) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Lord Blantyre. JAMES STVART. Anagramma.
STAY A TRV SEM.
I see the heart sincere, wherewith you vive,
And seem another Sem to be alive;
Marking whose steps, so truly you them trace,
Eeach man does judge you Sem by your just pace:
Stay them before you go, and let us view.
Steps (matchless Hero) you so well pursue,
Truth we must needs confess, that you are then
Verily the true picture of just Sem,
And your good life does make my thoughts to stay.
Rightly a true Sem you are in your way,
There does remain in me no more to say.
(267) To the Right Honorable ROBERT, Lord Burleigh ROBERTUS BALFOVRE.
Anagramma. OUR FATE SV ABLER ORB.
Rare Fate have you, whose Fate so nobly bent
On the rare abler Orb the heart has sent:
Be living, which you su both night and day,
Ever until that orb attain you may;
Rarely affecting that true orb so rare,
That does your fate true noble right declare.
Virtue's that nobler orb which does beget
Surely an abler Orb to follow it.
Blessed are you that virtue do pursue,
An abler orb than all the world you sue:
Likely it is, your fate which follow than
Fairly so good a gain, is happy man;
Our fate be like to yours so abler orb,
Virtue will teach you passions how to curb.
Run on till an abler orb we gain,
Eternity then so we shall attain
(268) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Lord Holyrudehouse. JOHN BOTHWELL.
Anagramma. BOTH ON HY WELL.
I Have read of Pride to which the soul aspires,
Of greatness too, wherein most men's desires,
Having affection upon honor set,
No pains fore-slow the hearts desire to get.
Blessed is the Soul when elevated hye,
On God she meditates advisedly:
The Body blessed is, when virtues shining
Han taken bin, Presages that divining
Well do fore-shew, that to hy dignity
Ere long that body shall advanced be.
Let soul and body then thus hy excel,
Lively you see, on hy they both are well.
(269) To the Right Honorable, JOHN Lord Madertie. JOHN DRVMONDE. Anagramma.
DON MVRED ON HY.
I see so noble actions by you done,
O, I must needs say you are a noble one:
Hy are you sure, for you on high are mured,
Nobly in good, who has so well endured.
Don's that in Spain, have so high dignity,
Rightly you put down with Nobility:
Virtue, you so in your good life do frame,
Most honorable you do make your name,
On which relying, you are mur'd so hy,
Never to fall from your great dignity:
Do as you have done then, and mured still,
Eternally in honor bide you will.
(270) To the Right Honorable, JAMES Lord Cooper. JAMES ELPINGSTONE.
Anagramma. ISE ENE STRONG PALM.
Ise ene strong Palm, you say, and you shall have it:
Ah Sir, the gods unto deservers gaveit;
Amongst which deservers, seeing that you are,
Every way your worth let Palm declare.
Such Palms were given, as signs of honors had,
Earned by those, who by Mars were victors made:
Likely then you, whom muses do befriend,
Palm giving you, who Countries good do tend.
Ensue with valor then as you begun
Nobly at first, till you the Palm had won,
That as you have the Palm, and earned it well,
Showing true manhood does within you dwell:
That you who gat the Palm of victory,
O nobly may retained true dignity.
None but will say your valor does excel,
E'ne you have earned strong Palm, which fits you well.
(271) To the Right Honorable, JOHN Lord Cranstone. JOHN CRANSTONE. Anagramma.
RACE ON HY STONN.
I doubt not, noble man, your virtues rare:
O you an high and precious stone declare.
High in your honor, precious in esteem,
Noble, since each one may your actions deem.
Choisely then, Noble Peer, the race pursue,
Right Noble, wherein entered each may view
A fair progression, you have well begun,
Nobly pursuing till the prize you'ave won;
So a true noble stone you noble show,
That each one may you for a hy stone know.
On in your race, 'twill thee at last succeed
Nobly a hy stone, so will be indeed,
Each one confessing you are a noble seed.
(272) To the Right Honorable, OGILBY Lord Deskforde. OGILBY DESKFORDE.
Anagramma. O SEEK GLYD BY FORD.
O seek on still in the fair way you go,
Glide by the Ford, that streaming does overflow
In your fair heart, guiding you still along,
Live, while you live within the world, (among
Beastly men, who have conversations vilde)
Yielding forth fruit becoming Gods best child.
Doubtless the Ford is that sweet stream of grace,
Entering into your heart that flows apace:
Such is the path that you should seeking be,
Keeping the way to heaven still warily:
Follow on still in this most blessed way,
O still pursue on forwards, do not stay;
Reaching at last, you such reward shall win,
Doubtless, that to repent you would never begin:
Ever then seek this way, glyd by this ford.
(273) To the Right Honorable, CARRE, Lord Iedbrough. CARRE IEDBROVGH.
Anagramma. BROCH RARE GVIDE.
Choice Noble Lord, who a rare guide indeed,
Advanced your self to be of noble breed,
Rightly Broch you the blood of enemies
Raging, that would your Countries life surprise:
Expressing so, you are a rare guide, wise,
In good way go you forward, and as guise,
E'ne of a rare guide rightly does require,
Do so, and we will no more of you desire:
Beholding after ages then shall be,
Right Noble Lord, but to example thee:
On whom, in Histories when they shall read,
Viewing your worth; o a rare guide indeed:
Guide rare then, broach, and fear not to begin,
Heaven so by virtuous valor you may win.
(274) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Lord Kintyier. JAMES CAMPEBELL.
Anagramma. PLACE BE-SMILES ME
It is a virtuous life which place be-smiles,
And virtue never any soul beguiles.
Mighty great Lord, then seeing in great place
Entrance you had by virtue, which does grace
So well your birth, though from a high descent,
Choisely indeed it you has honors lent:
Ah then advance you forward into grace
Mainely, since you be-smiled are by place:
Placed by virtue; since you are on high,
Embarked in the ship of dignity,
Bestirre your self, and still this grace pursue,
Ennobled Lord, that has ennobled you,
Luster then, showing me, show honored wight
Lively indeed, place has be-smil'd you right.
(274) To the Right Honorable, ARCHIBALD, Lord Naper, Baron of Marcheston.
ARCHIBALD NAPER. Anagramma. RICH AND REAP ALB.
Alb like white innocence with riches great,
Rare is it when these two together meet;
Christ says, It is most hard for a rich man,
Heavens blessed Kingdom happy to attain.
If riches do increase, says David, see,
Be careful that your hearts not on them be:
All which reveal's, that who do riches reap,
Likely they cannot innocence keep.
Doubtless, then noble Peer, you have no Peer
Nobly, that riches have not reaped here
Alone, but with them Albe of innocence,
Peerless in^eed, must therefore be the fence,
Excelling noble Peer, you have thereby
Reapt riches, and white Alb, O dignity.
(276) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS Lord Cameron. THOMAS FAIRFAX. Anagramma.
AH FIX MOST A FAR.
Thomas his faith it seems you have attained.
Heart having fixed on that which not obtained
One only glimpse, you yet believe to be,
Most earnestly expecting certainly,
A sure possession of that settled state,
Setting the same at an high estimate.
Fix then your heart still on the things not seen,
And matchless yet they of a certain been:
In earnest covet them, and though they are far,
Xenius is one of the na^es of Jove, and signifies bounty.
Righty true faith, as near will them declare:
Fix then a steadfast and firm confidence,
And second you the same with innocence,
Xenius great self will then be your defense.
(277) To the Right Honorable, EDWARD, Lord Newburge, Chanc^llor of the
Duchy of Lancaster, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
EDWARD BARRET. Anagramma. ADD TRVER BRAV.
Ever may you, right noble Sir, be brave,
Decked with resplendent honor which you have,
With answerable worth on you conferred,
According to your great and true high merit.
Reaching e'ne up unto our Sovereigns ear,
Deriving you a star to glitter here.
Brave Lord, though you in Bravery abound,
Add to be truer brave, and still be found,
Reaching at higher graces, which will grave,
Right true impression of a mind most brave;
Ever thus add still braver brave to be,
Till you obtain the heavenly bravery.
(278) To the Right Honorable, WALTER, Lord Forfare. WALTER ASTON. Anagramma.
AL A TRV STONE.
We all are stones, in Christ's best building set,
And the more hewn and polisht, still the bett:
Living stones, called in Gods blessed book;
Then, Noble Sir, when on your grace I look,
Entering into your virtues large survey,
Rightly all a true stone I must you say:
Al a true stone your virtues nominate,
Sir, that for heavenly buildings were create:
Then still remain a true stone for the Lord;
O still unto the building do afford
New fresh additions, polisht by Gods Word.
(279) To the Right Honorable, DONALD, Lord Reoay. DONALD MACKIE. Anagramma. I
AM LANDED OAK
Doubtless, your fortitude did lively show,
O noble Oak, that you Oaks strength pursue,
Noting that through the shipwreck of the Sea,
A landed Oak you come assuredly:
Long have the stormy tempest you endured,
Doubtless, more sol^ce y^u your self procured
Entering upon the earth out of the Sea,
Most lively heart of Oak, so strong you be;
Ah noble Sir retain your strength within,
Choicely defending still ^o strength to win:
Keep you in heart the noble fortitude,
You honored soul wherewith you are endu'd,
Each then will grant, you came oak when you are viewed.
(280) To the Right Honorable, ROBERT, Lord Dalzelle. ROBERTUS DALZELLE.
Anagramm. BEST DOLER TRV ZEALL.
Rightly true dole is that which is expressed
Out of an ardent and a zealous breast:
Best doler, or best dole give he that can
Executes it as a most zealous man,
Relieving of the poor, because in zeal
That he does seem their miseries to feel:
Virtuous thus his zealous heart affected
Seeks, that no work of love should be neglected.
Dedicate this the Muses do to you,
And it is because that zeal you do pursue;
Leading your life by true zeal guided well,
Zealously showing that you do excel.
Excel so still, for you best doler be,
Led by your zeal along to charity.
Lead others on by your example so
Ever, that zealous men may many grow.
(281) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Lord of Almond. JAMES LEVINSTONE.
Anagramma. ON AT SEEMLY VINES.
In the vines virtue growth discernable,
Admiredly is to be imitable:
Make a fair shadow next its branches do,
Each noble man should this attain unto:
Shadowing the poor, the feeble, and distressed,
Letting them safe, free from oppression rest.
Each vine will climb still upward by a stay:
Virtue who has, to Heaven clime upward may.
In vines is fruitfulness, so should ensue
Nobly to those in whom fair Virtue grew;
So Grapes in press do precious wine bring forth,
Thus was Christ's blood when he was on the earth.
On then as seemly vines, which yield forth so
Noble variety of graces to
Enrich a soul where grace does nobly flow.
(282) To the Right Honorable, ROBERT, Lord of Kirkubright. ROBERTUS
MACKLELLAN. Anagramma. EKE CAN BLAM TRV ROLLS.
Register noble Lord, what will afford?
O your true worthiness well to record:
Behold true valor mixed with wisdom well,
Excelling, rare, within your soul does dwell:
Variety of wisdom you express,
That fitteth well with honors nobleness.
Virtue of prudence is a virtue rare,
So where it dwells true worth it does declare.
Mark noble Peer, where fortitude innated,
A noble man to be he was created.
Chastity does on temperance attend:
Kept all, though to produce but little end;
Lustred by Justice, if they are not tho;
Entered, may prudence in a worldling flow
Lively, may fortitude and temperance
Lustringly brave a worldlings fame advance.
Ah Justice, it is that makes a perfect soul,
Nobly your virtues then can blam true roll.
(283) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Lord Forrester, Baron of Corstorphin.
JOHN FORRESTER. Anagramma. J REST FRE HORN.
I see you are a noble Forrester:
O noble Sir, who a free horn prefer;
Having free horn, which you so freely wind,
Now rending in the Air when game you find.
Free horn you rest, which does imply you sound
On blowing shrilly, that the woods around
Reverberate an Echo each to other,
Received from your breath their common mother.
Ensue your game Sir, and thus free be still,
So at the last you will hap to have your will:
The game well kept together you shall win
Entire praises who so well begin:
Resting so Sir you were a free horn seen.
(284) To the Right Honorable LINDSEY, Lord ^alcarras. LINDSAYE BALCARRAS.
Anagramma. AS RARE SAIL CAN BYLD.
Like Iubal Caine, the first that e're made Tent,
I Will you compare, who now so do invent
Not much unlike for matter, it is the same
During-like stuff, whereof your sail you frame.
Sails made are of Pouldavis, and the wet
Admits no harm to it, but makes it bet;
Yielding a fair expulsion from the weather,
Ensafes the ship, and them also together.
Build you your self like to your sail to be,
Admitting so of settled certainty
Like to the sail drive on a right course still,
Chose on a good way, and withal your skill,
Affecting rightly to be in the right,
Rightly you will then in virtuous things delight:
Right may men say then, you your soul can build
As rare a sail as that which ship does wild,
Sailing you on to Christ, your comfort still.
(285) To the Right Honorable, FORBES, Lord Petsligo. FORBES PETSLIGO.
Anagramma. GO FOR BEST PILES.
For best piles go, your fence to make the stronger;
O be best piled, you will endure the longer:
Rest on best piles, and still your mind high flying,
Be every day upon best piles relying:
Endeavoring still for best piles so to go,
Such best piles may ensafe you from a foe.
Piles best go for, such piles are actions best,
Enfranchising the man where best piles rest.
The best piles are pious Nobility,
Secured by best pile of great Sovereignty.
Likely you safe, then for the best piles go,
In getting the best pile you are happy so:
Go for the best piles then, and you shall se^
Over all the best piles, which is best to thee.
(286) To the Right Honorable, the Lord FRASER of Muckoll. LORD FRASERE.
Anagramma. LORDS FEE RARE.
Lords fees are rare, for Lords fees rare should be
O noble Hero, for an Angels fee
Requires each petty Counceller, and then
Doubles a Lords fee these as much again
Expressing the rare prowess of the mind,
Far from most Lawyers this fee we do find,
Raking now here, now there for fees they rooke,
Admitting only thus, it is in my book.
Sir, your Lords fees shows you most truly wise,
Endeavoring always not to covetize:
Rather indeed most nobly you do show
Expected crop of grace, your field will flow.
(287) To the Right Honorable, the Lord Iohnstoun. LORD IOHNSTOVN. Anagramma.
UNTO LORDS ON HY.
Lo, by the Muses nine charged am I,
O noble Peer unto the Lords on hy,
Respecting each according to his place:
Declare must I how them the Muses grace.
I know them not, it is true; but yet the Muses
Have skill enough, and Learnings Art infuses
On rather into those who have a will
Nobly their works with Heroes acts to fill.
So, since I am commanded thus to wright,
These letters will not blush, if they not right
On: as their Letters teach, so I do frame
Unto hy Lords each several Anagramme:
Nor do I Satyrize within the same.
(288) To the Right Honorable the Lord Olyphant. LORD OLYPHANT. Anagramma. O
LORD PLANT HY.
Looking Sir still upon your mighty name,
O I durst scarcely write an Anagramme;
Raising so many terrors in my brain,
Do still admire the virtues you retain.
O Lord plant hy, since you so noble are,
Lively by growing a great plant appear:
You growing a great plant, shall never be
Placed as food for Elephantines fee.
HY you will grow still, and a great Tree at last,
(A plant though at the first) if you grow fast:
Nor shall their afterward be any want
True noble Lord in such a noble plant.
The Nobility of Ireland.
(289) To the Right Honorable, GEORGE, Earl of Kildare. GEORGE FITZE-GERALDE.
Anagramma. FIRE EGER ZEAL GET GOD.
Great Lord, that of the Irish in first place
Entering, do first appear, and show your face:
O you a good beginning do begin,
Reaching zeales eger fire you blessed bin.
Great fervor is in zeal, for it is fire
Entered in him who does so high aspire.
Fire is true zeal, and therefore they who cold
In virtue are, zeal does not in them hold:
It Is eger fire, not raked in ashes dead;
Zeal eger fire will have its fervor spread.
Ever then eger zeal pursue, and then
Getting of zeal, you get your God again.
Eger zeal, fire, and God is fervor too,
Rightly then each the other reaches to.
Advance then forward, eger zeal once gotten,
Live like a Peer, be never of God forgotten.
Doubtless, who does zeales eger fire pursue.
Ever gets God; Sir, you shall find this true.
(290) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Earl of Ormond and Ossery. JAMES
BVTLER. Anagramma. A TRV SMILE BE.
I think Sir your most true Nobility
Admits well of noble courtesy,
Making me laugh when as I think you smile,
Encouraged to write to you the while.
Seeing a true smile in your face appear,
Be unto me true smile, the weather clear,
Virtue affecting with serenity.
T'ru smile, most noble Peer, extend on me,
Lively, the Muses then aloud will shout,
Expressing Butler affable no doubt,
Raising a true smile, though upon a rout.
(291) To the Right Honorable, HENRY, Earl of Thomond. HENRY O-BRYEN.
Anagramma. O BREN, I ERN HY.
Heroickly your virtues we discern,
Evermore striving hyly, like King Bren:
None ever could this Bren in valor pass,
Reading of times, in which he septered was:
You, though this Brens great valor parallel,
Or rather may be said it to excel,
Bearing the valor then, which Bren possessed,
Rightly may you to honor be addressed.
You erne hy Bren, whose virtues when you act,
Erne by Bren still, and let each Noble fact
Note your deserts, in some more learned tract.
(292) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Earl of Castle-haven, and Lord Audley,
Baron of Highleigh, in England. JAMES TOVCHET. Anagramma. YOU MEET CHASTE.
Joined unto your true Nobility,
Advanced high is noble chastity,
Meeting wherewith, you show you are a man,
Excellently that moderation can
Show to the life; so you do Chastnesse meet;
Thus Chaste then is your soul, who married (sweet)
O to the Lord the world will not retain,
Virtue will ever beat it back again.
Chastity bears hate to Adultry.
Hatred your soul bears to Idolatry:
Express then to the life, that your chaste heart
Truly meets Chastity, thence will not part.
(293) TO the Right Honorable, GEORGE, Earl of Desmond, Vicount Callen,
second son of William Earl of Denbigh. GEORGE FIELDING. Anagramma. GLORY
FEEING EDG.
Glorious great Lord, your edge to virtue bent,
Ever with glories fee shall be content,
O true edge, that on virtue thus is set,
Raised is by glory, which true edge has met.
Glory an edge is ever feeing well,
Edging the soul in glory to eFcell:
Feeing the edge ever on edge to rest,
Enjoying glorious honor amongst the blessed
Eternally in heaven, in glorious state,
Lauding his God who did his good create:
Duly that true edge may to grace remain,
In earth will glory fee, true edge retain.
Now you, great Lord, whose edge on virtue is,
Glory your fee in earth, in heaven never miss.
(294) To the Right Honorable, RICHARD, Earl of Cork. RICHARD BOIL.
Anagramma. BE RICHLY ADORD.
Rich virtues draw rich coin, rich coin again,
Enriched honors nobly do maintain
Choice virtues, honor meant, and you then
Having the one, the other have again
Adored, richly may you noble be,
Richly advanced unto rich dignity,
Drawn thereunto by virtue, which has drawn
(Blithe merry Lord) you honored as your own;
O, no Idolatrous fond adoration
You seek, it is only virtuous veneration;
Lending due honor virtue, where we see
Exalted in your heart, there place to be.
(295) To the Right Honorable, RANDALL, Earl of Antrim. RANDALL MAC-DONELL.
Anagramma. NO CELL-MAN DARED ALL.
Rare manhood is by activenes expressed,
And Hermit-like, not in his Cell does rest,
No Cell man ere dared all; a stirring man,
Doubtless, is he, that glory reach at can.
A man was borne not for himself alone,
Life, who lent him a part, may challenge one,
Likewise another part he will confess,
Most due unto his Country, then the less,
And that which does remain, is his alone,
Cell-men rob Countries, and themselves each one,
Doting so on a solitary life,
O, as for that they will forsake their wife.
No Cell-man ere dared all, but cowardly,
E'ne at a pinch, do from their Country fly,
Living in Cells: but you, great Lord, not so,
Lustrously, who your manhood truly show.
(296) To the Right Honorable, RICHARD, Earl of West Mead. RICHARD NV GENT.
Anagramma. GARDEN NV RICHT.
Rich is your garden with your several plants,
In which, your virtues soul finds truest haunts,
Charity lively flourishing does grow,
Hanging forth bough^s to shadow poor below,
And droppeth thence sweet Ne^ar of relief,
Refreshing those in misery and grief:
Doubtless, your garden, though it be but new,
No rich plants want in any soil that grew.
Virtue has planted it a garden great,
Growing with several sorts of fruit repleat:
Enter the garden then of your bright soul,
No garden, never so rich, can it control,
True Paradise it seems to inrole.
(297) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Earl of Roscomman. JAMES DILLONE.
Anagramma. MEED I ALL SION.
In truest holiness you so proceed,
As that you seem all Sion, Sir, to meed.
May men meed Sion, which does signify
Exact abiding of the Diety.
Surely we cannot, merits are to show:
Doubtless, such honor to attain unto,
In Gods account, the end by imputation,
Likely it is we merit, may relation,
Leading us to Christ, in whom most blessed,
Only our merits have their meede to rest:
Now then in him, all Sion meed you may,
Entered therein, Gods glory he will display.
(298) To the Right Honorable, ROBERT, Earl of London Derry. ROBERTUS
RIDGEWAYE Anagramma. BET WARY GVIDER ROSE.
Rose, a bet wary guide, your worthiness,
O better well you do your self express,
Better than ancient times, because you show
Exactly, virtues pourtray to the view.
Rose a bet guider; guide himself who can,
Truly he is fit to guide another man:
Virtue has taught you so the raines to bear,
Showing what passions most we ought to fear.
Rose a bett wary guider, when you rose,
In whom true wariness you well disclose,
Declaring that you, as a guider rare,
Guiding still warily, your self declare:
Evermore wary guider still more bett,
With rashness never any thing we get,
Ah then ensue you grace, which wary makes,
Yielding forth virtue, who so not forsakes,
E'ne a bet wary guide the world him takes.
(299) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Earl of East Mead. WILLIAM
BRABAZONE. Anagramma. WARLY BEAM I BLAZ ON.
With Herald skill you seem t'adorne your worth,
In that you blazon, and to life set forth,
Leaving behind you a dread character,
Lively imprinting dreadful signs of war,
In sound of Trumpet, causing men to wonder,
Amazing them, when as they hear the thunder,
Made by the noise of drum when it does rattle,
Betokening all is at hand to go to battle.
Rending the Air then with the Ordnance roar,
And so producing still amazement more;
Beams of the Ensigns then bravely displayed,
Advanced with Soldiers not to be dismayed:
Zealously stirred up with stomachs hot,
One force unto the other now has got:
Now blazon warly beam, you do see right,
Each one that sees you, thinks that you will fight.
(300) To the Right Honorable, DAVID, Earl of Barrimore. DAVID BARRY.
Anagramma. AV I DID BAR.
Drawing true manhoods courage as in war,
Admired Hero, you abuses bar:
Virtue so aid you, that you would repel,
If he came in your way, the devil of Hell;
Devoid of fear for ought that he can do:
Barring his bold attempts you bravely show,
And noble forces you therein discover,
Repelling him who all the world runs over;
Reaching more sway than Alexander got,
You barred Beelzebub, what barred you not?
(301) To the Right Honorable, RICHARD, Earl of Carbery. RICHARD VAVGHAME.
Anagramma. HAVE ME A CHARY GVID'R.
Rightly a chary guider you may be
In virtues steps, since walking we you see
Charily guiding of your self that so,
Having the mastery, you may undergo,
And reach unto by a more easy way,
Ruling of others with more noble sway.
Do then your chary guiding still ensue,
Each one will say, a chary guide are you.
Virtue a medium is, and on each side
A twofold by-path from the way does guide,
Virtuous Charity the virtue is:
Going on one side, we see covetize;
Have on the other side then but an eye,
And you shall look on prodigality.
Much wariness we need then, and we see
Endeed a wary guider had of thee.
(302) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Earl of Down. WILLIAM POPE.
Anagramma. AL WILI POMP.
Wily as Fox you show your self to been,
Innocent as the Dove you will be seen
Livin^ in wiliness, so ever still
Loving of innocence with hearty will.
In this your wiliness you make progression,
And honor falls unto you by succession:
Marking your wily steps, al do confess,
Pomp you deserve to grace your nobleness.
On whom because not nocent, wily you
People to cause al pomp your worth ensue,
Each waying wily you al pomp in view.
(303) To the Right Honorable, LVKE, Earl of Fingaule. LVCAS PLVNKET.
Anagramma. NV CASKET PVLL.
Loking upon your honors Casket rare,
Virtue seems Iuels therein to declare,
Casket, or Cabinet in them do keep
As close enclosed, that which erst the deep
Sea covered ore, and now inclos'dd it is,
Placed in a noble Casket as his blis.
Lighting thereon, who has attained the same
Verily, such a Casket you proclaim,
New framed for Iuels choice that are in you,
Kept as in Casket in your heart so true;
Each one perceiving this, pulls this nu casket,
True worth in you, they see you cannot mask it.
(304) To the Right Honorable, NICHOLAS, Viscount of Gormanston. NICHOLAS
PRESTON. Anagramma. RICH STOREN PALS ON.
Nobly great Sir, you are enricht with store,
In viewing which, there is none will judge you poor:
Choosing then so your store security,
Have you got pales to keep't more warily.
On paling so your store with such defense,
Likely there is none can take your store from thence:
And it is closed up so fast within,
Surely who steals it, may an Empire win.
Placed this store of grace within your heart,
Resting so surely there, not to depart:
Ever pal'd in by Gods most sure defense,
So mounded that it cannot be had thence.
Then God pales on rich storen that has place
On, rather in your heart, pressed by Gods grace
Naturally appearing in your face.
(305) To the Right Honorable, DAVID, Viscount of Fermoy. DAVID ROTHE.
Anagramma. O I DVR'D HATE.
Dure hate you did, and so shall any do
Advanced, to whom deserved honors flow.
Virtues attendant Envy always is,
Invying evermore at others bliss:
During all hate then, you no more endure
Rightly, than eyes too piercing, which procure
On whom soever they do fix their eyes,
That presently does envy thence arise.
Hence then be not discouraged at all,
Envy at others, as your self, does fall.
(306) To the Right Honorable, RICHARD, Viscount Mountgarret. RICHARD BVTLER.
Anagramma. TRV RICH LEAD'R BE.
Rich for the most part leaders be, and so
Indeed great Sir we do behold you too:
Choice leaders are they though who do ensue
Heroickly to be accounted true.
And few true leaders in the world are found,
Reaching their own, their Countries good they wound,
Declaring if they by the journey get,
Except some few none makes the Country bett.
But you as a rich leader, you are so; see,
Virtue has made you a true leader be:
Then be you still a leader rich, and true,
Lively vour Countries good that does ensue;
Expressing which, your Country then will say,
Rightly a true rich leader you are in fay.
(307) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Viscount Grandison. WILLIAM VILLARS.
Anagramma. I WILL VAILL MARS.
With courage Sir your heart does so excel,
Indeed you seem the god of war to quell:
Lively so still setting your valor forth,
Leaving great Mars as if he were naught worth,
I will vaill Mars say you, and so you do,
Aiming to make your Anagram prove so.
Mars was the god of war, but now he shall,
Veiled by your valor, from the clouds down fall
In th'element amongst the Planets seven:
Light in the world, as a great Star of Heaven,
Let him no longer stand, your worth him vailes,
And in a triumph to his place assailes;
Respecting which Villars with Deity
Shall of the god of war accounted be.
(308) To the Right Honorable, CHARLES, Viscount WILMOT of Athlont, and one of
his Majesty's most honorable privy Council. CHARLES WILMOTE. Anagramma. HE
WILL CARE MOST.
Care most you will, and therefore fit you are
Honored in privy Council to appear:
And fit it is he should of Honor boast,
Rightly like you that ever will care most:
Leaving your own care for a public care
Endeavoring, no pains at all to spare;
So things may to a period good s^cceed,
With wisdom guided, good effect may breed.
Ensue your pains, and let us ever see
Like Lords of Council, Cecill-like you be,
Most care that for the Public still will take.
O then an honored Council board you make:
Then Justice will increase, and flourish still,
Each when with care for good they bend their will.
(309) To the Right Honorable, HENRY, Viscount Valentia. HENRY POOR.
Anagramma. HERRY ON HOPE.
Herry on hope, Herry does signify
Entire devotion to some deity:
Noting likewise an honor which we give,
Rendering due praise to such who worthy live,
You then on hope do Herry ever still.
Praying to God with earnest faithful will,
On hope that men will in their good persever,
O you to Herry good men do endeavor,
Right course you steer to herry thus on hope,
Enjoy you shall at last your hearts true scope.
(310) To the Right Honorable, CHARLES, Viscount MOORE, of Drogheda. CHARLES
MOORE. Anagramma. ROME SO CALL HER.
Closetted up have you within your breast
Heroickly, what ever grace did rest
Amongst the Decij or the Consuls erst,
Regarded by the Poets when they verst:
Live do again Romes Emperors in you,
Each of their virtues seeing you ensue;
Soul being decked with graces so divine,
Many may think that Rome in her does shine,
On which reflecting, we their virtues see,
O, and their vices you avoiding flee:
Rome, rightly call her so, since she affects,
Expressing virtue, by the fruit selects.
(311) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Viscount DILLONE of Castillo galline.
THOMAS DILLONE. Anagramma. AH ONLY LED MOST.
Though your young tender years in infancy
Have not permitted to your dignity,
On noble warfare that you should be sent,
Making your name amongst the worthies pent,
Ah yet ensue their virtues, and you will see
Such as they have been, such your self will be.
Do as they have done, and their honor then
Indeed will yours be accounted amongst men.
Lead you a train of virtues in your youth,
Lead afterward a Band of men in truth:
Only that man indeed does lead the most,
Nobly that leads within himself an Host;
Expressing this, you may a Captain boast.
(312) To the Right Honorable, NICHOLAS, Viscount NETTERVILE, of Dewthe.
NICHOLAS NETTERVILE. Anagramma. LET CHOIS VINE LEARN.
Noble Heroic Sir, since you are a Peer,
Ensue still like a Vine to grow each year.
Choice vines (you know) are first a tender plant,
Having but little root, and leaves bur scant,
On a supporter though whilst it does lean,
Lively it spreading, and it grows green,
And as an harbor in the Summer-season,
Shadows from heat when cooler place is geason.
Now you a choice vine planted, supported by
Eternal aid of the great Deity,
That causes Sol, our King, with splendid heat
To warm and cherish you, to make you great:
E'ne like unto the choice vine learn to clime,
Raised to more honor, you may be in time
Vine like, if you give shadow to the poor,
Into Heavens habitation you may soore.
Let then the choice vine learn never to cease,
Eeking still higher, till you reach to peace.
(313) To the Right Honorable, HUGH, Viscount MOUNTGOMERY of the Ardes. HVGH
MOVNTGOMERY. Anagramma. MO HIGH VERG MOUNT.
High mount mo still, and to high verg mount you,
Very well is the way well known to you,
Going therein high mounting you may be
Had still in verge of brave felicity.
Mount still on high, upon your verge reflecting,
On still your way, let no pains be neglecting,
Unto high verge the straight way to aspire,
Nor pains give over, till you obtain desire.
To reach high verge, to which aspiring still,
Go forward then, and do obtain your will:
Once in your way, you may go forward; then
Mount mo high verg, and being up, then ken
Eternity, and that (your verg) affect,
Reaching whereto, you will prove a Saint select,
You may mount mo high verg, no time neglect.
(314) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Viscount Clandeboy. JAMES HAMILTON.
Anagramma. OH A TIMELY MAN.
In Honor you exalted timely man,
Advance your self still to more honor can,
Making still use of time, that you may be
Ever accounted timely man; we see
Such care you take in time as timely man,
Having your wits about you things to scan:
And each thing in his time you will effect,
Marked to be a timely man select.
Ensue the time you have, and in due time
Live worthily, and so to honor clime:
To honor climing here, that you hereafter
On Heaven as timely man may now look after:
None then but as a timely man you note.
(315) To the Right Honorable, ADAM, Viscount LOFTUS of Ely. ADAM LOFTVS.
Anagramma. ALOFT DAMVS.
Aloft great Sir you seem to sit on high,
Decked about with rich prosperity:
Accept this English, Latin Anagramme,
Made by the Muses on your lasting name.
Loud da the poor cry, you do answer damus;
Of many hearing da, is ignoramus
Fairly replied, not one poor doyt is given,
Though it would send them presently to Heaven.
Use you aloft, aloft your proper damus,
Sending such bounty as may make you famous.
(316) To the Right Honorable, SAPCOT, Viscount BEAUMONTE of Swords. SAPCOT
BEAVMONTE. Anagramma. BE A MOUNT AT SCOPE.
Sir, you are fair mount in name, and in your nature;
Amount you are, and so a stable creature.
Placed upon you is stability,
Choicely agreeing with your dignity.
On Mounts or Rocks who builds, are ever sure
That their foundations ever will endure.
Be then a Mount most noble Sir at scope,
Ever retaining what in you we hope,
Amounted sure stability, the which
Virtue will draw you to a higher pitch.
Mount be you still, and so enduring be,
On which our hopes may rest assuredly:
Nor cease a mount to be at largest scope,
That so retaining a more settled hope,
Eternity and you at last will cope.
(317) To the Right Honorable, HUGH, Viscount MAGENNIS of Evagh. HVGH MAC-ENOS,
ALIAS, MAGENNIS. Anagramma. HYSEEN AS MAGNANIMOS CALL.
Hy are the virtues which within you seen,
Verity must confess, in you to been:
Glorious rays are they they glitter forth,
Having so made you noble in great worth
Magnanimous you are within your mind,
And therefore you Magnanimous we find;
Calling you so, because that we have seen
Entrance for grace which you retain within:
Nonly you show your self indeed thereby,
On which Nobility you may rely.
Seen as magnanimous, we call you so
An hy magnanimous; your worth we know,
Letting each see the beams that you let fall:
Indeed magnanimus may make us call,
Admiring at your height, the noble flight,
Seen soring high, wherein you do delight.
Magnanimous shows you have a great spirit,
And hy, hy honors shows you do inherit;
Got not for nothing, but by virtues seen,
Expressed that by actions well have been.
Now thus magnanimus since you appear,
Nobly retain the worth that you have here,
In honor then you shall be seen to be,
Seen in magnanimous eternity.
(318) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Lord CROMWELL, Viscount le cale, and
Baron of Ockham in England. THOMAS CROMEWELL. Anagramma. HEART WELCOME SOME.
The noble nature that you do retain,
Has made me think that I shall welcome gain:
On which relying, I have been thus bold
Amongst other men to make your name enrolled,
And on Fames Roll to set you as a Peer,
Showing in luster to be nobly clear.
Come then great Lord, let me be bold with you,
Respect these, Lines, which but your honor true
On them present you, let heart welcome some,
Making your fame the greater to them come:
Expressing that with kindness you do take,
What with good will was penned for your sake:
Endeavoring to show what we hope true,
Lively heart-welcom they shall have from you.
(319) To the Right Honorable, EDWARD, Viscount CHICHESTER of Carigfergus.
EDWARD CHICHESTER. Anagramma. RICH CHEST WARDED.
Example does your heart a warded chest,
Decked with rich Jewels; so are you invest
With many virtues, which enclosed there,
Argue that you rich warded chest appear,
Rightly like to the chest where men put Gold,
Due warded, that the same it safe may hold.
Choice is the treasure that you have in you,
Having more worth than Gold, which worldlings sue;
In chest fast locked of your sincerest breast,
Closely repose as in a warded chest.
How rich this chest is then, the grace within
Expressly shows those who this Gold have seen
Sure warded by the Lords eternal Spirit,
That caused you those riches to inherit:
Enherit still your rich and warded Chest,
Reap so at last you have eternal rest.
(320) To the Right Honorable DOMINICK, Viscount SARSFELDE, of Kilmallocke.
DOMINICK SARSFELDE. Anagramma. FAIR KIND LED COME SO.
Do you express unto the life most fair,
On your pourtrayed virtue to a hair;
Making you fair within, that kind without,
In fruits you may appear to make us shout:
Note then whereas the Soul is fair within,
In outward gesture he will kind begin
Choicely to show himself, and so do you,
Kept fair within, kindness without ensue.
So then the Muses lead me to your honor,
And say that virtue, whose attendant on her,
Reaches forth still a kind and gentle hand,
Suited does in your noble nature stand.
Fair kind Lord then accept with free good will
Expressions poor, which here your ears do fill:
Lead me along so by your kindness fair,
Duly hereafter your worth to declare
Encouraging my poor Minerva here.
(321) TO the Right Honorable, ROBERT, Viscount Kilmurry. ROBERTUS NEEDHAM.
Anagramma. AH BE TRV, SEND MORE.
Rare virtues which a radiant light forth send,
O my endeavors veil, while brains I bend
Beauteously your virtues to discry,
Exactly in you showed expressively.
Right true I say, no more than truth it is,
They are so many I of skill do miss,
Verily though ensuing still be true,
Send out more virtues mustred out by you.
Noble your virtues make you, and your birth:
Enquire but of it make you of some worth:
Ene send more virtues forth, and then we will cry,
Doubtless good Needhams stream is never dry,
Ha Sir be true unto your self yet still,
And then send forth more virtues sure you will,
Making your life great volumes for to fill.
(322) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Viscount SOMERSET of Cassell. THOMAS
SOMERSET. Anagramma. ROSE HAVE ME MOST.
Those that have you, possess a pleasing Rose,
Having innated sweets which you disclose:
O yielding are freshment to those men,
Much of your sweetness who do entertain:
Ah then sweet Rose I must indeed confess,
Surely who has thee, has not any less.
So you send forth an odoriferous sent,
On whom your pleasing savor most is lent.
Moist Rose you are, and he that has you most,
Exceedingly may of a sweet Rose boast.
Render forth sweetness still, and so resent,
Show you your self, great Charles may not repent
Emplanted in his Garden that you be,
This rosy Viscount made of high degree.
(323) To the Right Honorable, NICHOLAS, Viscount of Castle-towne. NICHAOLS
SANDERSON. Anagramma. ON SON SEND AS AL RICH.
Noble Heroic spark be not agriev'd,
In name of Son the Muses thee relieve:
Choisly they love those whom so well they greet,
Honoring with a title is so sweet.
On son then let the Muses say to thee,
Lively express thy self their son to be:
And in their lines take thou so great delight
So that thou may be termed their son most right.
Send as al rich show that you are rich within,
Admiring at the work which you begin,
Nobly indeed within you to express;
Declaring in you is true worthiness.
Exactest riches do in you abide,
Raising a light without you cannot hide,
Send then without as that al rich within,
O each that look upon you may begin
Noting to wonder you such store did win.
(324) To the Right Honorable, MILES, Viscount Burgh of May^. MILES BVRGHE.
Anagramma. BELGIVM'S Belgium is a City in France
HE'RE
Most Noble Lord, in your most honored name
I find a Country for an Anagram,
Lyving in which many fair people dwell,
Excellently in beauty does excel,
So of the same which takes denomination:
Because the people after Venus fashion,
Venusses are their beauty does declare them,
Read we of few with whom we may compare them,
Great Lord fair virtues that in you appear,
Heroickly within to shine most clear,
Exactly show that Belgium is here.
(325) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS Viscount Baltinglas. THOMAS ROPER.
Anagramma. REAP MOSTOR.
The Heralds language use the word of or,
Heroicke noble Sir, properly for
Ore or rich gold the world so much desire,
Making their happiness thereto aspire:
And then the Anagram does signify
Sir, that the most true or you reach for thy.
Reaping's a Metaphor from Reaping Corn,
On which an eagar labor is out-worne:
Perceive I then the muses meaning right,
Exactest or you still have in your sight,
Reaping the most hereof with great delight.
(326) To the Right Honorable, LEWIS Visc. BOIL of Kinal-meaky. LEWIS BOIL.
Anagramma. LO I WILL BE WISE.
Lo Noble Peer though now in tender years,
Exquisite hope of towardness appears,
Wise you will be, you promise, and who know
Ingeniously your nature, finds it so,
Such wisdom does appear in infancy:
Blossoming forth to grace your dignity.
Onward advance you forward, let our hope
Yield forth her fruit and not return a slope,
Lo let it well appear that you will be wise,
Ever delight nobly to enterprise.
(327) To the Right Honorable, GEORGE Viscount Chaworth of Ardmagh. GEORGE
CHAWORTH. Anagramma. GO CHARGE WORTH.
Go Noble Sir, and still advance you forth,
Ever seek in the world and charged you worth,
On them rely, whom worthiest you do find:
Read now I do to you, what Christ most kind
Gave his Disciples in their charge, that they
Enquire should worthies out; and there should stay.
Choice piece of worth, the Muses find it true,
Heroicke worthiness remains in you;
And therefore has commanded me to charge
( Worth byding here) you, whose choice graces large
On a Mount, acted in most peoples sight;
Raising in them a singular delight:
Thus do the muses charge you with true worth,
Hear then these lines Minerva has brought forth.
(328) To the Right Honorable, BARNHAM, Viscount Carlingford. BARNHAM SWYFTE.
Anagramma. BAR HE SWIFT MAN.
Bar he swift man your anagram contains,
And thereby we conceive you take great pains;
Respecting of your Countries good so much,
Noting the swiftness of the foe who, such
Having advantage got, has ever bin,
Avoiding slacknesse (swift man) to be seen,
More swift are you for you bar that swift man:
Swiftly preventing all his slights you can,
With wisdom carrying so well abought,
You ward your Country bar the swift man out;
So your beginnings stop and ever still,
True bar unto a swift, so prove you will,
Exactly keeping all your friends from ill.
(329) To the Right Honorable, Viscount of Sligo. JOHN SCVDAMORE. Anagramma.
MORE HONEY CAVS'D
I take the honey for the public good,
On which this Anrgram is understood,
Honey more caused you then that does imply,
Nobly more good you caused in dignity.
Such one are you as the industrious Be,
Choosing of Flowers most laboriously;
Verting still over them, at last she makes
Dearly beloved honey, which she takes,
And closely closes it within the wax
Most neately that for it she had compact.
O so do you who Countries good do seek,
Respecting which you labor wealth to eeke,
Ene bringing so more honey to the Hive.
(330) To the Right Honorable, ROBERT, Viscount CHOLMUNDLEY of Kellis. ROBERT
CHOLMVNDLEY. Anagramma. RECH INROVLD TOMB.
Rightly that you the enrolled tomb may reach
On honor as a mountain, you do teach
Best acts how to persever, and them frame
Exactly so, to get a lasting name:
Recorded so a Chronicle shall be,
Tackt to your tomb as Epitaph for thee:
Chronicling so your deeds of worthy worth,
Heroickly which you did blazon forth,
On top of you recording how you did
Living with honor your remembrance spread,
Making your self the poor man's Almnery,
Verting your eyes upon their misery:
Noting the valor, tho then parted,
Did rest within you, who are now strong hearted.
Let then your light in this your dignity
Exactly so be, that in memory
You rech enrolled tomb worth to discry.
(331) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Viscount Strangford. THOMAS SMITH.
Anagramma. HAS MOST TIME.
Time you most truly have O noble Peer,
Heroickly to make you glister here:
On then while time does last, who has most time,
Magnanimous great Lord on high to clime.
And well you know to use your time so well,
Such is your wit in honor to excel.
So then you have time and wit, and both together;
Mighty great Lord then make good use of either.
Ensue in time your time so to redeem,
That you an everlasting time may seem:
Happily to obtain then you will confess,
Enjoying most time well, I had my bless.
(332) To the Right Honorable, RICHARD, Viscount LOMLEY, of Waterford. RICHARD
LOMLEY. Anagramma. RICH IVELL ARMED.
Rich juell armed you are with fulgency,
In which you greatly grace your dignity,
Choice juell are you, I must needs confess,
Having addition rich, which does express
A mean poor juell we must not esteem you;
Rather a iuell rich indeed we deem you,
Declaring which, you see there is a cause,
Lively while you should an armed iuell pause:
Virtue within your heart having its seat,
May be repelled by the foe, whose threate
Living in innocence, that you may fell,
Exactly armed you his force repel,
You then may be an armed rich iuell well.
(333) To the Right Honorable, RICHARD, Viscount WENMAN of Taaf. RICHARD
WENMAN. Anagramma. RICH MAN WARDEN.
Rich man you are in provident foresight,
In seeing danger ere on you they light;
Chosing with wisdom to avoid a clap,
Having foresight before the same do hap:
And thus rich man you do your self display,
Rightly that do ensue a wary way,
Declaring you rich man in wisdoms lore.
Warden may you then well be to the poor,
Ensuing your defense most safe who be
Noble, since you they a rich warden see.
May you as a rich man O still abide,
And may you warden those who do betide,
Noble brave Wenman your ward to abide.
(334) To the Right Honorable, JOHN, Viscount Taafe of Corirne. JOHN TAAFE.
Anagramma. ON A HY FEAT.
In honor if you do enjoy high seat,
On brandish forth your fame by an high feate,
Honor is high, and does high feats require:
Nobly of which to the same aspire.
Then on a high feate set your manhood forth,
And show to every one your truest worth:
Arms feats it is sure that you so holy play,
For which you do deserve the conquering bay:
Ensue a high feate then fame to assay.
(335) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Viscount MOVNSON of Castle-maine.
WILLIAM MOVNSON. Anagramma. WILL MY MOON AS NV.
Will, Sir your moon as new a changing bear,
In whom true constant trophies do appear;
Lasting in permanency to your self,
Like nere to be a changling peevish elfe:
In every month the moon does chang, but you
Admired constant to your self bide true:
Moon though you may be said respecting other
Moon light, your light when wayed with an other:
On as the moon does pass, so passes you,
Verily so to change you do not show.
No let the moon change, you will flable bide,
So as no changing shall to you betide:
On then will your moon be as new O no,
Notably you abhor the being so.
(336) To the Right Honorable, ROGER, Viscount Raimelagh. ROGER JONES.
Anagramma. ON O EGER SIR.
Rightly you eger are, but it is in good,
On therefore I exhort your honor-hood:
Go on in the good parts that you are in:
Eger sir, o go on, and do begin,
Raising your fortunes, and so raise your fame,
Inheriting an everlasting name.
On eger sir, o on and do not stay
Nobleness to pursue still in your way:
Ensuing which at last you will prove to be,
Solely innobled for eternity.
(337) To the Right Honorable, CHARLES, Viscount CARTYE of Muskry. CHARLES
MAC-CARTYE. Anagramma. LEST CARE CAME CHARY
Care makes chary, and who least care keeps,
Have this care still chary to be, and sleeps
Always secure, by chary diligence,
Least care that any has does care thus still,
Ever secure to be, with hearty will,
Security still seeking to enjoy,
Making a chary passage, least anoy,
And fell disaster should his soul oppress,
Care thus can charily, and happiness
Came still with chary care, and thus we see,
Admired Lord, it fell out right in thee:
Right charily that did to honor climb,
Therefore in it to last a lasting time;
Your care still follow on and charily,
Ever so mount unto eternity.
(338) To the Right Honorable, RICHARD, Viscount MVLINEVX of Mariburg. RICHARD
MVLLINEVX. Anagramma. MIX RICH'R AND WELL
Rich Governors so as the world enjoy,
It matters not how much they do destroy;
Chose governers we now do for their wealth,
Having no care unto the Public health:
Admired Sir, in wealth as you are rich,
Rightly so sway you in your power, which
Declares in deed you have an active head,
Ever will stand your Country in good stead.
Mixed in you is riches and wit too,
Very well then nobility you do
Lively perform, for where they both are mixed,
Indeed each eye may very well be fixed:
No riches you do want of body or in mind,
Expressly this we for a truth do find;
Very well may you true nobility,
Xerxes like show inricht with dignity.
(339) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Viscount FAIRFAX of Emmeley. THOMAS
FAIRFAX. Anagramma. HA AFFIX MO HEARTS.
The worthiness innated in your breast,
Has many hearts affixt on you to rest,
On you discrying virtues bravery,
Magna ^imous unto your dign ty.
Affix mo hearts still by your v^rtues rare,
So truly noble as your Ancient were.
Fixed in your breast is virtue, and the same
Affixeth mo hear^^ to your worthy name,
In which does test your most security,
Respect that lends to your nobility.
Fix virtue still within your heart, and so
Affixed hearts unto you still are mo,
Zanchus like streams which to the Sea does flow.
(340) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Viscount BOVVRKE of Clanmorris. THOMAS
BOWRKE. Anagramma. AH BE MOST WORK.
The busy be most working, thriving spirit,
Heroic heart you rightly do inherit:
On whom when we do but our eyes reflect,
Most nobly working still in worth select,
Admiredly we find you, and thereby
Show you your self fitted for places high.
Be you most working still, and so ensue
O that thrice noble virtue to each view;
Working still forward with such diligence,
Richly the Emblem of true labor hence;
Keeping your course as you begin to do,
Each one with admiration you will show.
(341) To the Right Honorable, PIERCE, Viscount of Ikerine. PIERCE BVTLER
Anagramma. BE TRVELY PEER.
Peer as you are advanced to honors high,
Inseated in the seat of dignity,
Ensue such courses as may make you be,
Right truly thought a peer of high degree:
Choose well you have, in virtues path to tread,
Ensue the same, and then although you dead
Burned your ashes are interred in
Vrne of your noble auncesters and kin;
The Records and the Monuments of time,
Lively will make your fame the Skies to clime:
Exactly showing you a true peer were,
Rightly that did so true a peer appear.
(342) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Viscount FITZEVVILLIAM of Merying.
THOMAS FITZE-WILLIAM Anagramma. AH MY ZEAL WILL FIT MOST.
That zeal that is truest of it men may boast,
Ah such a zeal most rightly will fit most,
On your zeal then who looks must needs confess,
Most you do fit; and therefore zealousnesse
And true affection unto God does rest,
Sweetly encompassed within your breast.
Fit you most still and still endeavor so,
In zealousnesse that none may you out go:
Truth still walking in so even a way,
Zeal guiding you never from thence to stray,
Encouraging who walk the way aright:
With wary steps in zeales path to delight,
Inciting those who walk not yet therein,
Lively that path to trace in, and begin
Like unto men zeal truly that affect,
Indeed to pace on in that way select.
Ah your zeal most will fit, full well I see,
Must you be zealous of necessity.
(343) To the Right Honorable, TERENCE, Viscount Glaumaleyra. TERENCE, DIMPSYE.
Anagramma. DISCERN TYPE ME.
Those that your nature inly do discern,
Exactly what you are within do learn,
Respecting of your soul the inward man,
Express your noble body likewise can,
Natural nobleness in you innated,
Choicely wherewith your soul is recreated:
Exactly thus most peerless you appear,
Discerning of your virtues, which shine clear,
In which both soul and body in his eye
Make forth a challenge for you presently:
Proudly, yet truly calling all the earth
Show for degree another of that worth:
Yea, type you forth another such a Peer,
Excelling in his beauties wondrous clear.
(344) To the Right Reverend Fathers in God, the Lords Archbishops, and Bishops
of the several Diocesses of the Kingdom of Ireland. The Lords Archbishops
and Bishops of the Kingdom of Ireland. Anagramma. O feed my sheep Christ bids,
so holi-ghost help's, ad book, and rann.
The several Archbishops who possess,
Having their Seas, as if their worthiness
Enbishoped within this noble I Will:
Lord Ardmargs great Archbishop, who does pile
On amongst his Titles Irelands Primacy,
Religious Dublin archiepiscopall;
Devoute Archbishop, and he amongst them all
Seated in Gassells high Archbishopric.
Archbishop then of Tuan has the like,
Reverend grave Bishops first of Mead, who is
Choice Kildares Bishop, and the peoples bliss;
Heaven minded Prelate, whose blessed Bishops See
Behight Fenus also Laghlin be
In Sea of Effin who is bishoped:
So Ostery and Pilkenny their Head,
Heavenly sweet Bishop of Dromore beside,
On whom for Bishop down Cannor relide,
Prelate of Waterford Lumore too:
So Cork, Clome, and Ros, their Prelacy also:
Add Cloghers Bishop, Lymmerick likewise,
Nobly whose fame religiously does rise:
Devoted Clonfert, and Kelincough too;
Bishop of Raphoe reverend also;
In Sea of Adfert, Aghada likewise:
So you who did to Kelmores Sea arise,
Heroic spark of Ballala, who do,
On as a part of your Sea reap also,
Prelacy of the Bishop Aghconry,
So Kilfennora Prelate holily.
On on the Roll Killalowe Bishop be,
Fylde with the Bishop who enjoyes the Sea
That Ardaghs Prelate should of right enjoy,
Have lasting Derries Bishop per me foy,
Each of you should an Anagram have had:
Kend I your names, and I should have been glad;
Instead thereof if them I do not know,
Note what Christ bids, which does your duty show:
Go feed my sheep Christ bids, and there is some reason;
Doubtless good Pastors in this age are geason.
O feed my sheep Christ bids an holy Pastor,
Most worthy of an ear, for he is your Master,
Ensuring you, helpless you shall not be,
Onward if you go with sedulity;
For holy Ghost helps so to feed the sheep,
In vain your l^bour shall not be to keep:
Religiously pursue them, and ad book,
Ensuing which, you on your duties look,
Lively you thus by Christ and holy ghost
A way to walk in, whereof you may boast.
Nor are you idle Shepherds, for you ran,
Duly expressing each a careful man;
Each feed Christ's sheep, for Holy Ghost helps than.
(345) To the Right Honorable, RICHARD, Lord BIRMINGHAM, Baron of Athenry.
RICHARD BIRMINGHAM. Anagramma. HE MAY BRAG RICH MIND.
Richer his mind is who to virtue bent,
Innobled rays of valor forth have sent:
Choosing with wisdom valor, so to mix,
Heroic heart he does on him affixe.
And thus right noble Lord, you rightly show,
Richer your mind rich virtues do pursue,
Declaring where there haps so rich a mind,
Every spectator may rich Iuells find.
Brag may you of your rich mind, which appearing,
Encourage all your friends, their hearts still cheering:
Richer when as they do perceive your mind
Made richer by the virtues there they find:
Ensue that riches evermore you will,
Nor cease to labor richer to be still:
Get still a richer mind, the glory then
Heroic Sir, will yours be amongst men;
And you may rightly brag, that you possess
Mind richer still, which is your happiness.
(346) To the Right Honorable, GERALDE, Lord COVVRCYE Baron of Kinsale.
GERALDE COWRCYE. Anagramma. CLEAR VOICE URGED.
Greatly you seem in Orators great skill,
Exercised well, and so persuade you will,
Raising your voice in alto, that thereby
Attention may be unto you, for thy
Leading the hearers on, by voice that is leere,
Duly unto your speech to lend an ear;
Expressing so sweet oratory well,
Curiously placing things that do excel:
O might such Orators as you, abound
With such clear voice as you, that urge so sound,
Rhetorically working on their hearts,
Choicely persuading in their inward parts,
Yielding it true, a clear voice urged best;
Ever remain so, and so nobly rest,
(347) To the Right Honorable, PATRICKE FITZMORRIS and Lixnaw. PATRICKE
FITZMORRIS. Anagramma. CRIES FRAM ZO'R KEPT IT.
Placed when Lot in Sodom City was,
And that Gods Sentence against the same did pass,
That it should be destroyed, Lot had in sight
Reflecting upon Zoare that there he might
In safety bide: unto God he did pray,
Chosing the same thitherward to survey,
Keeping so Zoare, Zoare likewise kept him too,
Each other one another good ensue:
Fitted with virtue since that you are then,
Insafing thereby Sir your Country men;
True it is your Zore y' ave kept safe to abide,
Zoare likewise ever does you good entide.
More firm is Zore in that you live therein,
On whose prosperity yours does begin:
Right true it is and it is right true likewise,
Raised is your wealth from Zores felicityes;
In which each well perceive and loud do cry,
So zoar kept you, you it kept for thy.
(348) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Lord FLEMING, Baron of Stane. WILLIAM
FLEMING. Anagramma. FLAME I WILL MINGLE.
With wise discretion you are mingled so,
Indeed you like a worthy Hero go,
Letting noe flames of passion get the sway,
Leading the man as captive quite away:
Inflamed so fiery hot, that men do deem
All on a fire, such are in their esteem:
Mingle you do so wisly still your passion
Flaming, but yet not causing alteration,
Letting each see that in you does remain
Exactest moderation; you retain
Mixed mingled flames, which you do mix so well,
In mingling zeal with wisdom, you excel,
Nobly still guiding of your passions so;
Getting the Mastry you they nere ought go,
Exactly mingling flames your will do show.
(349) To the Right Honorable, NICHOLAS, Lord St. LAVVRENCE, Baron of Houth.
NICHOLAS SAINT LAWRENCE. Anagramma. CAN CLEAR SAINT LINE SHOW.
Noting your virtues with your dignity,
Innated Faith expressed by Piety,
Cherisht by Hope by Charity set forth,
Heroickly that glister in your worth:
On Moral virtues nobly shining, and
Letting each know, you a true Hero stand,
Acting them bravely with a grace divine,
She all will grant you can a clear saint line,
See cleerenesse in you, which resplendent light
Admits easily does shine most bright;
In whom but look with a judicious eye,
Nothing but cleerenesse you at all can spy:
Clear soul within, body complete without,
True clear Sainct-line, who is it you can doubt?
Let Sainctlinesse be viewed, and therein see
Acted a fresh true Sainctlinesse in thee,
With such a splendent cleerenesse so set forth,
Rightly, clear Saint, we must esteem your worth
Ensued Sir from some most clear Sainct-line.
Naturally you being so divine:
Cherish your virtues, and let all men know,
Excellently you clear Sainct-line can show.
(350) To the Right Honorable, PATRICKE, Lord PLUNKET, Baron of Dunsany.
PATRICKE PLVNKET. Anagramma. KEPT PARCK TV NELY.
Park you have kept according to your state,
And may so still, such is your estimate;
Tunely or timely, take it what you will,
Rightly the Muses thereby with their skill,
Intend that you in honors high advance
Choice path keep still by Fortunes gracious glaunce.
Kept path you tunely have, and timely may,
Ever a path keep still the Muses pray.
Parked are graces, pal'd within your breast
Lively declaring you therein are blessed.
Virtues path keep still tunely, it is that you
Notably should so noble gain ensue:
Keep virtues park, there is a sweet harmony
Ever maintained 'twixt it and dignity,
That so will last unto eternity.
(351) To the Right Honorable, ROBERT, Lord BARNVVELL, Baron o^ Trymleston.
ROBERTUS BARNWELL. Anagramma. BEAR'T SVR WELL BORN.
Raging fierce storms with blustrous wind and weather
On earth still blowing, toss up every feather:
But whatsoever substance does contain
Earth, may upon it for the wind retain,
Raising a storm, that house can never break
That has a good foundation: I dare speak,
Virtue's the best foundation, and your birth,
Suits very well with your true noble worth.
Bear then what ever storms there can succeed,
And a foundation good you shall not need:
Rightly you are well borne, and thereupon
Nobly, but stand it out, trouble is gone:
With valor bear it Sur, a well borne spirit
Ever your ancient noble worth inherit.
Let storms then rage, and do they what they can,
Lively you show your self the well-borne man.
(352) To the Right Honorable, EDWARD Lord BUTLER, Baron of Dunboyne. EDWARD
BVTLER. Anagramma BESET DV REWARD.
Ever who in a virtuous way does hit,
Doubtless such one does due reward beset,
Warring against it, it besieging, so
A due reward from thence can never go:
Ramming it up so fast, that it must yield
Duly to virtue who has won the field.
Ever then, Sir, you due reward beset,
Bravely who walked in the way still bett,
Virtuously that in a good path pace,
Truly so walking, not there-hence to trace:
Live so here sti^l, and you thereby shall s^^
E'ne due reward nobly beset by thee;
Reflect it any way, it thine will be.
(353) To the Right Honorable BARNABAS, Lord MAC-GILPATRICKE, Baron of upper
Ossery. BARNABAS MAC-GILPATRICKE Anagramma. I A PARK CAN CALL BRIGHT BEAMS.
Bright beams imparked are within your breast,
Adorning your deserts which in you rest
Resplendently, raising a fulgent ray,
Notably so making ashamed the day;
And so proclaiming rightly, that in you
Bright beams of virtue shine to each ones view,
As parked it within your soul and body,
Showing a luster that may truly glad ye:
Making who look upon you, to confess,
A park you are indeed Sir, and no less,
Calling but truth to witness, we must cry:
Glimpsing but at your glorious bravery:
In your bright beams we cannot choose but see,
Luster most truly, noble is in thee:
Parks then most rightly we must you confess,
And waying of your virtues no what less
Then a most large circumference of ground,
Rightly that can so many graces bound:
If then a Park you be and bright beams there,
Call forth you can making their light appear,
Keep evermore this Park true noble still,
Eternal honor so your heart shall fill.
(354) To the Right Honorable, OLIVER, Lord PLVNK^T, Baron of Louth. OLIVER
PLVNKET. Anagramma. OR KEPT WELLN.
Or is a heralds nor, and gold thereby
Letters report that they do signify:
Ymply then does your Anagram thus much,
Virtue the truest gold, then which no such
Earth yields forth at all, and that in thee
Right noble Lord, well kept we all do see
Placed this Or within your heart remained;
Locked up, which well within your heart retained,
Very well kept within, yea kept in so
None but do see with Or you overflow.
Keep this Or still, Oh in thee keep it well,
Eternally your riches they excel,
That each will say here does rich PLVNKET dwell
(335) To the Right Honorable JOHN, Lord POWER, and Corraghmore. JOHN POWER.
Anagramma. ON HY POWER. Or HONEY POWER.
In honor set on high you power have got,
O Powerful Peer to have a powerful lot,
Honey your Power is tho, and you excel,
Nobly in sweetness which does grace you well:
Power you have, but it is a power so sweet,
On whom we find it, him we worthy greet,
With master bees they say there is no sting,
Even so who power has, wrath away should fling,
Rightly on high you honey power bring.
(356) To the Right Honorable, MVRRAVGHE, Lord Inchequin. MVRRAVGHE, O BRIAN.
Anagramma. A NV BRAVE MYRRH GO
Mirr ye^lds an odorifero^s pleasing smell,
V^rtually pleasin^ the senses well,
Refreshing the w a^ts hea t, comforting too
Rightly, those hearts who sorrowf^ll do show,
And you who list must needs confess indeed,
Verily you are Mirrh, a help at need:
Go on then new brave Mirrh, yield such a smell
Hearts may refresh, and comfort very well.
Exceedingly your odoriferous s^nt
O Noble sir unto the poor is lent:
Brave, new, fresh Mirrh that does proclaim you right,
Releeving of the poor, where ere in sight;
Ensue your course, go on as you begin,
And an eternal Savior you shall win,
Nere loosing sweetness though in grave ya'ue line.
(357) To the Right Honorable, EDMUND Lord BOVVRKE, Baron of Castleconnell.
EDMUND BOWRKE. Anagramma. BE MVNDED WORK.
Ever it fits with true nobility,
Doing of somewhat with sedulity,
Men idleness should evermore detest,
Virtue in diligence does always rest:
Now in the best work who are busied still,
Do show themselves to have a virtuous will.
Blessed then are you who still will busy be,
Oneward still working, yet with mundity
Work munded still, and so if you persever,
Rightly rewarded you will be for ever;
Keep on your course still, munded worker be,
Eternally your guerdon you shall see.
(352) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Lord BVTLER, Baron of Cahir. THOMAS
BVTLER. Anagramma. AL BE MOST TRV,
The virtues which innated are in you
Honored Sir, indeed be all most true;
On feigned things affection you not placing,
Most truly in true things your self are gracing;
And thereby honor small you do not win,
Showing the virtues wherein you begin,
Bravely your fame therewith to Magnify,
Verily be all true and do not lie:
True and not feigned be they, you may boast,
Like a brave Peer that they are true and most,
Eternally their honor shall remain,
Recording of your name without a stain.
(359) To the Right Honorable, CHARLES, Lord LAMBERTTE, Baron of Cav^^. CHARLES
LAMBERTTE. Anagramma. CARE BETTERS ALL.
Careful who are with diligence and pain,
Happy event do of their labors gain:
And who so careless without studiousnesse,
Return his labor to a public press;
Lightly it is they are not excellent,
Entered in Lines, them by the Muses lent;
Surely it is care that betters all things done.
Let ill succeed, let but this care alone:
Ah, pretermit this care, which betters all,
Many misfortunes on the work will fall.
Boast then may you of wisdom, who pursue
Each thing with carfulness to all men's view,
Respecting of your care sance admiration,
Truly we wish, that in your imitation,
Those who perceive your care still bettering all,
Each would to carfulness in's way do fall.
(359) To the Right Honorable, THEOBALD, Lord BOVVRKE, Baron of Brittas.
THEOBALD BOWRKE. Anagramma. WORK BE LEAD BOTH.
The soul and body of your noble self,
Here are be led by work, but not for pelf;
Each of them has a several work to do,
On which with diligence they do pursue,
Both by led work, and both by work are led,
And each of them with diligence is sped;
Leading it self most naturally free,
Doubtless to do such work as fitteth thee.
Behold your soul, how your intelligence
Onward sti^l working, seeks to guide your sense:
With nimble eye do but your body view,
Right noble actions still you do ensue.
Keep on your noble course, and you shall see
Erelong both soul and body guerdon'd be.
(360) To the Right Honorable, ANDREW, Lord STEWARD, Baron of
Castle-Steward. ANDREW STEWARD. Anagramma. WE STAND REWARD.
According to your merits and desert,
Notably doing like a noble heart,
Do you stand for reward, and it expect;
Rightly since you true honor do respect,
Ever may you stand for reward, indeed
With worthiness you work, and so you will speed.
Stand you reward then, and you soon shall see,
Truly rewarded surely you shall be:
Expecting which, persevere in the way,
With wisdom guided, not from thence to stray,
And you may justly a reward then stand
Right worthy Peer as ready still at hand,
Deserved by your worth, which it command.
(361) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Lord BALFOURE, Baron of Clan-Awley.
JAMES BALFOVRE. Anagramma. AL FAME BE YOVRS.
In virtues path who virtuously do tread,
Admit of fame to live by, although dead,
Making his fame his actions to outlast,
Entering his honored name on fames rou'e placed,
So that who sees him cannot choose but see,
Beholding of his life integrity.
Ah my Mecaenas I must needs profess,
Lively grace in you can deserve no less;
Fame be yours all, nay all the fame yours be,
On tracing virtue with dexterity,
Vir-like indeed you pass with virile strength,
Reaching till you attain to at the length
Eternity: and so all fame be yours.
(362) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Lord FOLYOT, Baron of Ballishenam.
THOMAS FOLIOT. Anagramma. OH I MO FAST LOT.
That person who to goodness does incline
Has a mo fast lot, he will find in time,
On which if he relyes, he may be sure,
Most happily a fast lot to endure;
And such a fast lot he shall get thereby,
Seating him faster in his dignity.
Fast does imply a lot that will not fail,
On whom so trusts it shall great avail;
Lot fast who has, it is his happiness,
In fast lot, joy to have in his distress:
On then, ensue your fast lot mo fast yet,
Trusting thereto ere long your lot will get.
(363) To the Right Honorable, EDWARD, Lord GORGES, Baron of Dundalke.
EDWARD GORGES. Anagramma. SE GOG REWARDED.
Each noble Peer should study to express,
Due Characters of exact nobleness,
Warding the good, defending them from Wrong,
Ayding them against their foes; who suffering long
Reproaches, scorns, and contumelies bide,
Devoted such from troubles still to hide,
Ever rewarding all the furious foes.
Gog-like that do oppress such poor as those
On whom rightly true nobillity,
Raises a look, such on the ground do lie,
Goggs killed are when as true noble men,
Ensuing pores defense appear, and then,
See they fierce Gogg rewarded in his den.
(364) To the Right Honorable, ROBERT, Lord DIGBY Baron of Geshell. ROBERTUS
DIGBYE. Anagramma. ROBE REST BY GVYD.
Robe of true honor and true nobleness,
On those is placed, who evell to repress
Be guids and leaders in the Commonwealth,
Evermore seeking for its good and health;
Robed in honors gown that such may be,
That truly seek their Lands felicity:
Veil may fierce Arms to gown the Laurel may
Stoop to the Languagies and them obey:
Doubtless to you then does the Robes belong,
In whom does rest an orators sweet tongue:
Guide unto those you are who to your charge
By CHARLES our King committed, are at large,
Yours may the Robe by, by you it may rest,
Ever he guide men so they may be blessed.
(365) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Lord FITZEVVILLIAM Baron of Lyffer.
WILLIAM FITZE-WILLIAM Anagramma. FIT WILL MY ZEALL I WAY ME.
With Zeal you filled are which does so hit,
Indeed who ways you, says your Zeal will fit,
Living a holy and religious life,
Loving of concord to be void of strife:
Enjoy my Zeal, and so my heart withal
A fire which knitteth you in several,
Most unto God, whom with a Zeal devout,
Fiery devotion you do seek still out:
In Zeal unto your Sovereign you are knit,
Tide to your Country, and you bend your wit
Zealously, ever something to affect,
Exactly may prove you an architect:
Waying your Zeal thus, you do find it sound,
If unto God his duties you propound;
Lively you see your Zeal does act them well,
Lively in duty to your Prince excel,
Yea and unto your Country you do so,
And thus your Zeal will fit how ere you go:
May every one then way their Zeal and try,
Each of them if as fit as yours 'twill ply.
(366) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Lord CAVFIELD, Baron of Charlemont.
WILLIAM CAVFIELD. Anagramma. AV I CAME WELL FILLED.
Waying your wisdom with au admiration,
I cannot choose but wish your imitation,
Like a rich Cabinet that well filled came,
Lively your Metaphor you are the same;
In emptiness you do not take delight,
Au you are filled to do your work in the right.
Mark how the Muses note how you did last,
Coming full filled many a year now past,
Au you are not with evil fraught and filled,
Virtuously your self to worth you yield:
Filled are you well, and so well filled you came,
Ever I hope you will remain the same;
Lively your virtues promised, and you
Do in the course that erst you did ensue.
(367) To the Right Honorable, THEODORE, Lord DOCKVVRAY, Baron of Culmore.
THEODORE DOCKWRAY. Anagramma. A, CRIED O DO THE WORK.
The work you still your servants do exhort,
Heartily to perform to keep your port;
Ever remembering, that where labor wants,
O many good things God in mercy scanteth,
Duly that men may to their labor fall:
On which with meditation you recall,
Rouzing your servants with an earnest cry,
Encouraging to work most earnestly:
Do you the work with diligence and care,
O do the work good servants, do not spare,
Crying unto them thus, you find the good,
Keeping high state unto your Honour-hood:
With labor it is maintained, but otherwise
Riches on Eagles wings, away she flies.
Ah then maintain labor and diligence,
You Will thereby find an increment of pence.
(368) To the Right Honorable, GERALD, Lord AUNGIER, Baron of Longford. GERALD
AVNGIER. Anagramma. GRE'D VAIL ANGER.
Greed once, when enemies are turned friends,
Each of them anger veil, sinister ends
Repulsing back, they then lay quite aside,
And in a fast firm peace ever abide;
Leading their lives as if that anger veiled,
Doubtless had never on their souls assailed,
Envenoming their breath with peevish hate.
Anger delights still in fell debate,
Veil then this anger should a wise man then,
Nobly agreeing with his Countrymen.
Great Peer you preach this in your worthy life,
In whom no shadow shows of any strife;
Excelling thus in vailing anger so,
Rare are the hearts that you can overgoe.
(369) To the Right Honorable, HENRY, Lord BLANIE, Baron of Monagham. HENRY
BLANYE. Anagramma. ERN HY IN ABLE.
Hy in your honor, hy in men's esteem,
Erued you have, as those that know you deem:
Nor have you any honor did descend
Rightly on you, before this earth did lend
Your hy commendations to your honors hy.
Borne are you of a noble Family,
Live though you do to grace them ne'rethelesse,
Actively since you worthiness express:
Nor do you rest herein commendable,
In honor erned hy to rest enable,
Each on you seek to sit at honors table.
(370) To the Right Honorable, LAURENCE, Lord ESMOND, Baron of Lymerick.
LAVRENCE ESMOND. Anagramma. RENCE LAW SEND MO.
Law where it comes with cost, will ever rence
And cleanse the purse, exhausting out the pence
With over-often feeing of the Clarks,
Receiving of their Masters many Marks.
Each man thinks not what forty-pence does waste,
Noting a Suit but one seven years to last:
Consider then ten Groats a Term in 's time,
Even unto more than eight pound fees will clime.
Each one that go'th to Law, if law does rence,
Send mo had need cry Sir, send pound and pence;
Millions of pounds the Lawyers soon devour,
On Angels only looking, else they lower.
Noble, you mark this well, and therefore call
Duly to yours, that not to Law they fall.
(371) To the Right Honorable, DERMONDE, Lord O-MALUNE, Baron of Gleano-Malune
and Cuerchy. DERMONDE O-MALVNE. Anagramma. LOVED MAN MORNED.
Doubtless Christ only loved man the most,
Entering into the world, (though he might boast
Rightly indeed to be the Son of God,
Man to deliver from Gods smarting Rod,
On him he took, such was his love to man,
Not in arerages wherein he had ran,
Duly to pay the debts which he did owe,
Expressing plainly that he loved man so.
O that our love with zeal to Christ might burn,
Mourn we'de for Christ as he for us did mourn,
A low, A low, Oh hone for us he cried,
Laboring with love when he did erst abide,
Vayling his Godhead in Man's shape a while,
No torments him exempt sin to exile.
Ever he loved man, and vild man him loathed.
(371) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Lord BRERETONE, Baron of Laghlin.
WILLIAM BRERETONE. Anagramma. ON RARE TIME WILL BE.
Will be on rare time and so certainly,
Indeed it hits that you rare spark will be;
Likely it is that a rare man should hap,
Lively in rare time to stop one gap,
In many virtues since that you are rare,
A rare time best is, your worth to declare.
Making the rareness of the time and man
Bravely concur, that few example can
Rightly appear, so rarely (that is indude)
Excelling in the minds brave fortitude,
Rightly on rare times Roules may you be writ,
Example who had scarcely found to hit:
Time turning over her Roll may blush and wonder,
On each one looking, scarce your light to thunder;
Nay certainly on rare time will you be,
Example set unto posterity.
(373) To the Right Honorable, CECILL, Lord BALTIMORE, Baron of Baltimore.
CECILL CALVERT. Anagramma. CALL TRVCE CIEL.
Ciel is a Suffolk word, and properly
Expresses time, which they do mean thereby;
Call truce ciell then implies, call time of truce,
In which fierce war has not an open fluce,
Letting both blood and wounds to enter in;
Let such Ciel go call truce ciell to begin:
Call truce ciel in, wherein the harvester
Armed with Sickle, and Since, cut, eat good cheer,
Leaving to war with men; do then begin
Valourously to bring the harvest in;
Expecting no more spoil, unless it be
Racing down purest wales most carelessly.
They call truce ciel, there time most happily.
(374) To the Right Honorable, HVGH, Lord Baron of Colrane. HVGH HARE.
Anagramma. HA HVG HER.
Ha hugg her Sir, it is virtue that I mean,
Virtue although you hugg, you are chaste and clean,
Great Peer, whose greatness rightly does befit,
Hugging of virtue honourdly to sit.
Ha hugg her then, that is, have herso near,
As that your self you may to her endeere:
Rightly she will then familiar be to you,
Excellently who in her trace pursue.
(375) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Lord SHERRARD, Baron of Letrim.
WILLIAM SHERARD. Anagramma. MY HIER DRAWS ALL.
With true deserts you are so furnished well,
In which like a true Peer you so excel;
Living no longer time then while you merit,
Loving your worths deserts still to inherit:
I must confess your hier or your desert,
Admits not to take some small part,
Making as if your hier reached no more.
Show you unto the world that you do soar
High, flying still at all things that are high,
Earning by virtue honors dignity,
Rightly your hyer draws all that can be said,
Admitting fit to your degree that is made
Rightly your hier draws all, and your deserts
Do challenge rightly to win many hearts.
To the Right Honorable, ROGER, Lord BOIL, Baron of Broghill. ROGER BOIL.
Anagramma. ERLY BORE GO.
Rare honored youth that in your youth so soon,
O like a tender plant so well does bloome,
Growing in early tender age to bear,
Early with fruits your honored head to rear:
Rightly may men admire, when as they see
Boys to tur^e men so soon as it is in thee,
On whom who does but slightly cast his eye,
You Early Bore may suddenly espy:
Let such rich plants go one and grow to Trees,
Increasing still their greater dignities.
(377) To the Right Honorable, CONNOR, Lord MAC-GVVYRE, Baron of Iniskillin.
CONNOR MAC-GWYER. Anagramma. CORN CAME ON, I GREW.
Corn in his growth came on and so did you,
On whom who ever looked, will say you grew:
Now Corn in earth it self a time did hide,
Nor you did always openly abide:
One time there was when as your Mothers Womb,
Required ten months time before you come:
Mightily though when you began to sprout,
And row upon the Faith, you grew it out,
Coming still upward to maturity;
Growing in grace, and inward purity,
With which if you in growing still shall be,
Indeed you will grow to truest dignity:
Even as the Corn came on so grew you, and
Right as good Corn in Gods Barn you shall stand.
(378) To the Right Honorable, FRANCIS, Lord Mount-Norris, Baron of
Mount-Norris. FRANCIS ANSLEYE. Anagramma. EN IS AL FAIR SEEN.
Fair is your sense which sense to virtue have
Regarding, nothing but what virtues crave
All fair your sense is, which so fair an object
Notes for you thereof to be the subject.
Certainly sense must needs be fair, whereas
In so fair way the senses seem to pass.
See any virtues, and the same will be
Admitted to be fair in each degree.
Now virtue fair, that leads so fair your will,
Senses must needs be fair, all fair be still,
Let fairness still within your heart abide.
En is behold, your worth is dignified;
You all fair sense abiding, needs must cause
Each one with en upon your worth to pause.
(379) To the Right Honorable, Sir THOMAS EDMONDS, Knight, Treasurer of his
Majesty's Household, and one of his Majesty's most honorable privy Council.
THOMAS EDMONDS. Anagramma. HO MOST DEMANDS.
Those who most pay, may rightly most demand,
How things are done that they may understand.
On you then when I look, and see your charge,
Muses may say you most demand at large:
And well you may, since you most charged be,
Seeing how each thing is in its degree.
Entrusted are you therefore by the King,
Duly his store into his house to bring;
Making accounts so well, that it may fit
Once the years end, quietus est to hit:
Not undeservedly you may demand,
Doubtless since each man well does understand,
Sir of your recknings they are rightly scand*
(380) To the Right Honorable, Sir HENRY FANE Knight, Comptroller of his
Majesty's household, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
HENRY FANE. Anagramma. EN HE FAIR.
Here en does call, with admiration too,
Enter beholding of the worth you show,
Noting how fairly you perform your place,
Raising great honor to your ancient race:
You needs must fair be, who so fairly do,
Fairly performing what you are fitted to;
And Fair still may you be, and Fairly may
Nobly your offspring flourish every day,
Ever fair walking sir in your fair way.
(381) To the Right Honorable, Sir THOMAS IARMINE, Knight, and
Vice-chamberlaine to his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council. THOMAS
IARMINE. Anagramma. AH, MOST I REMAIN.
Thou the Vice-chamberlaine, where ere the Court
Has its aboding, thither must resort,
On execution of your place still tending,
Most what remaining and your self still bending,
As does your place and honor best befit,
Swiftly with diligence performing it.
In the Kings presence you should most remain,
And so his gracious favor you retain;
Rendering still most part a prompt willing ear
Much of his wisdom cheerfully to hear.
In which place of your great pre-eminence,
Now let the Muses beg without offense,
E're to respect your handmaids diligence.
(382) To the Right Honorable, Sir JOHN COOK, Knight, one of the principal
Secretaries of State, and one of his Majesty's most honorable privy Council.
JOHN COOK. Anagramma. OH OAK COIN.
I see you have both strength and riches great,
Oh noble Secretary of Estate:
Here Oak does show you, strength and manly might,
Noted to be in you by these say right.
Coin shows your Riches, wherein you excelling,
On high are fitly set to have a dwelling:
On high in fortitude if you remain,
Keeping Oaks strength right well, coin may you gain,
Eternal riches you will at last obtain.
(383) To the Right Honorable, Sir FRANCIS WINEDEBANKE, another of the
principal Secretaries and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
FRANCIS WINDEBANKE. Anagramma. IN SAFE BANNK I DREW.
Fast is your state and many comforts bring,
Reaching into the secrets of your King;
And at his Council table have your place,
Nobly so doing, unto you such grace:
Choice are your honors, and your place indeed
Is very ancient if we Scripture read:
Safe bank then drew you in, who safely be
Well banked in with high Authority.
In your Dread Sovereigns favor banked so,
Noe envies hurt that you can undergo:
Draw safely banked, then you drew right well,
Ensafed by your King, from envy fell
Banked by virtue; banked in so sure,
A foe by no means can your hurt procure:
Nay, many foes although they were in Arms,
Keeping your bank can never boast your harms,
Ever you will showting victors brave Alarmes.
(1) To the most Excellent, and most illustrious Princes, together with the
Right Honorable the fellows of that most Noble Order of Saint Georg, commonly
called the Knights of the Garter. SAINT GEORGE HIS KNIGHTS. Anagramma. ONCE
KINGS, YE GET HIGH STARS
Such is the power of Kings, their dignity,
As that they raise unto Nobility,
In firmament of their Courts, that they place
Nobles, who ever they are pleased to grace:
Creating honors, orders framing new,
That higher still their Stars may be to view;
Excellently to glister on the Earth,
Giving a radiant glorious fulgour forth,
Erst every nation did an order frame
Of honored Knights, imposing them their name
Rightly, as every Potentate did please:
Great Edward here the third, created these,
Enstaling noble Knights, Saint Georg Knights called;
Highest in honor here, that are instaled,
Ye then once Kings, high stars do get of course,
Such is your power, such your majestic force.
Knights of the Garter then, accept you this,
Noted you are in this Parenthesis,
In which the Muses severally greet you:
Giving to each the honor that does meet you,
Heroicke hearts, heroicke honor bea^ing;
Truly my skills to little, I am fearing
Suitable trophies of you to be rearing.
(2) To the most high and mighty Monark, CHARLES by the Grace of GOD, King of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, defender of the faith, in these his
Majesty's Dominions, next under CHRIST, supreme Head of the Church, and the
first of the most Noble order of the Garter. CHARLES KING OF ENGLAND.
Anagramma. O CHEEF KING, ENLARG LANDS.
Chief King in Christendom, the heroic band,
Here of the Garter leading by the hand,
Accept your handmaid, prostrate once again,
Rendering one drop more to your Ocean maine;
Let me confess, but truth I shall disclose,
Ever chief King, supremest amongst those,
Seated in seat of highest Majesty:
Kingly excelling in your Sovereignty,
In your Religion chief, in Zeal likewise,
None seeing you, but you chief King soon vie
Great Monarch, chief, in your great Majesty,
Excelling chief in people that are free.
Oh let your fame enlarge it self through lands,
Famously seated amongst the Kingly bands:
Englands Great Emperor O chief King be,
Nor let fame cease, enlarging Lands by thee;
Grow let your Majesty's rare virtues, and
Lengthen forth still, enlarging such a band,
And then the Bards recording of your worth,
Near cease to say Englands Chief King by birth,
Does eagerly his virtuous life pursue,
Enlarging Fame, and Fame enlarging you.
(3) To the most Excellent Prince CHRISTIERNE, KING of Denmark, second fellow
of the most Noble Order of the Garter. CHRISTIERNE, KING OF DENMARK.
Anagramma. I ERN CHRIST EEK A FREE KINGDOM.
Christ, Christian King you may be said to earne,
Having his Doctrine (Kingly) not to learn,
Religiously being framed from your youth,
In Gods most certain and approved truth:
So then you know, to earne Christ, is no more,
Then Gods free acceptance to implore,
In earning Christ, no higher do you soar;
Earning through Gods account, that is by Christ:
Rightly with Christ blessed merits to be blist,
Now, Sacred Majesty does well befit,
Earning of Christ, and such a prize to get.
Kingdoms best fit for Kings, that they thereby
Inthroned, may set forth their Majesty;
Now your Majestic self, Christ earning, have
Great freedoms, to your Kingdoms which Christ gave,
Eking out liberties that do transcend:
(Oh boundless freedoms,) all the world to the end,
Free none alike, but this brave Monarchy:
Doubtless great Denmarks King you have got thereby,
Ear^ing of Christ, eking a Kingdom free,
Not to be sampled but great Charles by thee:
Making these free, who by so free a Law,
As Christ's New Testament are kept in awe,
Requiring nothing but the wills affection,
Keeping the heart free, yet with blessed direction,
Ever still building blessed architection.
(4) To the High and Mighty Prince, CHARLES, Palatine of the Rhine, Chief
Elector of the Sacred Roman Empire, and in the vacancy thereof, Emperor of the
same, and the third fellow of the Noble Order of the Garter. CHARLES PRINCE
ELECTOR PALATYNE. Anagramma. I SEARCH ON, CLEAR, ELECT, RIPE PLANT.
Chacing about the world in hot pursuit,
Ha what my muse has found; she will not be mute,
According to your worthiness to show,
Rightly to all the world; what here in due,
Lustrously fulgent, shines forth so clear,
Expressing you to be of Heaven a Peer:
Such clear resplendant virtues in you shine,
Proclaim your highness for a Prince Divine.
Read who your soul shall, a most clear bright mind,
Ingeniously confess I, he shall find:
Nothing but clearenesse shining to the eye,
Clearly descended from high Majesty,
Expressing as you are, a Prince most clear
Elected, so your highness does appear,
Lustring election by your clearenesse such,
Every one dares not sir, your praise to touch:
Clear and Elected Prince, Elector too,
That high great Honors always do ensue,
On as I search, on I may further pas^e,
Reaching your merits I m^^ too weak alas.
Passing along, you ripe I do discry,
And reached now unto Maturity,
Like to a Plant that' ripened is by years,
And many numbers of them on it bears.
Thus so a Plant you are, yet ripe you be,
Into full age attained now we see:
Nor may you cease, elect, clear ripe plant being,
Ever till fully ripe, to Heaven you are sleeing.
(5) To the high and Mighty PRINCE HENRY, Prince of Orange, one of the Electors
of the Sacred Roman Empire, and the fourth fellow of the most Noble Order of
the Garter. HENRY PRINCE OF ORANGE. Anagramma. ON GRAN HERO RIPE FENC.
Here is an other hero on the band
Entered, whom Charles our King leads by the hand;
Nay one gran Hero certainly you are,
Right so your virtues do your self declare,
Your highness one gran Hero sir to be,
Expressed well by your dexterity.
Prince of high blood, of true Religion sound,
Raised to Honors therefore that abound,
Inroll of Heroes amongst the Heroes placed,
Noble renowned Prince, so you are graced,
Chosen the Garters honor here to wear;
Expressing valor which your Soul does bear.
One grand right Hero we must needs confess,
Freely your highness is we say no less.
One grave Heroic spark your virtues make you,
Ripe by Religion, and such one we take you;
A ripe and ready fence in time of need,
Never leaving those who with afflictions bleed:
Gran Hero then, oh Sir a ripe fence be,
Erst as to others, so Sir now to me.
(6) To the most Illustrious Prince De Lorreine, Duke Chereuze, the first
Fellow of the most noble Order of the Garter. DE LORREINE DVKE CHEREVZE
Anagramma. CHEER, LIKE ZENO DVRED EVER.
Doubtless those who descend of noble blood,
Ever should cheerly be in doing good.
Let then the Muses great Duke greet your grace,
Onward exciting you with cheerely pace
Rightly as well your grace in virtues path,
Religious walking, so go on, and laugh:
Ever be cheerely, that each one may see
In deed like unto Zeno that you be:
None almost could this learned man excel,
Express true cheerlinesse though he did well.
Do you the like Zeno, and so dure you ever;
Virtue, you know, will breed repentance never.
Keep as you do, and then each one shall see,
Exact you act a Duke of high degree.
Cheerelinesse with your virtues still maintain,
Having like constant spirit you retain,
Exactly like to Zeno, of this name
Read we how one a Learned man became;
Examining old Histories we find,
Virtue who did retain well in his mind
Zeno another was a Prince, and he
Excelled in virtue too; both these you be.
(7) To the Right Honorable, EDMUND, Earl of Moulgrave, Lord Sheffield, of
Butterwicke and Knight of the Garter. EDMUND MOVLGRAVE. Anagramma. MVNDE GRAVE
MOVLD.
Each of you are a Mould of Nobleness,
Devoted truly unto worthiness;
Moulds though in ADAM full of rottenness,
Virtue does strain how vices to repress;
Now as more grace each day we do attain,
Do we so munding of our grave moulds gain:
Mould-grave are you, and virtuous too you are,
On which relying you each day appear,
Virtuously a progress so to hold;
Lively a grave mould you may be enrolled,
Grave in your actions, grave in virtues lore,
Rarely purtraying there you are not poor;
Ah, Mund your grave mould still until you be,
Vaild with the veil of upright purity,
Entered in Heaven to dwell eternally.
(8) To the right Honorable, WILLIAM, Earl of DARBY, Lord Stanley strange of
Knocking, and of the I Will of Man, Knight of the Garter. WILLIAM DARBY.
Anagramma. I BY A MILDER LAW.
With wisdom you are guided that excelling,
I do perceive within you has a dwelling,
Living as a high Law, which powerfully
Leads you forward till you reach on high:
I know your high blood, honored Stanley sure,
And wish your predecessors virtues may endure,
Made yours as now we do perceive they be:
Drawn by a mild law ingenuity,
And wisdom leading you so well along,
Rightly your virtues cannot my frail tongue
Blazon forth; rightly this is all I Will say,
You by a milder law are vide to sway,
Exactly where into you do obey.
(9) To the Right Honorable, PHILIP, Earl of PEMBROOKE and MOVNTGOMERY, Baron
Herbert, of Cardiffe and Sherland, Lord Parr and Rosse of Kendall, Fitzhugh
Marmion, and Saint quinton, Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's most Honorable
household, Knight of the Noble order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council. PHILIP PEMBROOKE AND MOVNTGOMERYE. Anagramma. O
PRIM MEEK PEER MOUNT ON, I LODGE BY HAP.
Pembrooks great Peer Prime in your meekenes well,
Heroickly proclaiming you excel,
Ensue your Honor still, oh Sir mount on,
Letting no time slip; and from you be gone;
In the Kings favor Prime, Prime in your place,
Prime in your meekness too, oh see here is grace.
Prime Peer, then daigne to gerdon my weak pen,
Expressing of your virtues unto men:
Meekness in you has boldness bred in me,
Boldly enough this to present to thee;
Right noble then like a true noble man,
O daigne not my infirmity to scan:
On my sex cast your Eye with free fair look,
Keeping your ancient meekness, take the Book
Expressing so you are a Prime meek Peer:
And I shall pray you may mount higher here,
Nobly your Titles filling with more ease,
Declaring rightly your true nobleness;
Mount may you rightly on, and higher clime,
On may your offspring mount in after time,
Virtues inheriting, from thee may they,
Nobly like beams, as you have done, display:
This to thy Lot (Great Peer) what ere to me,
Great troops of enemies do harmfully,
On by their malice, so still forward set,
Making me lodge by hap had not hap bett
Ene unto me befalne, they had destroyed
(Raging) your Servant, this had I enjoyed,
Yea I by hap had Lodged in the grave,
Except by hap good laws that hap did save.
(10) To the right Honorable, THOMAS, Earl of Arundell and Surrey, Earl
Marshall of England, Knight of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council. THOMAS ARVNDELL AND SVRRREY. Anagramma. HE EARND AND
MVST RVLE ROYALS.
Those who your doings see, will soon confess,
Heroicke Sir, that you have earnd no less,
On high as Englands Marshall high to sway,
Making even Royalls unto thee obey;
As every Peer is made a demi Royal,
Subject unto his Prince with duty loyal:
Ah here I see before you got on high,
Rightly great Peer you earnd your dignity,
Virtue commands none to honor clime,
Not having well deserved of his time;
Doubtless then Sir you may High-Martiall sit
Even by your worth you have deserved it,
Leading your virtues in so fair array,
Lead men he could well do the King did say.
And thus you must rule Royals now indeed,
Noble great Peer, to whom the rest take heed,
Doing their duty to you in your place:
So well does virtue those who loves grace.
Very well then ensue your earnings still,
Raised as you are, so let it be your will
Rightly your place still better to deserve,
Ensampling others faithfully to serve:
Your honor spotless you preserve hereby,
Ever still meriting high dignity.
(11) To the Right Honorable ROBERT, Earl of SOMERSET, Viscount Rochester,
Baron of Branspath, and Knight of the Garter. ROBERT SOMERSETT. Anagramma.
RESTS MORE BETT OR.
Rest more bett or you do, or does imply
Ore, or puer gold which here is meant thereby;
Bett is a Saxon word, and does import,
Englished, that is of a better sort;
Rest more bett or, implies that you do rest
The purest gold, in my account the best:
Such are your virtues which refulgent bright,
Or color do set forth to speak but right,
Making you rich, who this true riches here
Enherit truly, as a noble Peer,
Rest's more bett or, more bett or may you rest;
So shall your name inrold be with the best,
Entered in or upon the Rolls of fame:
This Robert Somersett his noble name,
That resting more bett or the same became.
(12) To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Earl of Kelly, Vice Fenton, Lord
Dwilton, Knight of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council. THOMAS KELLYE. Anagramma. LO HAVE MEEKLY.
The Lo wherewith your Anagram begins
Has an inviting nature, and it winnes
O noble Sir, spectators to behold
Meekely how hasting you are yet inrold
As a great Peer, in honors dignity,
Such have has meekness made to set you high.
Know honored Lord that those who highest are,
Excel in meekness, so their worth declare:
Let then your meek heart have to honor high,
Likely meek men are fit for dignity:
You then thus meek may unto honors have,
Envy has never yet meek men displac't.
(13) To the Right Honorable WILLIAM, Earl of SALISBURYE, Viscount Cramborne,
Baron Cecill of Effinden, Knight of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most
honorable privy Council. WILLIAM SALISBVRY. Anagramma. BRAVE SAIL I WILL SMYL.
Well are you a brave sail, who sail so brave,
Increasing still the honors which you have;
Lending still forward in a fair progression,
Like to the Ships which sail amidst the Ocean.
I cannot choose but smile, and smile I will,
Admiring honors smiling on you still,
Making you smile indeed, when as you see
Suitable honor to your merits be:
And so your friends will smile on you likewise,
Listing to hear you to new honors rise.
I likewise handmaid to the Muses, will
Smile, seeing you with virtue filled still;
Being more glad to see you good, than great,
Very well knowing you reward shall get:
Rising in honor if not here below,
Yet honored you shall be in Heaven I know;
Ensuing which, I smile to see you so.
(14) To the Right Honorable, EDWARD, Earl of Do^set, Baron Buckhurst,
Knight of the Garter, Lord Chamberlain to the Queens Majesty, and of his
Majesty's most honorable privy Council, EDWARD DORSETT. Anagramma. DO SET
REWARDED.
Englands Heroic Peer, do as you do,
Doubtless you so shall well rewarded go:
Within your self rewarded shall you be,
Attaining to spotless integrity:
Rarely rewarded with high dignities,
Do your deserts amongst the Worthies rise,
Each seeing plainly you rewarded set.
Do as you do, and you rewarded bett
O noble Peer, when this life ends, shall be;
Raised to the joys of Heavens eternity:
So you yourselfe, men, and the Heavens likewise,
Each do conspire, may you rewarded rise:
That you who follow in the path that is bett,
Thus doing good, may still rewarded set.
(15) To the Right Honorable, HENRY, Earl of Holland, and Baron of
Kengsinton, Chauncellor of the University of Cambridge, Justice and Air of all
his Majesty's Forests, Chases, Parkes, and Warrens on this side Trent,
Constable of the Honor and Castle of Windsor, Captain of his Majesty's Guard,
Lord High Steward of the Queens Majesty's Revenewes, Gentleman of his
Majesty's Bedchamber, Knight of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy. Council. HENRY HOLLAND. Anagramma. ERN HE-HOLY LAND.
Holy Land erst for which great Princes warred,
Earne may your worth, he then from thence are barred,
Notably so your valor well displaying,
Right valerously still your bands waying:
You very well hereby do show, indeed
(Each one perceives) you come of valiant breed.
Holy Land here may Heaven be, and the way
Oh Sir, by which to get it you assay,
Lively you show is virtue, which pursuing,
Let any say that have your worth in viewing,
Admiring at you if you do not earne,
(Noble Sir) Heaven then am I yet to learn,
Doubtiesse so well your actions you do stern.
(16) To the right Honorable, THOMAS Earl of BARKSHIERE, Viscount Andover,
Lord Charlton, and Knight of the Carter. THOMAS BARKSHIER. Anagramma. THO HER
MASSI BARK.
The Bark of Virtue fraught with heavenly riches,
How few there are, whom it to gain bewitches:
On which, those that do love it, having eye
Massy Bark it to be kind presently,
And see it, tho to draw into the Haven;
Seeking thereby this Massy Bark to saven.
Bark is a little ship, which fraught with treasure,
Admits of easy thoing on by leisure:
Rash drawing when the Bark is massy laden,
Knocks on the ground, and many times is broken:
So thoing tidely on to bring to shore,
Helping thereto with Rudder and the Oar:
I see you thus her massy Bark do tho,
Excellently endeavoring to show
Riches Celestial which from hence do flow.
(17) To the Right Honorable, THEOPHILUS Earl of SVFFOLKE, Lord Howard of
Walden, Knight of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council. THEOPHILUS SVFFOLKE. Anagramma. SVTS HY HOPEFVLL FOLK.
The Virtues in you very well agree,
Heroicke Peer, high folk you suit we see.
On which but looking, each one sees you high,
Placed a Peer in peer like dignity:
Hopeful withal, and so good Peers should be;
In virtue hopeful, as their high degree
Leads each man on them to place their eye,
Viewing them as an Hill in dignity:
Seeking high hopeful folks, your honor then
Setting forth virtue, I must say again,
Virtue is highest, and your soul, that flies
Freely by virtues wings, still higher hieth.
Frank is the hope that virtue sends forth
On it but eying its true precious worth.
Let envies haggs against you honored man,
Keep never so much a stir, do what they can,
Ever you suit high hopeful folk I scan.
(18) To the Right Honorable, ROBERT, Earl of LINDSEY, and Lord Willoughby of
Eresby, Lord great Chamberlain, Knight of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's
most honorable privy Council. ROBERT LINDSEY. Anagramma. BRYT ROLE I LEND.
Roles that record your high grown worthiness,
O Englands Chamberlain, and do express
Bright acts of yours, had need be very bright,
Eternizing your worth of radia^^ light.
Role bright you send the acts which you send forth,
Truly to Chronicle as is their worth.
Lend you do life unto a Poets pen,
In calling unto mind the ancient men:
Noting old Histories, and all he can,
Duly to set you out oh peerless man:
Seeking throughout at last, he none does find
Exampling you with such a noble mind;
You send bright Rolls, wherein your praise to bind.
(19) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Earl of EXCESTERE, Baron Burghley,
Knight of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most honorable privy Council.
WILLIAM EXCESTERE. Anagramma. I REST WELL MAY EXCEL.
Well may you rest, expert who virtuously
In virtue, so excelled in dignity,
Like a true Hero, who art fitted to
Live in Elizaum amongst the blessed souls, who
In virtue here excelling, afterward
A comfortable rest did them award,
Making their work to follow them who well
Exercised here on earth, did rare excel,
Xenarchus like, who with much learning filled,
Chose too with virtue rare to be instilled
Excesters Peer, I find that you excel,
So acting virtue, that a rest full well
To you belongs as your proper due;
Expecting which, you virtues path ensue.
Run on in virtues path, and still excel,
Earth cannot, yet the Heavens will please you well.
(20) To the Right Honorable, JAMES, Marquess HAMILTONS, Earl of Arran and
Cambridge, Lord Aven, Inordaile, and Aberbroth: Master of the Horse to his
Majesty, Knight of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most honorable privy
Council. JAMES HAMILTONE. Anagramma. MAY SET ME AL ON HY.
In you the virtues that I do espy,
Admired Marquess, may set you on hy,
Making you hy, who in so hy paths tread,
Example unto others when you are dead:
Seeing the which, I cannot choose but say,
Ha honored Marquess, Virtue set you may
All highly as a high and noble Peer,
Meaning it self in you great Lord to rear,
In whom high virtues are enclosed high,
Living with you in honors dignity.
Thus vert^e on hy set, may get you hy,
Only advance in all the peoples eye:
Noble your birth more noble is your grace,
Exactly treading out a virtuous trace.
(21) To the most Illustrious Prince, JAMES, Duke of LENOX, Earl of March,
Lord Darnley, Metriven, St. Andrews, and Aubigny, Admiral and Chamberlain of
Scotland by inheritance, Knight of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most
honorable privy Council. JAMES LENOX. Anagramma. AM ONLY SEX.
I am the only sex your Grace may say,
And rightly, for you are a man and display.
(Made high by honor, and by your great birth)
Excellent virtues, acting them on Earth;
So that the only sex with virile strength,
Looking on you, we grant you at the length:
Excelling in the conquest of the mind,
Noted above each ancient Peer we find,
On all the Roules of former ages gone;
Xerxes himself was not such valiant one.
(22) To the Right Honorable, HENRY, Earl of DANBYE, Lord Denvers of Dantsey,
Knight of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
HENRY DANBYE. Anagramma. I BE HY AND ERN.
Here is a Peer indeed, who tho so high,
Earneth or will not have his dignity,
Noting that who their honors will not merit:
Resplendent honors never do inherit,
You erne your dignity and so are high
Declaring a Rare point of Prudency;
As he that merits dignity and honor,
No envy the attendant still upon her,
Belching forth nee're so many tales she can
Imprint, may hatred on so good a man,
Exactly when his work men do but scan.
(23) To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Earl of Morton, Lord Dalkeith and
Aberdour, Treasurer of Scotland, Knight of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council. WILLIAM MORTONE. Anagramma. TYM WILL NOTE AMOR.
With amor first my riddle plain to make,
I mean interpreting some pains to take,
Let the beginning put be to the end,
Look on it then, you will find it no man's friend;
Invert the letters, read it backewards, then
O famous City it will be again,
Make it two sillables, and then you will see
Most rightly showed Sir, what now you be,
Or, it is gold and am does you denote,
Rightly will time you for the true gold coat:
Time well will note delays of other men,
On what your love is set, time shows again,
Noting at last what ere men say a while,
Eternal love will worldly love beguile.
(24) To the Right Honorable, ALGERNON, Earl of Northumberland, Lord Poyning,
Fitz-paine, and Brian, Knight of the Garter. ALGERNON NORTHVMBERLANDE
Anagramma. HE LEARN MOUNT, BE'N GRAN LORD.
A Noble Peer the Knightly band to end,
Lends here his presence England to be friend,
Grand Lord he been, he learn to mount on high,
Exalted unto Honors dignity:
Rejoicing to learn virtue, and the while
Note I his virtue raised to a pile,
On mounting high, as he does learn to be,
Noble in virtues with dexterity:
Nor may this Grand Lord cease Grand Lord to been,
On whom high honors Trophies high are seen,
Reaching and mounting evermore still higher,
Till to the clouds your virtues do aspire.
He may learn mount the way to be a Grand Lord;
Virtues true pattern is for him t'afford:
Mount thus Northumbers Peer example been,
Best imitated, his best virtues seen,
Emplanted in your breast to keep a train,
Rightly a Noble Peer you shall remain;
Learn thus to mount, and be you mounting still,
And never cease till you obtain the hill:
None but the Heroes of the Lord attain;
Do this Grand Peer, and then you shall remain
Eternized by no decaying strain.
Judges.

(15) To the Right Honorable, Sir JOHN BRAMPSTONE Knight, Lord chief Justice
of the Kings Bench. JOHANNES BRAMPESTONE. Anagramma. BEENN AS NO STORMY HEAP.
In men a heap of passions keep a swarm
On reason, raging down a furious storm:
How then can reason judge, who thus oppressed,
As by a stormy heap can have no rest.
No stormy heap of passions them should sway,
Not letting senses reasons Law obey,
Ever in those who of the land the stay,
Sit on the Bench the poor man's cause to judge,
Bitter oppression shall not make men grudge;
Right shall take place, and Justice there shall flourish:
Ah blessed are you, no stormy h^ap that nourish.
Might still your mildness mightily increase,
Peace be to you with an affecting peace:
Ever may you in peace securely sleep,
Storms be far hence, who as no stormy heap,
Truly been peaceful and the peace does keep.
Oh Brampestone rare, no stormy heap you been,
Now you have conq^ered your self within,
Easily may you punish outward sin.
(385) To the Right Honorable, Sir JOHN FINCH Knight, Lord chief Justice of
the Common Pleas. JOHN FINCHE. Anagramma. FECH IN HONEY.
Justice is so resplendant, bright, and clear,
On them whose just hearts make the poor hearts cheer
Hereby, that all men way their Justice so,
Never to let them void of honey go.
For even the upright walking in their pl^ce,
In unbrib'd ev'nesse purchases this grace,
Never to pass without some honey bait,
Chiefly sin^e they like B^es in labor wait.
Hence then my Lord, since you in just pains toil,
E'ne fetch in honey for your self awhile.
(386) To the right Honorable, Sir HVMPHREYE DAMPORTE Knight, Lord chief
Baron of his Majesty's Exchequer. HVMPHREYE DAMPORTE. Anagramma. UP REPORT ME
MADE HY.
High Baron of The Exchequer, your so clear
Virtue, resplendent, in you does appear:
Making my spirit rouse up, calling me
Prime Baron, to report our dignity:
High you are made, to virtues you adhering,
Report that honors never from you forbearing:
Enter upon it you, for it is your due,
Yielding you high, because they find you true;
Exhorting of the Muses to report
Duly your worth in the Exchequer Court,
And rousing of them up; to you last Lord,
(Many great worthy works which you afford)
Praises unto you due, to render and
On Roll of Fame in triumph let it stand,
Reporting you, made high in dignity,
That high before were in sincerity;
Ever remain so, honored Sir to be.
(387) To the right Worshipful, Sir DVDLEY DIGS, Knight, Master of the Rolls.
DVDLEY DIGS. Anagramma. DY'S GVYLDED.
Doubtless some men that outwardly have been
Viewed good at first, on Justice seat were seen
Decaying, in their sple^dor to behold,
Lead-colour like, did look more like than gold.
Erst 'twas observed long time to be a Judge,
Yealds forth much vice, when at the people grudge.
Dear master of the Rolls, your Anagram
Enjoynes a duty, put in are the same,
Give not your virtue and till l^^e be ended,
So 'twill be said, Sir Dudley Digs dies gilded.
(388) To the right Worshipful, Sir RICHARD HVTTON Knight, one of the Justices
of the Common Pleas. RICHARD HVTTON. Anagramma. ARDENT TOVCH HER.
Reaching with ardency and high flowne spirit,
Into the Justice seat you do inherit,
Choysely expressing it to wed the bride,
Having fair Justice to sit on your side.
Ardent you thus do touch her with your hand,
Reverently acting what she does command,
Doing to poor their right, who Justice cry,
Each one perceives is yours eternally.
Her touch with ardent love and fast affection,
Virtuously performing her direction,
That as you are a Judge, so you may be,
Truth still acting Iustic^arily:
On seat of Chancery when you assist,
None may your just poys'd equity resist.
(389) To the right Worshipful, Sir JOHN DENHAM Knight, one of the Barons of
the Exchequer. JOHN DENHAM. Anagramme. Quest. HAD MEN HONEY? Answ. MEN HAD HONEY.
If any for the honey in your hive,
Only for your own self you did contrive,
Having the question, had men honey, framed,
No cause they will find, your name should be declaimed.
Deeds of your charity you well express,
Endeavoring to help the comfortless:
New houses built for alms which you erected,
Have your true worthiness saved undetected.
And answer fully truly to the question,
Men had your honey, or but bad digestion.
(390) To the tight Worshipful, Sir WILLIAM ^ONES, Knight, one of the Justices
of the Kings Bench. WILLIAM JONES. Anagramma. O MANY IEW'LS, I.
Well many Iuels in you men behold,
Inricht in mind, not only with pure gold;
Laws certain knowledge, ballancing true weight,
Leading you to give every man his right
In every cause: but likewise silver's here,
A conscience spotless, and a mind most clear,
Mixed with Iron, though to show your mind,
In to an other fancy, will not wind
On reasons anvile, till that it be beat.
Now let one judge, are not the minds here great?
Ever he will with admiration cry,
See O how many Iuels now find I.
(391) To the right Worshipful, Sir GEORGE CROOK, Knight, one of the Justices
of the Kings Bench, GEORGE CROOK. Anagramma. GO EGER O ROCK.
Go eagerly, O Judge, the poor to free,
Ensafing them thereby from misery:
O be a rock, a sure defense for those,
Running to you to be kept free from foes;
Go and defend them, and so ever be,
Eagarly a defense to misery.
Cruel oppressors eagerly put down,
Raising so up your honored high renown.
O be a Rock impregnable for those,
On whose side Justice does the truth disclose.
Keeping them safe, and from oppressions free,
Each man will say, Crook a strong Rock is he.
(392) To the right Worshipful, THOMAS TREVOR Knight, one of the Barons of the
Exchequer. THOMAS TREVORE. Anagramma. MO TREASVRE THO.
The Barons of the exchequer placed are
Hourly of the Kings rents to have a care;
On which their trust and faithful providence,
Most truly does depend the Kings expense:
And he deceived by each knavish Groom,
Suddenly might to mean estate become.
Therefore does he the exchequer Barons make,
Reckoning of his revenues right to take,
Endeavoring to take care how it does go,
Very well say you then mo treasure tho:
One faithful heart unto our Sovereign, having
Recorded his occasions, which are craving
Ever more treasure, therefore wisty saving.
(393) To the right Worshipful, Sir GEORGE VERNON, Knight, one of the Justices
of the Common Pleas. GEORGE VERNON. Anagramma. GO EAGER RVN ON.
Go eager, reverend Judge with eager heart,
Ever to the oppressed help to impart
On running in a course of Justice so
Religion guiding, you may eager go.
Going with eager zeal and good affection,
Eagerly seeking Justice sole direction.
Very well may you run then in that path,
Ever the more you walk, so the more men laugh:
Run seeing you do in a just way still,
None but your praise, blazon forth (Sir) will:
On run, they will you exhort, and eagerly,
Never cease going in path of verity.
(394) To the right Worshipful, Sir ROBERT BARKLEY Knight, one of the Justices
of the Kings Bench. ROBERTUS BARKLEY. Anagramma. ORS BARK BE TRVLY.
Rightly the Justice and the evenesse, which
Out of you easily spied, show you rich,
Bewrayes that you a Bark of Or contain,
Ever that passing sweetly through the maine
Rough raging storms may here a time endure,
The Haven at last it will attain be sure:
Voyage on still, ne fear the storms fierce rage,
Set where yo're bound, truth shall your harms assuage:
Be truly Ors Bark still, nay do you lose
A jot of that true riches you disclose:
Rightly true Or you then possess indeed,
Keeping the which you never shall have need;
Let this Or be the Justice you possess,
Entered in the Bark of your tru^ worthine^se,
You truly be Ors Bark, I so confess.
(395) To the right Worshipful, Sir FRANCIS CRAVLEY, Knight, one of the
Justices of the Common Pleas. FRANCIS CRAVLEY. Anagramma. CRAVE IN FAIR CEL.
Fairer is your Cel, and it does crave to be
Rightly with^n filled with sincerity,
Admitting nothing, O wise Judge profound,
Not of tr^e fairness, being tried that's sound.
Cell so m^st needs be fair, and that's your caske
In which your inward soul her self does mask;
So if the casket be so purely fair,
C^oise must the Jewel needs be then and rare:
Rare it is indeed, for i^ you is a soul
Admits of nothing has a show of foul.
Very well may we crave in such fair Cell
Lung, many years may that fair jewel dwell,
Expressing so the bewties of the mind,
Yielding a full reward at last you will find.
(396) To the right Worshipful RICHARD WESTON, Knight, one or the Barons of
the Exchequer. RICHARD WESTON. Anagramma. SO RICH ARDENT.
Riches apparent in you let so be
Inherent to your places dignity:
Choice is still treasured in your heart, that they
Had as your chiefest treasure placed may;
And locked up within your heart, yet so,
Right Reverend Baron, as if then you sow,
Declaring outwardly what is within.
With ardent hot affection then begin,
Ever to sow the riches of your mind,
Sparing them here and there, though home confined:
That is, although your riches bide within,
Outward to sow them you may never lin;
Noting your self so for a Reverend Judge.
EPILOGVE.
Sun, Moon, and Stars, ye rare Birds of the sky,
That in your thought, to virtues heaven do fly;
Riches of Heaven and Earth, I doubt if rich
A^ all there be, beyond your glorious pitch:
Pardon the portrait of your handmaids Pen,
Presuming you to paint, the Worthiest Men
Take it as what she had, she has no better,
Accept it kindly, she will abide your debtor;
And your rich natures so will richly shine
For kind acceptance is a thing divine.
M. F.

FINIS.

