Portland-Stone IN Paules-Church-yard.

Their Birth, their Mirth, their Thankfulness, their Advertisement.

Written By HEN: FARLEY, a Freeman of London: Who has done as freely for
Freestone, within these eight years, as most men, and knows as much of their
minds as any Man.

Buy, or go by.

LONDON, Printed by G. E. for R. M. and are to be sold at the great South door
of of Paul's. 1622.

THE AVTHORS CHARGE TO HIS BOOK.
TO know where Portland is,
If any do desire,
Lest they should think amiss
Tell them in Dorsetshire.
For some perhaps will say,
That do not understand
From whence they be, that they
Came from a foreign Land.
So England may have wrongs,
And eke a noble County,
And God to whom belongs
All thanks for his great bounty.
For sure as He Is above,
Then we, no living Nation
E're tasted of his love
In more abundant fashion;
Of things which named be
Above or underground:
Or on, or in the Sea
That can or may be found.
His name be blessed therefore:
And so my Book adieu,
I need to say no more,
But pray God prosper you.
The Books answer.
YOur Charge I will obey
As I am bound by right:
And what y' aue writ I Will say
To Lady, Lord, and Knight.
In hope though I am weak,
And in proportion small,
Yet so you have taught me speak,
As some good do I shall.
And workmen will take heed
To do what is just and fit,
Which is as much as need,
Where Conscience is and Wit.
TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Reverend, Worshipful, and Worthy Commissioners,
appointed by the Kings most Sacred Majesty, for the Reparation of St. PAVLS
Church in LONDON:
My very good Lords and Masters.
IF your grave Wisdoms herein I offend.
My faithful Muse
did never so intend;
For (though but plain)
she is honest, and she is true,
And has respect to God, King, Church and You.
In all humility she is well content,
For her least fault to be right penitent;
And (of your favors) craves but this for guerdon,
If well, your boon; if ill, your gentle pardon.
Amore, Veritate, and Reuerentia. So devoted to Gods House, And to your
Lordships and Worships ever bounden, HEN: FARLEY.

TO THE RIGHT Reverend Father in GOD, GEORGE, Lord Bishop of London, etc. My
singular good Lord.
AS from the Hill
of Hermons Heavenly tops,
Most Sacred Dew
on Sion Mountains drops:
Which falling further to the lower ground,
Does make the Fields with fruits divine abound;
So may that Hermon-Dewe be dropping still,
On thee (chief Montaigne) of Pauls-Sion Hill;
That so Her lower grounds may fruitful be,
And She ( poor Church) made fortunate by Thee:
For which I pray, these Blessings may ensue,
Health, Plenty, Peace, Joy, and Long-life to You.
H. F.

This is no Nettle, thorn or thistle, But unto Envy an Epistle.
PErhaps you do delight to flout and fleere,
Perhaps a word may be misplaced here,
^erhaps some thing may touch you very near,
^erhaps you do believe, your threats I fear,
^erhaps you love me not, the case is clear,
^erhaps you do backbite me every where,
^erhaps you think it comes not to mine ear,
^erhaps you crossed my new books sale last year,
Perhaps you know I cannot quit this gear.
Yes, if I would as envious appear:
But what need I, since acting thus your part,
You wound your selves (by Envy) to the heart.
H. F.

PORTLAND STONE IN Paul's Churchyard.
E'Re since the Architect
of Heavens fair frame,
Did make the World,
and Man to use the same;
In Earths wide womb,
as in our natural bed,
We have been hid,
concealed, and covered,
Where many thousand ships, have sailed by,
But knew us not, and therefore let us lie.
Till at the last, and very lately too,
(Some Builders having building work to do,
And time be'ing come we could no longer tarry,
But must be borne from out our earthly quarry)
We were discovered, and to London sent,
And by good Artists tryde incontinent:
Who (finding us in all things firm and sound,
Fairer and greater then elsewhere are found;
Fitter for carriage, and more sure for weather,
Then Oxford, Ancaster, or Beerstone either,
Did well approve our worth above them All,
Unto the King for service at White Hall:
Where being quickly come, as quickly we,
Had welcome to his Sacred Majesty,
And (for our humbleness full many a day)
Were still exalted highest every way,
In works of most perspicuous Eminence,
Which in all buildings have pre-eminence:
As Columns, Cornish, Capitals, and Basis,
In Fillets, Frise, in Ornaments and Facis,
In Architraues, in Pedistals, and Pillars.
And (as the only best of our well-willers)
Hi^ Highness now our service does prefer
Unto the Church, to join and dwell with Her:
So that from one good Montaigne to another,
And from our Mother-earth, to this Church-mother
We come apace, and are preparing aye,
To cure her evils, and her great decay;
To be her front, her bulwark, and defense,
And: also to renew her excellence,
Where Hymns and Haleluiahs shall be sung,
With praises to the Lord by old and young,
From day to day, and so from year to year,
Till Christ his second coming does appear.
O happy age, wherein such things are done,
Thrice happy we that now may see the Sun,
And be united to this sacred place,
(A grace to us beyond all other grace)
For thus we know the truth of truest story,
All that God made, he made for his own glory;
And at one time or other come to light,
To do man service, and their Maker right;
That very senseless things may him adore,
And magnify his holy Name therefore.
O Blessed God preserve our Royal James,
honor his name among the honored names
Of best precedent Kings that ever stood,
Renowned for Wisdom, and for doing good:
Make him a second Solomon, a peerlesse Iemme,
In these his Kingdoms, this his Jerusalem:
Lengthen his days, his treasure still increase,
And let him live, and dye, a King of peace.
So bless, O Lord, our high and mighty Charles,
And then the names of Barons, Peers and Earls*
The worthy Knights, and Gentry of this Land,
That to this Work do set their helping hand.
The Bishops, Clergy, City, Country, All,
(And as our duties bind in special)
This Reu'rend Bishop for his love to us,
Let him be famous as MAVRITIVS,
Anno 1087. This Church of Saint Paul was much wasted by fire; and worthy
Mauritius here mentioned (then Bishop of London,) began a new foundation
thereof, in manner as now it is, upon Arches and Vaults of stone, for defense
of fire. In which work he continued a constant and a bountiful Benefactor for
20 years together, and then dyed After him (viz) Anno 1107 succeeded Bishop
^eaumer, who wonderfully increased the same Church for 20 years more,
purchasing at his own costs the large Streets and Lanes round about it, which
he began to compass about with a strong wall of stone, and Gates.

Long lived as Nestor, and in every way
Happy and prosperous till his dying day;
That still he may this famous Church advance,
In gaining her both Coin and Countenance,
Till such a noble Register be seen
Of Benefactors, as has never been
In any age or any work before,
And till he say, Enough, there needs no more.
And cause no mourning in our streets may be,
With such as fear demolishment to see.
Lord for thy Names sake, let it be thy pleasure,
The rather to increase that pious Treasure,
That every one may have some satisfaction,
To gain their prayers in so good an action,
And that two Noble works together may
Be bravely done, to all true Subjects joy;
And through the world this fame may ever ring,
Pity did reign in Bishop, Lord, and King;
Mercy and Justice were so met in one,
That Justice (scarce) from Mercy could be known.
So, for a Nation pitiful and loyal,
Great Britain shall win praise past all denial.
No man shall need to grieve, or to lament,
For's place of Custom, or Demolishment:
And blessings many will the Work attend,
From the beginning to the very end.
But yet, though pity here we do request,
That none may think themselves too much oppressed
Let such as must depart their houses know
No wind so calm or warm did ever blow,
Nor ever was a Work so good as this,
But that with some it blew or went amiss.
Then since herein the wind blows somewhat ill
For such as join to Paul's against her will;
That have impaired her strength by vaults and cellars
To make more room for Buyers and for Sellers;
Let them with patience endure some loss,
And for the Work sake bear a little cross;
Not grudgingly, or by pronouncing wrong,
Cause there is their Custom, there they lived long
^or though desire of gaine's a grievous Tempter
There is a Proverb bids them Caveat Emptor.
And ne'rethelesse their Custom and their trade,
This House of God must new again be made.
Was it not example scurrilous and rude,
At first to grant that trades should there intrudel
Nay are they not accursed, that did yield
To make Gods Courts a merchandising field?
May we not call them beasts, even to their faces,
That like bruit beasts defile such sacred places?
Things consecrated unto P^ous uses,
Is It fit that they should suffer foul abuses?
Is there no civil difference or ods,
Twixt clean and unclean things, man's house and Gods?
Should Christians bones be dig'd out of their graves
And laid with dogs bones in the fields by knaves,
That so more room under the Church foundation,
May be for A-iaxe in a beastly fashion?
No easment but against the Temple-wals?
No other place to piss, or make Laystals?
No way to pass with burdens, but through Paul's
where burthend consciences should ease their souls?
And' cause she is material, as men term her,
Is it material therefore they should harm her?
Look well about thee Reader, and then see
Whether such things as these ought so to be:
And after due consideration had, then tell
If therewithal God can be pleased well:
Or if there do belong no curse or woe,
To such as first gave way to wrong her so:
Or if it were a credit to our Nation,
At all to grant so base a toleration:
For we do know thou will agree with us,
To hold it vile and sacrilegious:
And all good men that after look upon her,
Will say, it is to this Land a great dishonor.
O that we had such gifts of tongue and pen,
As there is given to some sons of Men;
That by perswasiue reasons we might win
The abusers of Gods house to know their sin:
That with their Souls they might no longer flatter
But understand it is a heinous matter;
And will be punished before men's eyes,
When all things wronged shall in judgment rise:
But we are blockish yet, not past our letters,
And (being divine) we leave it to our Betters.
SO now you Workmen, listen what we say,
You are so called by work, and not by play)
If ever you were Masters of your Trade,
Make this best Masterpiece that ere you made.
It Is for the Church, and therefore do not spare
Your best advice, skill, diligence and care:
And as (some ways) you stand on reputation,
So labor now to get the commendation:
Not for precedence, lest then you err,
For all(...)s one here, both Free and Forreyner;
And as she does receive all sorts to prayer,
So any Worke-man, any good Surueyor,
She may retain to gain her Reparation,
As for the Church is used in every Nation.
And yet we hold it were both sin and pity
Since Workmen live in this renowned City,
Good Artists, honest, paying scot and lot,
If more then others they should be forgot;
But rather be preferred in some degree
Before a Stranger, whatsoever he be.
And' cause our Writer a poor Freeman is,
We hope these words no man can take amiss;
For what he write's according to his oath,
Which to infringe we know he will be loath;
That is, the Cities honor to maintain,
And also to advance Her honest gain.
So once again we do revive our Muse,
And to all workmen do more counsel use;
Learn by the Scriptures what you ought to do
Let them direct your hands and conscience to;
Ezra, Ne'miah, Chronicles and Kings,
And Haggai will show you many things:
How justly men did work about the Temple,
Which there is Registered for your example;
And with what joy and love they did proceed,
The Book of God will show you if you read;
For happy was that man that could devise
Most curious work to grace that Edifice:
Or he whose purse or person could present
Ought that might help to make Her excellent.
Lead, timber, stone, brass, iron, some men gave;
Some lyme, some sand, some glass, to make her brave*
And Laborers, like Bees, did labor truly,
Observing all their times and hours most duly.
Then if your own gain you do only plod,
You are unworthy for the House of God;
For if you work by taske-worke, or by day,
Your pay shall be as just as ere was pay;
And therefore it is expected you should be
Not sparing in your work, but francke and free.
Some men there are will maintain to ones face,
(But such we hold both lewd and very base)
That in a work for King or Church they may
Trifle the time by loytring and delay.
Some will be working hard, but when do you think?
Just when they have no come, or trust for drink;
Or when the Clock is near the stroke eleven,
And say they have so wrought e're since 'twas seven,
Or when some Officer they do epsy,
That otherwise cashiers them presently.
Some with their Rules do fidle up and down,
As if they did more work then all the town:
But mark them well, and give them their due check
For one weeks work, almost three days they lack
Some spend much time in finding fault, and so
To pick a thank will nimbly run or go,
Till at the last, the seed which they have sown,
Brings forth a fruit more fit to be their own.
Some have the gift of working more then some,
Until a holiday, or Sunday come.
But then what they have got six days before,
They will consume it, if'tvvere ten times more:
Mean while poor vvines and children live full bare
Hoping when husbands come of better fare,
And they return when all the work is done
As poor as Job, or as the Vnthrist Son.
Some have their jobs to do in other places,
And so they work like Ianus with two faces;
And from that task that longest will remain,
They oftentimes an hour or two will gain.
But he that in this work proves such a lobber,
Is but a kind of Sacrilegious Robber.
Others, at every one that by them walk,
Will to their fellows have some thing to talk:
and while their tongues are tatling, it is their course
To hold their hands, and that is ten times worse.
So there are other some* that for a need,
When hemp is scarce, will only buy gape-seed,
And look about as if naught were their task,
But for to answer all that men will ask,
And think it is a color fit t'excuse
The precious time they wrongfully abuse.
These, like some Scholars that are sent to schools
Have a good conscience, though not little fools;
And make Pauls-worke, the Proverb true does stand,
Of every little thing they take in hand:
With whom to live a faithful Clarke ath' works,
As good go dwell with Saracens and Turks.
But now we think no man will be so rude.
And thus in charity we do conclude.
FINIS.
Paul's merrily, yet modestly.
IF Preachers now will speak for me,
In Parish-Churches where they be,
And all good hearts agree in one,
Then farewell my Complaint and moan.
Our good King James, he has begun,
And eke Prince Charles his only Son:
With many' a Noble Lord and Peer,
To give me money every year.
O follow such brave Leaders then,
All you braue-minded Englishmen:
For what you give it is not lost,
But brings a blessing for your cost.
So Portland stone since you are come,
To join with me till day of doom,
Until that day we will be friends,
And wish them good that good intends.
Certain Additions of the Author, as they were given to the King and Prince,
in the Parliament-time last, and at the Christmas following
CHrist the Beloved of the King of Kings,
Apparent Heir of Heavens rich Diadem;
Rejoice the Heart, and Spirit in all things,
Of this fair Branch of our most Royal Stem,
Long Life, good Wife, (sweet Jesus) give to Him,
Unto His present Age, and day of Birth,
Send Him all Blessings both of Heaven and Earth.
PRotect Him by thy Power Omnipotent,
Renown Him in the Court of Parliament,
Instruct Him by the Wisdom from above,
Never be absent from Him in thy Love;
Crown Him with Triumphs and great victories,
Ever confound (or turn) His Enemies;
Prosper His going out, and coming in,
Save Him in all assaults of deadly Sin.
Amen.
IN sixteen hundred Twenty one,
(A year you may remember)
Prince Charles was aged Twenty one
The Nineteenth of November,
The Nineteenth year of JAMES our Kin^
His peaceful happy Reign:
God bless Them both, and Their Offspring
Till SHILO come again.
He that did write for Paul's (named Henry Farley^
Prays thus for Them, and so will late and early.
FINIS.

