A DISCOVERY OF THE GREAT SVBtiltie and wonderful wisdom of the Italians,
whereby they bear sway over the most part of Christendom, and cunningly
behave themselves to fetch the Quintescence out of the peoples purses:
DISCOVRSING AT LARGE the means, how they prosecute and continue the same: and
last of all, convenient remedies to prevent all their policies herein.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf. 1591.

TO THE MOST MAGnanimious, victorious, and invincible King Henry the fourth,
King of Fran^e and Navarre, and to all the Princes of the bloud-royall, and all
others Ecclesiastical persons, both noble and others assistaunt in the
assembly of States: the royal Frenchman wishes grace, and peace in our Lord
Jesus Christ.
COnsidering how the body of the Christian Common wealth, has a long time been
grieuouslie tormented with a most dangerous and incurable d^sease, which does
not only trouble the w^ts of men, with terrors and vexation, putting their
bodies to extreme torments and grievous travels, but also exposes the goods
of all in general to the pillage and purl^yning of others. For remedy
whereof, a number of good spirits pricked forward with a Christian and laudable
zeal, have endeavored their best, these fifty years, to root out the malady
by such medicines as they suppose most convenient and wholesome, yet do they
all what they could: they could never heal the wound perfectly. So that the
body diseased, falls down still oftentimes into far worse case then at the
first, and me think the cause is, for that they have not looked with tbe eye
of their understanding, to the first causes and beginnings, from whence this
sickness should grow, but went no further then to stop the course of her
effects, like the Physician, who seeks to cure only the pains and accidents
of a disease, never touching the root and cause thereof: the which in space of
time, recovering new force and rigor does bud again, and is as bad and worse
then ever it was, which is not only true in Physic, but in all other affairs
of the world. Wherefore, deep was the judgment of the Latin Poet: who
reputeth that man happy who can know the cause of things. For Aristotle also
witnesses with him, that the ignorance thereof breeds manifold errors.
Seeing then the diversity of men's judgments concerning the cause and curing
of this malady, coming nothing near the truth; some because they were a
muster of ignorance, which dimmeth so their sight, that they cannot see well:
others, because they suffer themselves to be carried away with their own
passion; affectionat only to some one particular party: and other some,
because they go no further, but to remedy only some particular effects, and
leave the cause untouched: I have thought good pitiyng this languishing and
sick body, so to represent and lively set down the cause and cure of this
disease, that it shall be long of her self, if she recover not perfect health.
Neither let any be afraid to take this wholesome medicine which I will prescribe,
being no violent corsuie, or Antimoyne, nor dear as is the tincture of Sol,
for I present but a sweet decoction, to purify the crooked sinew, governor of
the sight of the understanding, to purge the Septentrionall and Occidentall
peoples of a gross humor engendered in them, by reason of the grosnes, and
coldness of the aier wherein they live, which lets them for seeing so clearly
into matters of state, and the government of this world, as do the nations
that are more Meridionall who being aware of so great advantage can so
cunningly handle the matter, to make us fall together by the ears, to weaken
and ouer-throwe our selves by our own forces and arms, thereby to make v^
their slaves, to possess and nicye our persons, and to triumph over v^, having
purloyned our domination and riches into their own hands: but especially those,
who have the Sea so near their noses, that they can every way trade and
traffic with other peoples, as are the Grecians, Carthaginians, Florentins,
Venetians, and other Italians their like: who if they may discover but the
least entrance to set in foot amongst the Septentrionals, they will straight be
able to devise and practice so great shifts and subtilties, that they will make
them break asunder all bonds of amity, and flesh them to ruin one another
like cruel and savage beasts, causing an alteration of blood amongst the best
of the Country by their marriages, and so to grow to make quarrels and take
parts, when they see them feeble and in misery, and then to fish for their
riches and dignities, even as in a troubled water, men catch and kill fish best,
when they cannot be discried. Wherefore, many of those whom the heaven has
enriched with a clearnes of judgment above the rest, have great need to be
aided herein. Some attributing the spring of these mischiefs, to the darkness
and obscurity of the holy Scriptures, wherein for all that they are deceived,
seeing that it in some requires of us, but to love God and our neighbor, to
fly from evil, and to do good. And because the corruption of man does hinder
him to believe in him who has absolutely fulfilled all, and shed his blood for
the purging of all our sins, using only certain Sacraments after the holy
institution of him and his holy Apostles: some others think that the diverse
interpretations there abouts, and about other texts of Scripture, are the cause
of all this mischief, and are of opinion, that to interpret and expound
truly these places and passages of Scriptures, is the very best mean and
remedy to deliver all Christendom from all these troubles: and thereuppon do
the Divines fall out, and backbite one another by contumelious speeches, every
where defaming one another shamefully: but the expositions that they condemn,
and whereupon they are so at variance, are but thrids spun by some of the more
meridionall nations: who when they perceive how they can set us together by the
ears, they know how to invent store of such new obscurities and shifts to
trouble us, if we will give them leave a little to come in amongst us into our
Countries: where they will show themselves alwais with profane knowledge to
teach us how we shall go to heaven, or else inflamed with a burning zeal for
the publi^ke good of all our Country. Although if we be so wise as to look
well into them, we shall soon discover their mines, how they do but seek to
reap some profit out of our ruins, and to make their hand by us. We must
then cast our eyes upon the good instruction, that nature or rather the Author
thereof does set before us visibly: For he having laid and set the Alps most
high mountains, so firm and permanant on the one side, and the deep Seas on
the other, for bars between us and them, that we should not go to one another,
teaches us, if we will take his instruction, we should dispose of all that
concerns our State, apart: and shut up from them al access or entrance into
our Country by the reasons and experience of things already past, which shall
more amply be dilated in this d^scourse, prepared for a general remedy for us
all, whether we be Catholics or Protestants, to recover full deliverance and
health of these maladies, which so long time have oppressed and troubled us:
hoping by the grace and bles^ing of the most highest, it shall work some great
effects in those, who shall use these preparatiues, which are first of all
presented unto them, before the taking of more strong medicines, and harder
physic. Now, for that the governor of the whole world, seems to have
turned his favorable countenance toward us, having given the royal Scepter
into your Majesty's hands, being extracted out of a more Meridionall quarter
then your predecessors were, and also in giving us, who are neighbors of the
great Ocean-sea, a wiser and more ingenious King, then those before time have
been: to the end that we being lightened by so bright and glorious a star, the
quick and subtle Italians may no more abuse us, so that we shall no more be
exposed to the lamentable miseries, into the which they were wont to bring us
headlong, as men altogether blind andegrosse-headded, at their own lust and
pleasure. And this is the cause why I have presumed to dedicate this discourse
unto your M. hoping that it shall be rather liked and approved of you, then of
others, who being more Septentrionals have their spirits more dull and nothing
so quick and pliable, assuring also my self, that if it please you to receive
it with a favorable countenance, that only shall give it a far more free
passage to all those, who are your most affectionate servants: Now, I will pray
the sovereign Lord and God to inuirone your M. with his special protection in
the midst of all the perils and dangers wherewith you are besieged,
establishing your thrown in all justice and godliness, according to his most
holy will and pleasure.

A description of Italy, and the causes of the subtilitie of that Nation. Cap.
1.
THe Italians inhabit the right arm of the continent of Europe, which has
Spain in place of the head, France for the stomach, for the belly Germany,
and Denmark for the left arm: From that part of Italy which extends more
to the Southward, and from the other bounding North, with his two arms, which
are parts of the maine, entering further into the Sea then the rest of the
body, have from all times the other principal parts of Christendom,
sustained great ruins, cruelties, loss of goods and other oppressions: of the
first, because it goes far beyond all Nations bordering Northward, in
invention, craft and worldly policy, witness Aristotle, Strabo, Caesar,
Pliny, and other approved Authors: of the second, in respect of their
surpassing straight and corporal puissance, by reason of the cold situation
of the place. That which produces such effects in Italy, is the moderate
temperature of the clymate, situate in a subtle air near unto the sea every
where, without any excess heat or cold: and beside, another cause is, the
trading and great dealing that the Italians have with the people of Asia, of
Africa, and Europa, as also with the Ilanders, or a great part of them with
whom they haunt, and live. By reason whereof, besides that they are of
themselves very witty and subtle headed, all cunning slightes, crafty
conueyances, and deceitful cosinages, are so proper and common to them,
whereby they can fetch under other people, and are so cunning to finger from
them their money, and can moreover, so closely cover their actions, that of a
thousand hardly one could ever come within them to perceive their iugling. For
as any deceit or cosinage finely handled, is not perceived but of those which
know it, and look very near unto it, deceiving those which have their eye
but on the natural and external show: so there are none but those which
curiously seek out the beginning, the progress and aduancements of the Roman
and Italian government, and the means whereby they have drawn money from
other nations of the earth, since the time of Romulus, to this present day, who
can find out their fetches and shifts, or discover the maskes wherewith they
are disguised, to advance and enrich themselves by the overthrow and pillage of
others. Albeit, it is not enough when we have gone so far, if besides we
throw not away the mufflers which deprive us of sound and true judgment in
things of this world, as are custom, hate, love, obstinacy, and envy, which
are even so many plagues and corruptions, overthrowing quite the judgment and
clear understanding of man in all things: for if custom carry us away, the
Italian may prevail, not only of an hundred, but of more then a thousand and
five hundred years, which was the very time that Julius Caesar an Italian,
pillaged and ruined, not only France, but also all other parts of Europe.
Therefore we should deserve to be commanded and gnawen to the bare bone, for
ever hereafter, as well as in time past, that could look to these matters no
sooner. The cause of all, have been but our blind affections which pervert us
in true judgment, the which now we must needs cut off, to have only reason
for our guide, which is the true and essential difference, that separateth man
from other Animals, and makes him judge truly of all things: otherwise we
rob our selves of the most excellent and precious jewel we have, to become
as bestiall as the bruit beasts. From hence springs then also the cause of
so great diversity of opinions in our Continent, the principal and chiefest
part of the world, for that some suffer themselves to be governed by the clear
light of reason and understanding, and other some let themselves be carried away
headlong with their own affections and customs, and this is the cause why the
inhabitants of the Oriental. Asia under the dominion of the great Cham of
Tartarie, whose Empire is two thousand leagues in longitude, do hold him for
the son of God in earth, and why? those which live under the great Turk
believe Mahomet to be a greater prophet then Jesus Christ: and why? the Jews
scattered in great multitudes follow the customs of their fathers, rejecting
the true Messiah, to look for another: and why? Christendom is so troubled by
reason of the Romish constitutions, which some believe to be holy and
necessary to salvation, and others altogether contemn: being none other mean
of reconciliation amongst us, but to cast away these blind mufflers of
customs, hatred, and consideration of loss or gain, and to suffer our selves
to be directed by the clear light of the heavenly word, by the unsearchable
works of God, and by lively reason clarified with authentical histories of
time. Putting but this in practice once, we shall soon discover, and clearly
see with our eyes the wonderful deep subtilities of Italians, and hereafter
beware how we be ouerrought by their policies.

Cap. 2.
How in the persons of Romulus, and Numa Pompilius, their were two kinds of
gouernmentes prefigured among the Italians.

FIrst we will consider, even as in the murder of Abell, committed by Cain,
God did prefigure unto us, that the good should be persecuted by the wicked for
his service sake till the end of the world: so also in the person of Romulus
first founder of Rome, and murderer of his brother Romus and Tassius his
companion, as also in the person of Numa Pompilius, a most subtle and
ingenious inuentor of a forged religion, to establish his own government. God
would manifest unto us, that this nation should serve it self hereafter, with
murders and appearance of a counterfeit religion, to lay hands on others
kingdoms, and to snatch away the substance of other peoples: for we see even
as their first domination began at the first by effusion of blood, and after by
cloak of religion: so also it is come to pass, that the first glory of the
great Empire of the Italians, to the which all Europe was brought in subjection
and made tributarie, was gotten by the great murders so commonly committed in
the time of Marius and Sylla, contrived by Augustus Caesar, and by Anthony,
which luster being by long tract of time dimmed and extingnished, is by a
clean contrary manner restored and restablished under a fair show and cloak
of religion.

Cap. 3.
How the subtle Italian borrows the name of the Pope, to come to his
pretenses with more facility.

NOw I pray thee Reader, be not persuaded, that I mean by this discourse
contemptuously to blame the Popes of Rome in their own persons, or any holy
constitution in the Church of Rome: My desire is only to lay open the deep
reach and subtlety of the Romans, who by a great foresight and immutable
order, have been able so to handle their affairs, and to dispose of Popes, of
Kings and Princes of the earth, in such sort that they have got the head and
rule over them, and fetch round sums of deniers out of their cofers, and from
their commons besides. For proof hereof, I will maintain the like
preposition, that was held to Augustus Caesar, the greatest, happiest,
subtillest, and most pollitike Monarke of the world. It was this, That he
commanded indeed all nations, and all the world trembled at the excellency of
his nature, but yet that his wife commanded him, and his daughter her mother:
giving thereby to understand, that it was they that ruled only, borrowing his
name to authorize and establish what they listed. So I say, that whatsoever is
ratified, published and received under the name and authority of the Popes, it
is but the counsel and invention of the Italians of Rome, who to authorize
their doings, cover them with the name of the Pope, and therefore must be
attributed to them, as to the inuentors, persuaders, and contriuers of that
which proceeds from his holiness.

Cap. 4.
A lively pattern of Italian subtlety, in the person of Katherine de Medicis,
and her Florentine Counsel.

FOr confirmation of that which goes before, and for demonstration of the
matter, let us set before our eyes the estate of France, in the time that
Katherine de Medicis, Queene-Mother lived, and we shall see, as in a clear
glass, that she and her Council of Italians got between them the whole
government and disposing of all the affairs in France, into their hands, and
like bloodsuckers sucked the blood of the poor people so dry, as if it had
been crushed out in a wine press: so that by such cruelty, men perished in
France by famine, nakedness, and hearts grief, by thousands and millions, and
never were there so many died by poison of Serpents and other venomous beasts,
nor by the cruelty of Tigers, Lybbards, Crocodiles, Lynres, Bears, and other
devouring beasts, since the creation of the world, as by their tyrannous
cruelty, showed whilst they bore the sway. This could not any one French man
perceive to come to pass, for so small a matter, as to have matched ye daughter
of an Italian Duke with a younger brother of France: But herehence proceeds
it, that this nation is so ingenious and subtle, that upon the least occasion
which may be, it makes way and mean to enterprise and effect the greatest
matters in the world, and moreover, to lay the blame and grudge that comes
by their stingings and exactions upon other men's shoulders: fine workmen I
warrant you: that can so closely cover their dealings with the name and
authority of great Prelates, Kings or Princes, that the hatred and blame may
lie upon their necks, and the profit be put in their own purses. And sure
this nation can make so sure way so far before hand, and so contriue their
plots, that then at the length only men can perceive them, when it is clean
past their power to find out any remedy to prevent them.

Cap. 5.
How of any light occasion, this Nation can devise to effect great matters.

FOr evident proof hereof, this Italinesse had not remained long time in
France, but Monseur le Dauphin, who was to rule over us, as lawful heir to
the Crown, vanished quickly by some perfume, or by some other Italian devise,
thereby to give entrance, and make a gap for the Italians to rush in, to the
managing of the greatest parts of the affairs of France. And this occasion
being redoubled by the death of King Henry, they took fast hold of her hair
which grows before, not letting her slip out their hands to run after her,
judging the two best means to procure the government of this estate to this
woman and themselves, was first of all to bring up those which should rule over
us in all lasciuiousnes and pleasure, to make them more effeminate then their
own mother, and likewise in the ignorance of good letters and in well
governing an estate, to the end that their Italinesse being more forward in
knowledge of these things then they, (to the great advantage of Italians) might
sease wholly on the government of the kingdom, and the entire disposing of all
France: and secondly, to sow debates, and stir up wars among the French,
least that their union and concord might disturb or not permit the rule,
government, and advancement of a strange nation over them, who could not
suffer or permit any government to the only daughters of our Kings of France
it self,

Cap. 6.
The Roman sows divisions, and puts away the snbstance of a people, to
enrich himself, and to do with it at his pleasure.

THese two breaches being made in the body of France, the Italians persuading
themselves, that if then when they had yet no way to set in foot, which was
but in the time of K. Henry, they were able to frame among them such disorder,
that Francis the first, having left seventeen hundred thousand crowns in his
coffers, albeit he had paid ransom in Spain: the said Henry having reigned
but a while, had left his heir behind him indebted forty three Millions,
which was a most strange and marvelous debt, considering the great tributes
which he had exacted of his subjects, of the employing whereof, there could be
none account heard, notwithstanding the best friends and lovers of the
communaltie, made a motion and were very instant. They have at this present
far more ability by the authority and subtilitie of their Italinesse, to
prosecute the ruin and utter subversion of this estate: the which to bring to
a low ebb: they must fill full of civil wars, and so over load with such
heavy burdens of subsidies, taxes, and new rereages, that they poor people
remained quite ruined and trodden down, so that it could never since recover
foot again: and the better to fear and torture them thereunto, to lock them
up in prisons, and there to make them rot miserably, if they did not pay their
intolerable ransomes, exceeding in many parts of France, more by the third
part then the yearly revenue of the poor Pesant did amount unto: not
disburdening him thereby any thing at all of his charges in finding soldiers,
of whom he was daily sore gnawen, devoured, beaten, and oppressed, besides the
extremity showed unto him in paying the fines of his wine, without the which
he could by no means be discharged. Thus this subtle nation having gotten on
their side some Italionate Frenchmen, to take their parts, and to fortify
them somewhat more: as also to lay part of the blame of these pilleries on
their backs, do all things at their own will and pleasure, to the enriching of
themselves, and to the utter ruin of the poor commons, who abide the greatest
smart of all. And he which would desire to know what is become of all these
excessive heaps of money levied in this kingdom: let him go to Florence, to
behold the sumptuous buildings which there have been erected by our ruins, and
there let him see the wondrous wealth wherein many Florentines swim, which
came but like poor snakes into France, and now how they have altered their
state. But if the people of France had had as much wit and wisdom as they:
they should at the first have laid their heads together, and concluded to have
chased them back into their own country, and foreseeing the debates and
quarrels that they began to sow every where in France, have sent them back to
their own home: as they themselves once served the French, when they were in
their country, in like manner.

Cap. 7.
How this Nation going about to ruin a country, begins with some one
estate, and from thence comes to all the rest by degrees, and how the French
can by no means take such opportunity when it serves them.

ALthough they have been always void of all mercy and compassion toward the
poor people, having drenched them dry, and brought them to great misery, yet
they have showed as little favor as might be to Churchmen, making them to be
gnawen to the bare bone with tenthes, and to be pulled a hole lower by sale of
their goods, maintaining all inequality amongst them, making floods of riches
to run down the heels of some Italianate spirits, their coherents, and as for
those who take pains daily in divine service, which the French Romans will not
meddle withal, nor so much as with the tip of their finger to turn over one
leaf of it, they may have a sore drowth, but the devil a whit of drink will
they give them to cool their thirst. Their Nobles they were saluted so
oftentimes with summonings to assemble themselves, who held any lands of the
Crown, to be seassed for the affairs of the wars and payment of soldiers,
and withal put to such pinches and dangers, to ruin one another: with such
extreme costs and charges raised by the vain enhancings of their gold chains
of their Order, for all paiments and wages employed only for the pays of the
Italians, and other strange nations. As for the Officers, although that their
offices were sold unto them in the wane of the Italian power, ten times dearer
then in the reign of any former Prince or King, they were so fleeced and
pulled away by substitution of others, that did rob them of all the profit
and honor that might grow thereby, who in their turn also were pilled and
brought to nothing, by restoring the money that was sucked from them, that first
bought them: so that by that time all their lands were counted, there was
nothing to be laughed at on no side: but only the Florentines and their
partners, who might well laugh in their sleeves, having so much the more to
drink, filling their purses, with the emptyings of others, so that by such
devises they have so well sucked out the substance of the French, that since
the coming of this Italianesse into France: they have picked more pence out of
the coat of this people, then during the reign of twelve Kings before. The
tokens whereof most manifestly appear, especially upon the poor pesants by
their nakedness, who go apparrelled but with old linen cloth in the greatest
coldes, and are besides constrained to humble themselves so low, as to live
upon Oats and Pease like bruit beasts. The cause and original of all these
miseries proceeding of the marriage of one Italinesse in France, aspiring to
make way for her adherents, and to get the Crown into her own hands, making our
kings odious to the whole world: and this shows well, that they are so
ingenious, that of the least occasion that may serve to favor them: they know
how to find and fetch out greater advantages, far beyond the reach of any
nation in the world beside. This thou shall easily perceive, if with the
consideration of that which goes before, thou cast but thine eye of
understanding upon the French, to see how great a number of the Kings daughters
have been married into Italy, as Madame Renee daughter of King Jews the
twelfth, to the Duke of Ferrara: others to the King of England, and into
Spain, to the Dukes of Sauoy, and of Lorraine. By means of whom, although
they were all descended of far more noble houses then her, yet the French
could never by any such occasion tyrannise and impouerish these people, never
making the least commodity thereby, or get any other preferment: but to the
contrary, they still left behind them very much of their own, as in the
marriages of the King of Spain, and of the Duke of Sauoy, where they got to
their shares the fairest fleeces and conquests of France. And this may very
well show how gross witted we are in France, and how ingenious and subtle the
Italian is at every opportunity that may happen. See wherefore I would feign be
able to persuade the Popes, quite to forsake this nation to come into
Swicerland, and into France, very courteous and good people: to deliver
themselves from the yoke of that nation which is the most corrupt in the whole
world: for if one only Italinesse were able to chain our Kings at Paris, and
within a little therabouts, and with one wink of her eye make tremble
Constables, Marshals of France, governors of provinces, and by the least word
or letter alter the Parlaments of France, what may ten 1000. Italians do,
enuironing a Pope? It is certain, they may force his will by violence,
depriving him of his liberty in his government of ye church. Or if he bow not
that way which they would have him, they will not stick to give his holiness some
dram of such perfume, as they did to the deceassed Queen of Navarre. This is
the cause why commonly we see four or five Popes to die, during the reign of
one Emperor. Wherefore he should do well either for love of his life or his
liberty to retire and come away from amongst them.

Cap. 8.
Upon what occasion the Romans changed their Monanarchie into a populer
estate: that is to wit, upon the rauishment of Lucretia, committed by their
king Tarquinius.

But to make a more lively representation of the great wisdom of the Italian,
we must mount a little higher to the beginnings, progress, and advancement of
this admirable domination, whether by degrees it has elevated it self in
perceiving the Tarquins their kings were very vicious, and nothing valerous,
they spied out matter enough quickly against them to be rid of them, so iumpe
at that time fell out for their purpose the rauishment of Lucretia, perpetrated
by Tarquinius their King: whereupon they made a commotion against him, by and by
to thrust him out of his kingdom: not that they meant to restablish any other
in his place, but to alter this form of government (although it be absolutely
the best, when kings rule as they should do, and behave themselves well) and to
institute another, which should exalt them (as they thought most likely) above
all other peoples, and make them all tributarie to them. Now this was their
order, to have a Senate wherein men of the greatest spirits, very well
learned and experienced were only admitted, by whom every year should two
Consuls be chosen, who should always have the conduct of wars: and besides
if any important affairs chanced, then was there elected one to be a Dictator,
and such a one as was most worthy of all Italy to command and to resist, whom
soever came against the Romans. So that if one Consul lost a battle, the
estate was not thereby overthrown, because his fellow had mustered in a
readiness another Army ready to fight and give battle again, so that if he
also were vanquished, they had for all that good hope yet, being the Dictator
to come, upon whose valor and experience, they most of all relied, (as on
Marius and Fabius,) for he set in incontinent for the third man. This is the
reason, that when the enemies of the Romans had gotten two fields against
them, as diverse times did Pyrrhus and Hanniball, they were not dismayed for all
that, and thought themselves thereby never a whit the more overcome, whereas
contrariwise, if any King, Prince, or common wealth had once had an overthrow
by a battle in the field, they could not so soon recover their loss, but
would judge themselves straightwaies ruined, and overthrown. By this mean,
their domination seemed altogether invincible, till by their own Armies, by
civil broils and domestical iarres, they conspired their own ruin and
destruction.

Cap. 9.
How the Romans by pretense of their Faith, found means to augment their
Domination.

ALbeit, that this so goodly order and form of government might have been
sufficient to make them surpass all other people, yet they perceiving that the
breaking of faith and promises, did work the ruin of all estates, that made
no conscience to violate them: the Italians well advised hereof, as those that
saw well enough that Faith was the most firm band of humane society: and
that where it reigned not, even did stand very flipperie, and were always
staggering, tottering, and shaking with fear, and mistrust: to the end to
bind themselves most strictly to the observation of the same, and to make all
the world believe that they would inuiolably keep their promises, they builded
a Temple of FAITH: to the which they gave great honor and reverence. Whereupon
every one assuring them selves in their fidelity, desired their league and
friendship, and to cover them selves with their protection and favor, sparing
neither tribuite nor subjection to obtain the same. This was a most rare piece
of policy and wisdom, found out by them, whereby they bore sway, and drew
profit from all other peoples: albeit otherwise the Italians were far
surpassed by them in number and forces. Hereby may we then see evidently, that
they have a spirit more sublimate and ingenious, then any other nation that
lives under the scope of the heavens.

Cap. 10.
The ruin of the first Roman Domination, and the causes thereof.

But as all earthly things come in process of time, to fail in glory and
natural force, so this brave Signiorie which seemed to sway the whole earth,
fell at last to decay and ruin, because at the first beginning they did but
shave and clip those which were subiugated and forced to take hold on the
cords of the empire, to make them a little gentler and tamer: afterward they
fell roundly to fleying of them: besides the horrible and detestable cruelties
of Nero, Caligula, Commodas, Heliagabalus, and other such like monsters, made
this nation odious, and spited of many others, who beginning a little to
discover, that the Romans had not brought them in subjection by any greater
power or multitudes, whereby they excelled them too that ways, but rather had
gotten the upper hand, by sowing quarrels amongst them, by supprising them
unawares, and establishing among them a better order of military discipline,
then was before: they resolved with hazard of their lives to overthrow their
tirannie, and to pull down their intolerable Domination to the ground.
Amongst other the people of the North, enuironing the left arm, I mean the
Goths, the Saxons, and Hungarians who having experience of their strength, to
be far passing that of Italians, observing a better order in their warfare
then before, set forward and prosecuted so lustilie, the course of their
hearty enterprises, that they became in short time masters of the city of
Rome, and many other parts of Italy. In like manner Arthure a most valiant
king of England, accompanied with six hundred thousand men, victoriously
overthrew Lucius the Roman Senator, marching with no less number of
soldiers then he, pretending to make the English tributarie, as they were
before time. The Gauls likewise cast of their yoke, and the Almaines got from
them the dignity imperial, into their own hands, whereupon ensued the
total subversion of this their first earthly violent, and forced Domination,
under the which, they had yoaked in the necks of all the rest of the people of
Europe.

Cap. 11.
Of the beginninges and first foundations of the second Domination of the
Romans in christiandome.

THey then perceiving by their profound wisdom, that there was no means to be
had, for the reestablishment of their first Domination, because the nations of
the North most strong and warlike, had made proof that the corporal strength
of Italians, was far inferior to theirs, and that it was impossible to bring
them ever so low again by arms or force, to yield them that obedience they
had done in former time: yet the Italians lay other ambushes for them, and
begin to deceive these people, to bring them under again, by a victory
altogether spiritual, voluntary, and nothing at all carnal, tastiug nothing
but a spiritual government, and such a one as might guide men to life
everlasting: and to lay the foundation stones of this Domination: they must
uphold that there is none other mean to be brought for the confirmation of the
christian Church, but by establishing of a sovereign Head and universal
Bishop, in like manner forsooth, as it is in the Monarchies and Empires of the
world. Persuading themselves, that if they had carried away this point once,
they might very well prevail in the rest, seeing that Rome had been the
seat of the rulers and Emperors of the earth, they might rather then any
other nation com by this prerogative, to dispose of christian people, under the
cloak and authority of their universal Bishop, at their own will and
pleasure, so that they might without ever striking stroke, or shedding blood,
be kings, and make money come apace from al provinces, which should protest to
hold ye christian part. And for a fairer show and more credit of the matter, it
were very meet to publish by word of mouth, by report and writings, that
Rome had been the seat of S. Peter, and that he suffered martiredome there, so
that thereby he had planted in that city a more excellent dignity and
prerogative, then in any other city of the world.

Cap. 12.
How in creating an universal Bishop at Rome, the Italians entered into
possession of a far more excellent Domination, then that which they had lost
before.

THese two points being once granted them, the Italians might very well
dispose at their pleasure, of all christiandome, putting on but the cloak and
authority of their universal Bishops. This was an easy way for them to hold,
for the recovery of a more excellent Domination (being now spiritual and
heavenly) then the first which they had lost, and by this prerogative might
they make the purest and most precions gold and silver of all christianity,
to fly to Rome. It was most easy of all to make this current among other
Bishops: persuading them that all this did but increase their dignity and
profit, and inuest them with a power to make head against the kings of the
earth, to cast of their yoke, and neglect all their magistrates. By reason
whereof, this invention was found good, and passed quickly without any
contradiction: but there was only a little strife between the Bishop of Rome,
and him of Constantinople, for the superiority of them two. But yet on the
Italians side, there was no mean to make them forgo this dignity, they would
in no wise lay it down, because they foresaw that thereby they could make what
doctrine they listed curra^t throughout all churches, and their constitutions to
be received every where, as the decrees of their sovereign and heavenly
Court: they could make them selves redoubted and feared of the kings, and
princes of the earth, as though they were the only Porters of heaven gates,
and that no man could come in there, but by their leave, mean, and favor. To
make the rest of the Clargie receive this invention, there was no more ado,
but to perform it with a smell of the augmentation of their dignity and
profit, and they straight ways embraced it, with all joy and gladness: for
whilst that men are living here in this earth, very few are found, but will
suffer themselves to be infected with such plagues, which (as Galen says) are
Avarice and Ambition, which bring unto the soul that which the falling
sickness does bring to the body. And if there be any found any found
amongst the rest, which have the glory of God, and the salvation of men in
greater regard, it is in so small number, that the greater part shall soon
overcome the better, and bring them quickly to a contrary bow.

Cap. 13.
How the people follow none other religion but that which their Pastors teach
them, and how the Romans give us one according to their own nature.

TOuching the people (by whom I comprehend Nobles, Citizens and Pesants) in
matter of religion, they will embrace that which their Pastors shall preach
unto them, or that wherein they have been brought up, without making any
further choice: So that if a man be of the Empire of Tartarians, he will frame
himself to the form of divine service that is there established: in like
manner will he do that is borne among Turks and Jews, Lutherians, and
Catholics: the worst is when he is grounded in one, he will take no knowledge,
nor make none examination of any other, but will have them all in detestation,
and shall be as glorious in his own, as if he had found some precious treasure
of inestimable valor, especially when he has his eyes dimmed by sensible,
terrestrial, and human religion.

The Italian is not here to seek how to deal with him, he can handle the
matter so well, that he will fetch some substance from him, without any war
or violence, and at his own pleasure: and to effect the same, he has no more
to do, but to win to his side the Doctors and Priests, which instruct the
people, who may teach them a religion which is altogether agreeable to their
own nature. But here is the point of controversy, which has and shall be
ever betwoone God and men: that God will be honored with a service agreeable to
him self, and of the quality of his own nature, to wit, spiritual, divine,
and heavenly: and we human creatures, clean contrary will serve him with a
service that is nearest and best agreeing to our own nature: for it is his
will, that when we adore and invoke his holy name, we should lift up our
spirits above the heavens: and we desire to find him here below on earth, in
our Temples, under some visible form, which we may see and touch, because that
our earthly nature takes far greater delight, in that which it sees with
the bodily eyes, then to transport it self in spirit above the azured heavens,
so far distant from us. In like manner those which will make their prayers to
the saints of Paradise, take great pleasure to have their images here below on
earth, saving a long journey to go into the kingdom of heaven to seek them.
God will have his divine service proceeding from his divinity, and such a one
whereof he himself is the author: and we take more delight in that which is
human, and proceeds from our own brain, because it most consists in
visible things, to be beholded with these our bodily eyes: as are sumptuous and
goodly Temples, glistering with costly glass windows, triumphantinges, lively
pictures, images exquisitely carved forth, most precious clothes, of Arras,
Chalices, Crosses of the finest Ducket gold, height of Piramides, Copes of
crimsin velvet, others of cloth of gold and silver, which are things most
pleasant to the eyes to behold. And to delight the hearing with songs of
Mnsicke, noise of Organs, and sound of Belles: al these things are delectable
in deed, and have some show of humane wisdom, for all that have they not God
for any Author: neither did Jesus Christ nor his Apostles ever institute or
occupy the like: rather they taught us to despise the world, and all that is
therein, to aspire up to heaven, instructing us to renounce our selves and all
the lusts of the flesh, to do the holy and perfect will of God, to take up
our Cross and wade through many tribulations into the glory of God. And this
cannot we abide, we must have a religion which will help to augment our
dignities and earthly riches, that we may live here in all voluptuousnes and
security. And because the Gospel taken in his purity is quite contrary to
that, there is nothing in the earth that this nation hates more, then to hear
speak thereof: far preferring a worldly felicity present, which by no
means they will forgo, upon hope of any eternal, absent, and hidden joys
which are to come.

Cap. 14.
A comparison of the divine service invented by the Italians, with the counsel
of some subtle Physician.

HE that would thoroughly examine the form of Religion planted by the Italians,
by the authority of their sovereign high Priest, shall find all these things
before truly observed amongst them. So that flying thereby, with wings swifter
and stronger then the wings of any Engle, they are able to beat down to the
ground those that are so saucy as to withstand in any thing, or gainsay in any
wise the forms of their services, which they have introduced to fetch under
their subjection, the greatest Potentates of the earth, and to draw thereby
deniers and revenues from them: imitating herein some crafty Physician, who
preferring a good booty of silver before the health of the sick patient: will
learn what meat and drink pleases best his appetite, and having found, that
he loves claret wine above all things, and sugar to make it have a dainty
taste, which he takes: imagine that he go visit the patient, who will
straight begin to tell him, how he can get no recovery of his sickness, albeit
he has used much blood letting, taken many pills, and other physic, which
has brought him very low, and put him to much pain: this same impudent
Physician that tell him, that all that served but to weaken him, and to take
away his stomach: and by moving a question to the sick patient, shall ask
him, if he love not well good claret wine? He answering, with all his heart,
this Physician shall reply, that he will warrant him to recover his health
again, if he leave taking these hard medicines, and those pills so bitter in
swallowing, and to get some dainty wine of most delicious taste, if he should
send his man ten miles for some, to have always at the least, three or four
good bottles in his Celler in store. And bid him besides, least the vapors
should sum too much to intoxicate his head: to take Coriander comfits at the
end of his repast, and assure him that this will make him more lusty again
then all the physic in the world. I let you judge with what audacitie the
sick shall dare to embrace this counsel? But if it chance after he has been
very ill, and his sickness begin to grow away, he come to recover straight here
upon, how will he honor this Physician? he shall never be able sufficiently to
set forth his praise. But in the service of God it is otherwise, we must eat
the bread of affliction and sorrow, drink the water of bitterness, which are
very bitter and loathsome drugs to swallow, as things much offending our
taste, whereas in the service invented by the Italians, there is nothing but yt
which is very pleasant to our humane senses, and which does very well agree
with our carnal nature: and therefore do ignorant men embrace with a most
ardent desire, all that they invent, which when they have once received, is
hard to be rooted out of them, because their eye sight is not quick enough to
discover the mark whereat they shoot, which is only to bear rule, and to
share and make boot of the money which they get from them.

Cap. 15.
That they care not at Rome for any diversity of Religions, so they tend only
to maintain their Domination.

THis is most manifest, for if any man invent any new form of religion never
known before in the world, apparelling himself after a strange fashion never
seen before, using iestures altogether rediculous and foolish: living after a
most austere, to cruel and brutish manner, as do the Capuchians, Fucillians,
and such like foolish orders of Friars, all shall be approved and received by
the Italians with great plaudities, so that such religions will serve them for
a wall and defense for their kingdom and gain: but if any one appear or come
near them that dare speak against such abuses, and touch them to the quick a
little, leaning upon the pillar of that doctrine, which has been given from the
terrestrial Paradise, they will shake a heaven and earth, and remove all a
world, to stop his mouth and kill him, with great exclamations, that he went
about to sow new doctrines, and begin some new sect of religion: whereby we may
clearly see, that under this cloak of religion, they do but aspire to be
rulers; and to finger money from other peoples and nations: and that all the
wars and civil broils which have so long troubled Germany, Swicerland, all
Flanders and France have been broched and begun by them for such matters,
albeit, those who had the conduct thereof, enterprised them for the zeal they
bore to their own religion.

Cap. 16.
That the Romans are not contented to stay themselves with that which is
spiritual, but would also dispose the kingdoms of the earth at their pleasure.

THat the Italians shoot at this mark also, I bring evident proof, that when
they had set their matters in so good forwardnes that the Emperor and the
other Christian kings had granted this title of sovereign high Priest and
universal Bishop to their Prelate of Rome: for to be a greater stay and
pillar of the Christian Church, and to keep the other Bishops and Pastors in
better order, and within the compass of their duty, they are not content to
rest with that: pass further, and cause to preach and publish by word and
writing, that their Bishop is Christ's only Lieftenant on earth: to whom all
Scepters and Crowns must yield humble obeisance and be subject, having full
power to take them from whom he list, and give them again to others, as it may
best please his Holiness. And touching the kingdom of heaven, he has it so at
commandment, that he has power to open it to some, and to shut it to other
some: as he that keeps the keys of heaven gates in his own hands: as for
Hell, his power serves him as well to send thither whole Cart loades of
souls, no man so bold for his life as to ask him why nor wherefore. These
things made Kings and Princes so sore astonished, that the Emperors at their
Coronation abase themselves so low, as they promise to serve the Pope, for
Subdeacon to hold the stirrope while he get on horseback, and to lead his
Horse by the bridle a little while. A worthy piece of homage for the Italians
to remember, who have exalted their Sea and Bishop to so great pre-eminence. Of
which act they may be well ashamed, as also of the dispossessing of
Childericke, descended from Pharamond, of the Crown of France, to inuest
Pipin, great Master of the Palace, whom he had sent with his Army to succor
the Romans, against other Italians, in recompense of his conquestes which he
forgave the Pope, and the people of Rome, which was a reward out of other men's
purses, for it cost Childericke full dear. He learned not this by the
succession of the Apostles, neither did he herein imitate Jesus Christ, for he
himself paid tribute to Caesar: and he (whose heir and successor he says
he is) teaches him another lesson in his first Epistle, Fear God, Honor the
King. And S. Paul writing to the Romans, wills that every soul be subject
to the higher powers: and that in resisting them, they resist the ordinance of
God. Likewise S. John Chrysostom interpreting this place says: that by these
words, ( Every soul) is meant Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Bishops and
Monks, none excepted. In like manner the high Priests representing the person
of Jesus Christ, did never enterprise to make such braueries against David,
Solomon, and their successors, kings of Jerusalem. Is it then likely that a
Bishop or poor Monk should go about such high enterprises of his own motion?
we may easily judge that it is the Italians of Rome, who under the covering of
their names, and by their subtle means extort from them such things to make
themselves rulers, and get money under the mask of their authorities from other
peoples and nations of the earth.

Cap. 17.
That to make the kings of the earth vassalles tributary to the Romans: they
sow wars amongst them, and use Censures.

ALthough the Italians having advanced their capital City and high Priests
to so high dignity and sovereignty, ought to have rested content without
encroching any further: yet such is the natural inclination of this nation,
that having an inch granted them, they will take an ell: they begin now to cast
about and devise some means to wind under their arms the necks of Christian
Kings and Princes, to bring them to be their tributarie vassals. To make way to
this, considering that from the beginning the Popes were not admitted in the
election of Emperors or the Kings of France, by reason whereof, they could not
so well master them, nor turn and wind them at their pleasure, because they
durst not enterprise against them so freely: the Council of Rome takes away
this obstacle, and works so well in the matter, that the election is
translated to the Priests of Rome, who are my Lords, the Cardinals. That once
dispatched, seeing themselves greatly advanced thereby, they contriue other
means which they see more fit to effect their purposes, whereof one is to
stir up wars and debates between Christian Kings and Potentates, whereby
they may destroy and weaken them selves, by their own proper arms, and bow
more at ease their necks under the Italian Domination. The other is by the
Popes censures to set them together by the ears with domestical and civil
quarrels, and in the mean time while they jar, to get some province or
kingdom from them into their own hands: it is long since the Romans
understood this practice: yea a good while before the domination of Caesar. For
desiring to bring Greece in subjection, wherein there were two invincible
leagues, to wit: of the Achayans and Ethobians, who held so fast together, that
it was impossible to vanquish them any way by arms: they found out this hole
to enter in, to make them fall to wars and divisions among them selves, so to
ruinate their own country, that they might more easily set foot into their
provinces. And if we look well unto the violeries that Caesar won on this side
the mountains, the Italians redoubting the Switzers, more then any nation in
the world, as Cicero says in his Philippickes, we shall see that Caesar
charged them by surprise, at great disadvantage, and against the law of arms:
they having passed the one half of their army over the river Soane, and the
other remaining on the other side of the river, could not come to fight: being
as yet then no declaration made of open war, between the Switzers and him.
Besides he took Ariomistius chief Captain of the Almanes, and all his
troops at unawares, and assailed them in time of truce: after to cover his
sport, and to make the matter good, he said that he had discovered, how they
went about to surprise him. By means whereof having furnished his army with
two strong and warlike peoples, and having by divisions that he sowed every
where, got most of the Gawles on his side: being beside very skillful to keep
good order of military discipline: it was an easiie matter for him to
overthrow all other peoples. Amongst the rest the English withstood him most
courageously at the first, and gave him repulse, but he went another way about
with them, for before he departed, he kindled such quarrels and divisions among
them, in the which they were very hot one against another before he returned
to set upon them again: wherefore it was an easy matter for him to vanquish
and conquest them afterward.

Cap. 18.
The Council of Rome, sets kings and christian princes together by the
ears, and the way how they discover all their counsels and enterprises.

THe Roman Council has got some more advantage by this their policy and
device, since the creation of their Pope: for pretending to bring all kings,
peoples and princes of christianity, Catholics, as well spiritual as
temporal unto their subjection, under cloak of their Bishops, they have
spunne the thread of all the wars which have been between the Emperors, and
other christian princes, so to bring them on their knees, and to undermine them
that ways, that they must still of force have recourse to them, as to a place
of refuge and protection, the only mean to pull down their hautie stomakes,
and to set the Italian far above them. To pass over this plancke well, they
have given the name of Cardinals to the priests of Rome, granting the sons
and brethren of kings and christian princes, to be honored with the same
title and estate: suffering them also to remain with their train amongst
them. To the end that by these their creatures they might handle and turn the
other at their devotion, make them arm their people, and march against their
neighbors at their pleasure, and disarme again and retire, their forces when
they should serve God. Considering also that by such persons, the Councels
wills, and determinations of kings and christian princes, to the which they are
called, should thereby be revealed and manifested to them. The quick spirited
Venetians, having long time since discovered this policy, being a people of
Italy very subtle, and well advised, would never permit that any
ecclesiastical person should be admitted into their Council, because they had
all taken the oath of the Pope of Rome. See then it appears that the Romans
are privy to all the counsels and enterpriser of the princes of the earth, and
of their highest and sovereign courts, they discover all their actions, as
well as if they were present, where on the contrary, not one of these can come
within them to under feel their consultations and dealinges, they are so close
and secret, whereby we may judge clearly, how far they surpass all other
people in invention and subtlety of wit.

Cap. 19.
The great force of Excommunication, to put the kings of the arth in fear, to
make them their tributaries, and the magnanimity of our kings in France.

NOw I come to another device of theires, by the which they have so cunningly
triumphed over the kings of the earth, never striking stroke for the matter,
and without any danger at al, and yet they have brought them under as much or
more then ever the ancient Romans did by their Trophies and great victories,
to wit: by excommunication, with the which they so frighted them, that if they
had never so little displeased them: by and by they were threatened with
rebellion of their subjects, to have their scepters taken from them, and
others to be invested therewith incontinent, having no way in the world to
resist or save them selves, but in humbling them selves under the greatness of
their Bishops, yielding them selves to be the Popes vassals, or in paying them
otherwise some great and intolerable tributes. By this means they exacted
from John king of England, that all his subjects should pay him a penny
sterling for fire, for the murder by him committed on the person of Arthure
Duke of Britanie, his own Nephew and heir, which tribute the Italians mined
from them, more then the term of trhee hundred years, albeit the fault of
this murder was not in the people, and therefore they paid this tribute very
unjustly, and against all reason. Yet they found means to augment this tribute
very much, by the death of the Archbishop of Cauterburie, who was executed by
command of the king. Yet had the Italians nothing to do in the matter, having
no interest at all therein, being neither his heirs nor children. Another
tribute was exacted of the Polonians, for the murder committed on the person
of Stauislaus their Archbishop, to, which is paid for S. Peter's tongue. The
Pope having thundered by excommunication against the duke of Venis, he was
feign to make him quiet, to creep on all four like a Dog, having a rope about
his neck, to be absolved. The kings of Navarre, and Granade for disobeying
him, were dispossessed of their kingdoms, which were bestowed on Ferdinand
king of Spain, yet the Italians did not forget themselves in this match, as in
deed they must nener: for it was upon this condition, that they should
afterward be held of their Pope of Rome. Pope Nicholas excommunicated the
kings of Naples and Sicilie: and making them turn over a new leaf, invested
the Duke of Aniow brother to Jews the ninth, yet not forgetting him self, as
we said before: upon condition to pay him eight thousand ounces of gold
yearly revenue. He excommunicated also Philippes le Bell king of France,
because he would not hold his kingdom of him, as his vassal: but he being
descended of the race of Hue le grand County of Paris, quaked not a whit at
the matter, but with a magnanimious courage, proper to the kings of this race,
constantly resisted, and never trembled at the hearing thereof, as other
christian kings did, whose great magnanimity has been continued by his
successors. This was the cause that the Italian Council laid their heads
together to do their uttermost to ruin this Monarchy, by foreign forces,
making it to be assailed on every side, and having set the Armies of the
Empire of Spain and England, to thrust this race out of their kingdom, which
seemed to them invincible. But perceiving all that took not effect, as they
did wish, they have filled the State full of civil wars, thereby to weaken
and diminish the force of this kingdom, and to make way to inuest some other
with ye Crown: who should think him self borne under an happy planet, and
greatly beholding to them, to come by it so easily, yielding him self
therefore there vassal and homager, having purloyned a kingdom by there
means. Who also would be easily entreated to let slip the accords confirmed
between our kings and the popes for the privileges, and liberties of the
French Churches, and touching the presentations of Benefices, reserned to the
Nobility and other patrones of the Layty, only translating them over wholly to
the Pope, and so to enrich more and more the city of Rome. And by this mean
we should see this flourishing kingdom parted, as a booty and pray, between
the Italian: keeping for his part, the spiritual, and his confederates who
should have the temporal for their shares.

Cap. 20.
That it is a very false pretext that they take, to refuse the King for his
religion sake, seeing they have a spite at all his race, and wish them no more
well, although they were never so great catholics.

THat this has been the drift of the Italians, the proof is most manifest in
this, that although Charles the ninth, and Henry the third of this name his
brother, were the most religious obseruers of the ceremonies of the church of
Rome, and more precise then any kings that had been before them, sparing
nothing to ruin and rout out the religion of the protestant Huguenots, not so
much as their own persons, life, treasure, nor livings, nor their faith and
honor beside, which is more. Yet for all that, could they never win the
favor and good will of the Italians, nothing near other princes, who had
wrought little in comparison of them. And what was the cause hereof but that
the Italians foresaw that a race of ancient, and so long time invested with
the Crown of France: would never abide that they should have any rule or
prerogative over them nor in no ways permit that the liberties and covenants
made betweee their predecessors, the kings, and the Popes for the benefit of
their kingdom should be infringed. This is the reason why the Council of Rome
has sought all means possible to enstall other princes in their room, and to
bring it to pass: have employed all their Preachers, begging Friars, and other
Ecclesiastikes, to vomit out all kind of blame and shame most opprobriously
against the said King Henry the third deceassed, placing him in the rank of
the most abominable tyrants, and murderers of the world, whom by their
count, he should surpass in the periode of all mischief: extolling above the
heavens with the highest titles of praise which they could devise, some other
Princes, thereby to adjure them, and make every one honor them, love them,
and make much of them. But to show that the Italians and their partners meant
no good, not only to the deceased Kings person, but also to all his race in
general, see we not plainly that when they had by treason caused him to be
murdered, they continue their selfsame practices toward those of the house
of Bourbon, issued of the last son of S. Jews, called Robert County of
Clermont? upon whom, seeing they can lay no blame, for that they are the true
and lawful heirs of this Crown, they think to disherite him who is the
eldest son and heir, whose place he holds and represents: upon a color
only that he believes not as much or more in the Constitutions of the Church
of Rome, as in the word of God, and by this text, they win the good will of the
people, and of other ignorant people. But when they contemn those of this
house, making war against them, who have been most zealous and affectionate
to their Constitutions, who have also for defense thereof, exposed their lives
and goods to all dangers, as have done the Dukes of Mont Pensier, both father
and son: do they not show, that they are thoroughly resolved to destroy this
race, and to translate this Crown unto some other progeny? Touching the King,
who is at this present: they should never be able to attaint or stain him with
note of any cruelty, tyranny, nor any other insufficiency to rule, for to
blame him for sticking to that religion wherein he has been brought up, it is
not likely they will, for the same reproach would fall upon their pates, if they
should not persevere in these. But he offreth them fair, and more then they
will accord to, that is to be heard in a place of free assembly, to eramine
lovingly all these things, and to stand to that which shall be awarded for both
sides. Wherein he shows, how impudently and falsely, they argue and condemn
him to be an heretic. And as for those who magnify and exalt the offspring,
and descent of other houses to make the world believe that this whence he is
descended, is base, poor, and of no name, they are less able to speak of the
great, high, and noble families of Christendom, then are Bats and Moles to
discourse of the greatness, height, essence, beauty, and admirable operations
of the Sun: for seek among all the Empires of the Assirians, Persians,
Grecians, Romans, Almans, Jews, Tartarians, Mahometans, and over all the face
of the whole world beside, and you shall not find a King of greater race, nor
of more ancient family then this, having had xxviii. Kings in his house before
him, and all lineally in race masculine: and of his mothers side being the
issue and heir of a Queen, who with her mother the sister of Francis the
Great, excelled in wit, learning, and hautie courage, all other Christian
Princesses, that ever have been before them. And touching the great bounty and
virtue both in time of war and peace of the house of Bourbon, neither Kings
nor Princes, since the death of S. Jews, but this race has far gone beyond
them, as all the Cronicles of France shall witness sufficient. And touching his
wealth, he has always had twenty times as much as has had any adversary he
has, having at ye time of his succession more then a million of rent, by his
patrimony and yearly revenue, which he might have multiplied to as much more,
if he would have pinched and sucked his subjects, by taxings, sales of Offices
and rearing of tributes, as some Italians have caused to be done in France.
Let them then lay away these false cloakes wherewith they disguise the truth
of things, and let us believe for a troth, as it is true indeed, that the
Italians seek nothing else but to translate the Crown into some other house,
which will bow their necks under their commandments, and suffer them to fish
this Realm for silver, to plant amongst us the Spanish Inquisition, to admit
the Council of Trent, and to take the right of presentations from the Nobles,
to finger them themselves, and wipe their noses of the best and sweetest
profits that belong to the Realm.

Cap. 21.
The great subtilty of the counsel of Rome in getting into their hands the
Souerantie of the newfound world conquered by the Spaniards.

But I cannot so often call to mind the conquest of the new world, as I
wounder at the great subtlety of the counsel of Rome, and again at the more
then great simplicity in the Spaniards and Portingales behalf: for the
Italians perceauing to their great grief their Domination and tributes, to be
cut of in the East and North parts, as well by the conquests of the Turk, as
by the preaching of. Luther, as also Pope Alexander the sixth had set in his
foot at the parting of stakes, and made the division: giving on half to the
one king and the other to the other, reserving for himself the seesimple,
principal Jurisdiction and Souerayntie, making these two Kings consent to be
his vassals, and to hold their countries of him, although he had neither right
of service, nor of possession, and was not the discouerer neither. Yet see,
this part was handled with such cuning and craft, that the Italian became
thereby Sovereign Lord of twice so much soil and country as all Christendom
under the name of their Pope, And by what mean? you shall not find it to be
by his great travels, perils, and expenses, but by the labors bloudshedings,
and arms of the Spanyardes who venture bodies and goods, exposing themselves
to infinte perils, troubles and hazardes, to shipwracks of the sea, in danger
of many Pirates and Rouers before the can come thither: and when the are once
there and entered into the country, fainte to fight many combats and battles,
and worse then all this, to fall into many strange and incurable diseases,
which proceed of change of air and habitation, when men transporte
themselves into far countries, where the clymate is of far more excessive
heat and cold then their own was. Now whileste these nations endure these
travels and sorrows, worse then twenty deaths, the Italians are at whom in
there sumptuas and brave palaces, out of all danger, passing the time in all
voleptuous pleasure, nevertheless they have the most precious and fairest
fleece of their conquestes reserved for them, even as well, as if they
themselves had bine the only attempters and atchiuers of these so hawty and
dangerous exploytes. But let us look a little if there were ever any Kings or
Emperors, who griped so easily whole countries and kingdoms from others, as
these do: Cyrus, one of the first, after he had sustained infinite turmoyles
and travels, lost his life and had his head put in a bole of blood, to quench
it so insaciable desire of blood: Alexander the great found himself in often
Ieoperdies to lose his also, and was many times over matched, and put to the
worst. Julius and Augustus Caesar's, the most politic and wisest heads of the
world, never made any conquest but by bloody fightes and victories, exposing
themselves to a thousand dangers both by sea and land: But now the counsel of
Rome taking there ease at their own home, never approaching any danger for the
matter, have invested themselus with the Seigniorie and Domination of the
greatest countres that ever have bine conquested by the sword. O subtle
heads, more subtle and cawtelous then subtlety it self. O that the high
reach of thine inventions are elevated many degrees abone all other nations of
the earth. O that thou forseest long before the event of things, and can
choose the gaynest ways to attain thy desires: few or none there be that can
discover thy meanning, thou winnest first the heart of the greatest part of
those; the third of whose ruin thon meanest to spin: afterward to underprop
thy self against those that refuse thy Domination, and will not become thy
tributary vassals. Thon wilt know all things, and yet thou will keep other
people in such ignorance, that they shall know nothing: thus thou use them at
thy pleasure, lest they should bewray thee in thy subtle shifts, and beware of
them hereafter. This is they reason why a long time thou have laid a block in
the way, that all matters of great consequence either concerning Religion, or
otherwise of any other great importance could not be registered but in thine
old mother tongue the Latin, and sore against thy will it has bine if the have
bine written or Printed in any other language because that it makes a breach,
and shows a ready way for many to come to discover the fertility of thy
spirit, abounding with so many subtilities, fetches, drifts, and deceites. See
this is the cause also why thou will not permit the nations of the new
conquested countries to understand any thing concerning religion or matters of
State, that thou may lead them by the noses, and handle them as if they were
so many bruit Animals that had neither wit nor reason.

Cap. 22.
The causes why the money that is transported to Rome, is called by the name of
Quintessence.

NOw we have sufficiently spoken of the Dominations of the Romans, we will
pass to the next point touching the extraction of the Quintessence of purses,
where ye must note that I take purses, for the gold and silver that is put in
them, speaking by a figurative speech, for I borrow these terms by a
similitude: for even as in all liquers, be it of Wines, Oils, Plants,
Sulpheres, Allums, Antymoines, and other Mynerals, they who are skilled to draw
out the tinctures or proprieties, and can separate them from the terrestrial
and elementall body, as could that great Philosopher Paracelsas Gesnerus, and
he that wrote the book entitled, le Medecin Liebant: these have the sweet
fruition of the finest and most precious part of the bodies and natural
substances, whereof the more celestial and spiritual part is called
Quintessence. In like manner the Romans having learned by incomparable skill and
artistry, to draw unto themselves the most noble portable, the most desirable
and fairest coin of all Christendom, leaving the grosser, and more
terrestrial sort of baser moneys to the Kings, Princes, and people of
Christendom for their usage, appropriating to themselves the more spiritual
and celestial part, which they can tell how to separate from the temporal and
earthly: are very well said to draw the Quintessence out of their purses*

Cap. 23.
Of the excellency of the money which is carried to Rome out of other
countries, and how the Italians only can fetch it thither.

TO show this by a familiar example, regard but a man that is of base
condition, who has only but fifty or sixty crowns of yearly rent for a
piece of land that he holds by feefarme, lying within the demaines of some
Baron or County, he will make more account of that piece, then of three or
four times so much lying among Pesants, or that he gathers among country
Farmers, bragging of it every where. Now see we some Bishop, or poor Monk
coming to be Pope, to have rentes and tributes out of the kingdoms of
Spain, Portugal, Naples, Sicily, and Polonia, and as he was wont also out
of the kingdom of England, where as all Christian Kings and Princes take no
tribute: but for the most part of poor, base and miserable people their
subjects, readier to take then to give, and this must they do by Taxes,
Subsidies, Fifteenes, and such like paiments. Herein we may see the marvelous
excellency of the Popes tributes above those of all our Kings. And to show how
the sweetest money and most desired of all, goes still to the parts of Rome:
mark but the common fashion of every one, that falls into want of money: he
wishes straight but to have a hundred or two of crowns out of the Abbots or
Bishops purse, who is next to the place where he dwells, as being such
fellows which have least need, and yet have the greatest plenty of all:
albeit, they may wish for it long enough before they have it to fill their
purses, because they can devise no shift proper for the obteining of their
desire, although they be his very next neighbors. But the Italians, they can
work such a way, and handle their matters so well, that they can scrape and
hook to them a thousand crowns from one place, and twice as many from
another, the distance of an hundredth leagues or more, and the difficulty of
passing over the mountains cannot hinder them a jot.

Cap. 24.
How that this money when it is transported to Rome, does fly with an
incredible swiftness.

YEt to prove better that the name of Quintessence, is properly attributed to
the gold that they share from other people of Christendom, I pray thee gentle
Reader, consider that the substance of Quintessence is of so celestial a
nature, that if it be not very closely kept, and enclosed within some vessel
for that purpose, it leeseth straight the virtue, and flies away by vapors
into the air: so this gold which they fetch so far to Rome, has such an
excellency more then all other money has, and has both value and virtue,
none like it, that we have: not only for that it is levied with such
wonderful celeritie, and unusual speed. (For when they purchase any
collection of money, or any other Bull of an Abbey or a Bishoppricke, they spare
no Horse flesh to gather up the sums taxed, and having gotten them up once,
they must go in post, and change Horse so often, that it seems the Fly with
a Swallows wings: no height of mountains, no rough, narrow, steep, stony,
hellow, crooked, nor raggie ways, no depth of snowes, nor hardness of yse or
frostes, no rivers that can stay or stop the passage of this money, it must to
Rome, it must fly, it must not creep on the face of the earth: and sure it is
of a wonderful swiftnes in comparison of the heaviness, delaie, and long time
that the moneys of Kings, Princes, and other great Estates are in getting into
their coffers, when oftentimes before they can get it in, they must force the
good will of their subjects, and be driven to choose out men that shall sit upon
their Subsidies and other Imposts, and others to collect the same, they which
will not take such charges upon them but by great constraint, and being urged
by necessity, and then the poor people pay such sums sore against their
will, putting it of as long as they may. Then must there be straining of
moueables, and much heauing and shouing to have them again, hatred,
despleasure, anger, ill will, much adoo, and great delaie on every side, so
that it will ask commonly three, or four months at the least, to collect,
and deliver in these Deniers to the receipts, although it might easily be
carried thither in three or four hours: and in very deed may be said to
march but with wodden legs, in respect of the swift course and great
celeritie, of that which is transported to Rome. This may very well show, that
the quality and nature thereof, is far more excellent and precious, then of
that coin which the Kings and Princes of the earth possess. Yet some may
peradventure reply, that that which comes by the sale of offices, approaches
very near the nature thereof, I will confess so, but I will also answer,
that such traffic is but an Italian trick and invention, for that by all
laws and ordinances, both of God and man, all such sales are forbidden as most
pernicious, and greatly damageable to the common wealth, and matters most
unworthy and unbeseeming all good Christians, that have the fear of God
before their eyes.

Cap. 25.
A description made, by learned men which has always feared the Council of
Rome, and the causes why.

I Think I have said enough of the Domination and filching of money, wherewith
the Italians have a great while prevailed to fill their pockets, and to master
the world. Now must I speak of the means wherewith they serve their turn to
maintain the^selus in their estate, and to make it good against al other. And
albeit, in invention and devising, the yare so cunning, and can pass and make
seem good to every one, that which they have invented and devised: yet are
they far more expert in keeping their estate, and can remove and prevent all
lets that may endamage them to hold their own. Foreseeing then that they had
entangled the people of Europe within their Domination, under the pretense and
cloak of religion, there was no more likelihood that the people might ever
pull their necks out of their yoke, being far grosser and harder to receive
any change, then the people of Affrike: seeing also that all that they feared
was, lest that some, addicting themselves to the contemplation of Gods works,
to the study of Philosophy, and to the reading and perusing of the holy
scriptures in the language wherein they were written, might view all the
religions that are used under the scope of the heavens, and seek out the first
causes, principles, and inuentors thereof, and having curiously examined all,
might make these conclusions: viz. that all religion is either divine or
humane: that the divine is proceeded from God, the other from men: that by the
divine, there is nothing required at our hands but to offer our selves, souls,
and bodies to God, to do that which is his will, which is to follow virtue, and
to fly vice, to call upon him and adore his holy name, and for our sins, I
have recourse unto the mercy that he offers us in Jesus Christ, the which he
offers us freely without our money or riches, only enioyning us charitably to
help and love one another. On the other side, casting their eyes upon humane
religion, they shall see that all religions that men have, whether they be
Pastors of the church, or who soever they be: for their authors, tend only
but to get rule, and to draw away the substance of those that embrace them, and
are fitter to tie men by the feet to this earth, then to carry them up to
heaven, where the seat of God is. Concluding likewise this: that, that
religion is best, by the which God is best served: then it must needs follow,
that following his will declared by his word, he is better served, then by the
traditions of men: wherefore we must not go beyond that, as being the only
object of faith, and as being the only thing which agrees with his Doctors
and Preachers in all the parts of the world, to wit, the Firmament, with his
admirable greatness and beauty almost incomprehensible: the Planets placed
between it and us: the air, and that which is engendered therein, the earth,
the water, and the creatures which live and move in the same, altogether
setting forth from the one end of the world to the other, the greatness,
majesty, wisdom, providence, power, and bounty of God the Creator and
preserver of the same. On the other side, serving to convince us of weakness of
spirit, of ignorance, of blindness, and vncapablenes to comprehend his essence,
his profound wisdom, and the mean whereby he has created all these things,
how he conserueth them in their being, and how he works every day in the
diversity of so many things which we see before our eyes, to learue us
thereby, that it is an intolerable auragancie, and presumption in men to
think to be his councellers, to make laws, like lictle Kings, in his Church,
which he calls the Kingdom of heanen, and his Spowse: to there great shame
which name themselves servants in the same, by whom agreat oversight and
rashness (not to be borne with all,) go about to establish in it certain
human Constitutons, as though they weere to command and not to obey. For
seeing that it is his Spowse: servants must not be so saucie as to make Laws
for her to be at their check. Seeing then that he is the sovereign King,
and him before whom all things are present, no man may enterprise such things
without encroching upon his kingdom, reputing himself of greater wisdom then
he, who is his creator, which are grievous offenses deserving very great
punishments, and clean contrary to our duty toward God, which is to show our
selves, humble, lowly and glad to be taught by him, and to tremble at his
words, as this Dampish earth an insensible and deaf creature taught us, at the
publication of the law, when it reeled, trembled and was ready to shake in
sunder at the voice of God. Moreover what fair show soever they can set on the
Constitutions of Pastors, the shall always be human, and whosoever obayeth
them, obayeth but men and there inventions. But he that would look with a
vigilant eye to the near examination and deep sownding thereof: shall easily
discover, that their only purpose is to amplify there authority more and more
still, and to draw coin from people secretly, selling that at an hard and
dear rate which God gives us freely, and offers us most gratis. And this is
the reason why the Italyans fearing lest the publications of such doctrine
altogether heavenly and divine, would make there Domination shake from the top,
quickly turn it up side down, and soon diminish all the profits that the
reap out of the countries of all Christendom, by means of their reaching
inventions: they have therefore by a most subtle piece of providence took
order in the matter that the Doctrine and lessons of these men come not to
light by remedies which seem to be the fittest in the world for their purpose.

Cap. 26.
The first means that the Romany use to maintain their Domination.

FIrst, to prevent lest any should attain to so great knowledge in the holy
Scriptures, that they should find out of themselves the most perfect and only
wholesome means of salvation to consist therein, and to despise all other
human services: the have caused all that concerns the Divine service to be
written and pronounced in a tongue out of use with all nations, the
understanding whereof cannot be attained, but in consuming many years great
travels, and much cost, to the end to keep the people still in ignorance of the
true way to serve God. Taking good heed not to translate it into Italian, lest
by and by they should prove to learned to suffer the council of Rome, to handle
them as they have done. And beside all this to use the matter so, that the that
understand Latin should not learn to much by the lecture of the Epistles and
Gospels, the have set down an order that the shall sing the^ with such a Note,
that those which understand the tongue very well otherwise, shall not
understand much more in that place, then the ignorant people: for to speak
troth the council of Rome uses the word of God no further, but so fare as it
will serve for there Domination and enriching in other parts of Christendom,
and would be willing that whatsoever therein is contained importing any
disadvantage to their dealinges, had bine cut of five hundred years since, for
that they have no need of it, observing therein very well the saying of a
certain Philosopher used in these speeches: Take heed lest in seeking to
much the Heaven, ye loose not the earth. Which is as much to say: that they
must prefere earthly things before the kingdom of God. As we see the Italians
do, interpreting or reading Gods commandments when the cutof the defenses
made in the law of God, against Images: whereof one is, not to make Images,
another not to bow down to them, and the third not to worship them. Would they
ever do this, think you, but that they foresee that the true understanding of
this commandment, would cool and freeze the zeal of those that bring offerings
to the worshipping of their Images, with the which they lick their lips full
sweetly. But they will not I warrant you, pervert or misconster this article.
Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church. All the world shall
hear, what these words signify, they will want no Trumpets for the matter,
that they may thereby be Dominators and Kings, and fetch in money by Cart lodes
to Rome: such force and virtue have those words, so sure a staff unto them is
the rock of S. Peter. See then this is one mean most ingeniously invented, to
contain the people within the obedience of the Roman Council.

Cap. 27.
A second mean that they have to keep men in their service still.

But judging that to be a sufficient remedy to withhold learned men, who by
reading of the holy scriptures, by true contemplation of things created by
the handie work of God, and by the great harmony of both these, joined
together, should be brought to the knowledge of the Creator, and to the true
service convenient for his holy name, and so fall to be opinatiue, rejecting
the Italian Domination, and by such means shake their so sure government, and
make it totter a little. Against whom being men well armed with sound arguments,
it were a most dangerous thing for the Italians and their suppostes to deal by
way of disputations: yet see they have defenses and ramparies to let them, for
making any breach in their Domination. First to make them hold their tongues:
no more but to give them some fat benefice, some Abbey or Priory, and to
school them a little with this lesson, that the verity which they say, they
know, is but poor and bare god wot, wearing but a third bare coat, never able
to make a man rich: (as it was apparent indeed in him who was the Verity it
self, having no place to hide his head in:) that beside it had the world, all
Kings and Princes of the earth for enemy. On the other side, he that would be
employed for Rome, she had to command all over ye world, and had the bestowing
of Bishoppricks, Abbeys, Priories, and Parsonages, to advance and make happy
all those that embraced their part. Now of a great number few or none stand out
with them, but are overcome with such temptations, and if there be any that
will not yield to them, we see by and by that the Bishops and their Officials
have them in chase, and do their uttermost to inflame the Magistrate against
them, to put them to death, as did the Priests of the old law, against Helias,
Ieremias, and the rest of the Prophets, and their successors, against Christ.
But if the Magistrates chance to wincke at them, the Council of Rome, has
caused Ecclesiastical Counselors to be admitted into all Courts of
Parliament to advise, stire up and inflame all Presidents, Proctors of the King,
and all other councillors to make open war with fire and sword against such
people, not without sore charge to the Judges, to look unto them, menacing
their negligence herein with double punishment. By reason whereof, it shall be
heard for them to escape their hands. Whereby appears, how great the carnal
wisdom of this nation is, to maintain and hold fast their revenues and
Domination.

Cap. 28.
The third mean whereby they fortify themselves with the Forces of three of
the most mightiest in all Christendom.

NOt to be destitute of any one aid that might stand them in steed, they found
means to arm themselves with the greatest Forces ye Christen men may yield,
when they perceived that by such fellows as are abouesaid, Princes, Cities and
commonweals might be pulled from them, which were no fish for Prouosts,
Controllers, nor Sergeants mouths: they backed themselves better with the most
strong redoubtable and puissant forces of all Christendom, as with the K. of
Spain for the head, with the King of France for the stomach, and the Emperor
for the belly, which are the principal parts of Europe. So that if a man open
his mouth to speak against their Domination, you shall see the Catholic
straightway, thunder down all with his Inquisition, and every man have a
fling at him. Is there any that will set upon them by main strength for any
other matter? Be the Lombards, Venetians, Neapolitans, or whatsoever they be,
they will but whistle at Rome, and by and by ye shall see marching to their
succor the Armies of these mighty Princes above named. But the Romans, they
will make themselves poor when they should pay them, and recompense their
travels: they can abide nothing worse then that. For Childericke the King of
France, for sending them aid, lost the Crown of France. And as for
satisfaction for any other aid that other Kings of France have given them,
they never put their hand to their treasures yet, to recompense them: nor never
adjoined any Duchy or kingdom to their Empire: but have always been pulling
from them. But in recompense of all their labors, losses and expenses, they
have given this word ( THRICE) which is used in forming a superlatiue, to the
King of France: although he had as much and more authority to take it to
himself, then the Romans to give it him. And to the King of Spain they have
given this word ( Catholic) which he might have taken himself if he would
have challenged it, no man to say nay. These names have continued from father
to son, as if they came by inheritance, by which the Italians have played and
wrought upon, as well the one as the other, as though the bare names had any
virtue or operation in them, to transform the persons, and to make them any
other then they were, which should be a most manifest abuse. But when that a
man has any quality of great virtue or vice, he may very fitly have some
name of honor or dishonor attributed unto him. As S. Jews was so called for
his holiness of life. Philip le Bell, for his exceeding beauty: and Philip le
Hardi, for his hardines and valor. But all this cannot be translated to their
heirs and successors, because they are but qualities of special persons, and
are proper to them only, from whom they cannot pass. For as it had bin a most
absurd thing to have termed Commodus an Emperor of Rome, and a most cruel
tyrant, a Saint and a Philosopher, because Marcus Aurelius his father, for his
rare virtues, sagesse and eloquence was so named: so also is there none
apparent reason why the Council of Rome, should denominate for flattery,
indifferently all the successors of this crown, Kings most Christian. No more
then with the Epitheton that was given to Charles le grand, (1. the great.) And
as for the title of Catholic, it was falsely attributed to the King of Spain,
because it signifies as much as vninersall King: that is, King ever all.
Whereas at that time he was King only but of the Spaines; for as yet then
reigned the King of Portugal: and beside he is not so much yet neither as King
over all Christendom. Although that such Epithets have been very unfit, and
falfly attributed indifferently to all: yet we see by such toys and devises,
they have with a wet finger drawn more Forces to their succor out of these
kingdoms, then at this present twenty millions out of any other Princes
purse, would do out of all Germany. By giving them only these names and titles,
they make them march when they list, using them like the great Canary Dogs,
which are tied fast with a long chain and a collar. As for the Emperor to
keep him under, they have bestowed on him some kingdom or Princedome, to make
him their own creature and vassal, yet under the name of their Pope, to set
him forward, or pull him back as they list, and at their devotion. And all
this to the end, that if any went about to shake or endomage their Domination
at the head, he should straight assail and be shaken off by the Catholic
King, if he came against the breast, the most Christian King should trownce
him, if he made at the belly, the Emperor should tear him: so that he should
be met withal what way so ever he came. Turn over and read the Histories of
the memorable acts and deeds of all nations in the world, and find none that
ever has so iusteled Kings and Emperors by a voluntary Domination, to make
them march, without any pay at all, as has done the Council of Rome. I speak
not only by these but by an infinite number of others, so he have bin glad to
obey and follow them at all times, whenever they stood in need.

Cap. 29.
A Demonstration how the Council of Rome wins to their side, Princes,
younger brothers, and makes them their voluntary slaves.

But the sublimation of the Italian spirit is remarked to fly far above all
other nations of the world, herein especially, that perceiving a few years
since, there were found many men of great spirit in the Councelles of these
Monarkes, who discovering their drifts, began to counterchecke them a little,
not stirring a whit at the first sound of the Trumpet, coming from Italy, as
they were wont to do in times past, they have made a cunning prouiso for this
matter, drawing into their confederacy and league, certain younger brethren
of the best houses of the Princes in Christendom, who being not surcharged
with too much revenues, nor too great governments, to employ themselves, run
like swift footed Greyhounds at the first call, that is made for them. To make
them march with more then humane expedition, they must be charmed with praises
up to the heavens, far higher then the praises of many of those which the
Paynims held for Gods in this world. Comparing them with the most worthy and
valiant warriors which ever have been, terming them the very portraitures of
Alexander, in diligence and hautinesse of courage: very Images of Augustus
Caesar, in subtilitie and wisdom, and in zeal for the enlarging and glory
of the Roman Church: true imitators of Constantine the great, resemblers of
Charlemaine, and as great warriors as ever was the Roman Fertorius, to resist
and stand out boldly against all humane powers. And to set a better hue on
these so high commendations, if there be to be found any external beauty or
corporal force in these Princes, that must not be forgotten in no wise, but
extolled to the ninth degree: likewise, for the antiquity of their houses, the
great Alliances with other Princes, the noble and famous acts of all their
predecessors, all this must be curiously dilated, not one little forgotten.
And besides, to pass them up with the wind of such vain praises, and to
eleuate their courage above all that is under Luna, they forget not to abase and
disgrace as much as they can, the spirit, courage, and valor of these three
great ones, of whom I spoke but now, as though they had not the wit to
enterprise any great exploites of arms: as though they had no magnanimity,
diligence, force nor wisdom at all, to execute such matters: notwithstanding
the place and dignity they keep, and the great means they have in their
power: but they if they had their room, it were enough to make them become
Monarkes of the whole world. The very breath of these so high commendations,
does so set on fire all the parts of their soul and body, that it serves
them for wings to fly when they go about any affairs for the Council of
Rome; who for their part, to the end to give them feet to stay and stand
surely upon, must not forget to advertise them, that if they have any brethren
or children, they may promote them to the dignity of Cardinals, so that they
shall be sure to have as much Ecclesiastical revenue as their back will bear,
so they may fill their houses full of coin, which had but in mean quantity
before. Now every one may think, that whilst they go about these things,
Coursers of Naples, Damasco swords, plumes of feathers, and precious stones,
the rarest and dearest are also presented them, as those only who are worthy
to possess them. But above all, when they understand that all that shall be
their own that they can conquest, which is temporal, and that the Italians
pass not but for the spiritual, then they are set on fire with an
inextinguible zeal. Then appears there such a sodein change, and strange
metamorphosis in these Princes, that a man would think that some new soul had
entered into their body, and dispossessed and chased out that which ruled
there before: for then treading under foot the natural affection, that they
bore to their country, their sweet mother, who has brought them up tenderly,
and nourished them more delitiously then all others: then farewell the homage
and loyalty belonging to those whom God has set in place for their
superiors, and the straight bond of amity toward all their kindreds and
ancient friends, without any regard of those, who have been their planke to
prefer them to so high degree and rank of honor which they possess, such
younger brethren, neglecting the oath given to their Prince, transported with a
most unquenchable heat, and zeal, without all government of reason, cast
themselves headlong to embrase the affairs and practices of the Roman Council,
with so violent affection, yt all their thoughts, discourses, and imaginations,
are occupied in nothing else, but still how to continue the same. So that the
fervent zeal to advance the Roman Domination, does consume and gnaw them night
and day: falling into such disquietnesse for the furthering thereof, that they
have not so much as the patience to abide any good aduertisements. But like as
they were transformed into more natural Romans; set their wits to devise a
thousand things for their good and conservation: refusing not to sustain all
perils and dangers of body and goods, all watchings and travels for their
sake. Making no doubt of conscience to set kingdoms and provinces any ways on
fire: either by working their ruin by their own arms, or by foreign Forces,
or to do worse, to stir up thieves and murderers, who by treason and at
unawares, do shed the blood of those, who keep themselves fast locked within
towns, causing all laws and bonds (both divine and humane) of amity and
consanguinitie to be violated, persuading themselves that such butchery and
murder, may any way advance the Italians: or else that such cruelties should be
to them only sacrificers of sweet savor, and services most agreeable. See
then ye arrows that be ready drawn, made by this most ingenious nation, to
the ruin and confusion of those, who dare once open their mouths to speak
against their profits or Domination.

Cap. 30.
Begging Friars sent abroad and employed by the Romans, to set upon those that
dare open their mouths against their Domination.

THe Council of Rome having long time found that many Cardinals, Bishops, and
Colleges did not stir at the first word, that they hard from Rome, to set upon
Princes and commonweales, although they were their own creatures double bound
unto them: first having ben advanced by Kings and princes by their leave, and
next, for fear to loose the fairest feathers that they wear. They invent, or
howsoever give place to other kind of fellows, which they receive into the
number of Clergy men, that will make no such delaie as the other: I mean
their begging Friars, a most laborious kind of people, supporting all travel
and pain, and doing so much good abroad, that they will swell out incontinent,
and have at a baie those that do but think any evil against the kingdom of
the Romish Constitutions. Let them hide themselves never so well, they are sure
to be drawn out of their dens by this kennell, who can open and discover so
well, that in the twinkeling of an eye, they will set in an uproar all
Christendom, exclaim against Kings, Princes, and peoples, yea, against
Bishops and all other Clergy men, that will not execute their resolutions and
commandments. Greatness nor highness cannot amaze these fellows, they will
speak their pleasure, and that which is in their heads, what soever come of
it. Neither fear they that their Prebends be taken from them, or that any
other fine be set on their head: for there is no more to be gotten of them,
then of the shauing of an Eg-shell. Besides, they need neither gold nor silver
by the way to spend, for their lodgings are provided before where they shall be
relieved without a penny cost, neither fear they any confiscation of their
goods, nor that any infamy fall upon their children, for that they have none at
all. See how they may be bold with all security, to speak any contumelious
reproaches, and ignonimious slanders on Princes, outraging them in their
persons, caring not a point, and making a small matter to do it.

Cap. 31.
Of the service of Jesuits, to blind the youth withal, to the end to make
them adore the Italian inventions.

But because this great rabble had not taken upon them the instruction of
youth, wherein certain learned Schoolemaisters being employed, discovered many
things to the great diminishing of the Roman authority, to make up this
breach, the Italians brought in Jesuits of far profounder learning then the
begging Friars, and with the same have peopled the most famous Universities of
Christendom, who being so much followed by students, take no hire of them
that hear them, contenting themselves only with the gain of their pensioners.
They hold opinion, that the Bishop of Rome is above the Consuls, by this mean
altogether overthrowing the authority thereof. As for their Disciples, they
tie them so fast by the heels, with the cords of the Italian superstitions,
that they put them in such fear that they tremble again, if they transgress
the least of them never so little: and the more easily to strike this fear into
their hearts, they rob the tender youth of all judgment and use of reason.
For to judge truly of any question in controversy, we must diligently hear
and weigh the reasons on both sides, all affection laid apart. These on the
contrary, having brought their Disciples to believe in the Catholic and
Roman Church, they conclude thus thereupon, that they stop their hearing, and
give none ear to any one, who soever dare speak against the Popes authority,
nor against the ceremonies which he has instituted, nor dare once so much as
to read any book, which may call them in doubt, as not altogether necessary
to salvation: and that he which fears the plague, ought to fly from such
places and persons which are infected: so they before all things must take
heed, not to hear any, nor receive any books which may go about to remove
them from their opinion in one jot. These are their propper foundations and
grounds, whereby they do not only deprive their Disciples of all judgment,
but also of the use of all their natural senses, wherewith God has endued man
to make choice of things, and to know how to put a difference between good and
bad: by this means, they make them not only dull spirited; but altogether as
brutish beasts in heavenly and divine things, fighting directly against the
instruction of S. Paul, who teaches us to prove all things, praising in this
place of scripture, the diligence of those that did examine the Prophecies, to
know if Christ were the true Messiah. And whereas the Prophets did not cease to
exclaim against the abuse of the Sacrificators and Priests of the old law: S.
John Baptist in like manner: Christ also the sovereign Prophet, the Apostles
who ever cried out against the false pastors. And S. Augustine complaining of
the multitude of ceremonies which were entered into the Church at his time: and
besides we have seen heretofore many Bishops, Doctors and Pastors do the same
in contemning the greatest part of them. These on the other side, hold all
good, and maintain them, not only over and above the word of God: but further
the^ this, beside ye word of God. By reason whereof, if the Catholics look not
about them, to bestir themselves otherwise then they have done since the
entrance and creation of these Jesuits, to shake off the yoke of the Italian
Domination, it will soon be restablished in the highest degrees of soueraintie
that ever was since it began. And there shall be neither King nor Prince be he
never so strong nor mighty, but the Romans will make him tremble at one wink
of their eye: and will put them in as bad fear as the poor Israelites were at
the publication of the Law, when they shall threaten them with the thundrings
and lightnings of their Romish excommunications, to discharge all their
subjects of the oath of their loyalty, to inuest others with their kingdoms
and principalities, so that the Italians shall triumph over them, as they did
over the Duke of Venice, trailing him with a cord about his neck, for his
disobedience to their Romish Bishop.

Cap. 32.
A brief refutation of the Jesuits.

But whosoever would not make himself obstinat against his own good and
salvation, might easily help himself out of these Jesuits halters, setting
before his eyes how that they allege things contrary to that which they
profess and cause to be executed indeed. For this is the sum of their
Doctrins, that every one most firmly abide in his own Religion, without
hearing any thing to the contrary, and nevertheless they have enflamed the
Spaniards to kill thousands and Millions of the new world, because they would
not change there Religion, to embrace another. And as it is proper to shifters,
deceauers, and those that have not loyal Marchandises, to deal in secret,
as much as they can, and closely to cover there action, to sell there ware in
dark places, to the end to keep the truth of the matter hidden, lest their
abuse should be discovered: so these which fear so much the examination of
their Doctrine convince themselves, that it is not sownde, nor allowable.
Whereas that man that seeks but the glory of God, withont any respect of any
Domination, or wordly profit, will take singular pleasure, seeing his Doctrine
examined by the word of God, and with the works that he has created, and
likewise be delighted to maintain and defend it against whosoever would
dispute to the contrary. For all this, this would never the Church of Rome
permit, her pollocie is so great herein, albeit Italy is replenished with a
great number of very learned men and great Scholars, as well in Philosophy as
in any of the laws: and very desirus to maintain any dispute against
heretics, (as the term them) who are so themselves, to give them their right
title and definition, and against all those that go about to diminish or
speak against there kingdom and gains, for that the repute not others for
such. For the are not so gross witted as the Almons, who dispute about the
Consubstantiation and Infinity of the body of Christ against the confession of
the Switzers and Frenchmen, without hope of any profit or Domination to be
gotten thereby: But the Italian smelling out any profit or gain in that which
is propounded, he will agree to all, and repugne only in that whereby he
thinks to receive any dommage. Which is a most clear and manifest proof that
there is nothing, but worldly wisdom in all that he pretends and goes
about.

Cap. 33.
The council of Rome is like to certain Petifogging layers, who will not
consent to have there causes disputed and heard in open audience.

TO make this more apparent, we must note that when the council of Rome, will
never accord to have there cause defended in any open audience against there
adversaries, what other thing thereby may be inferred, but that they secretly
yield that there cause is scant good, for the are not so gross witted, nor so
much blinded, as the Iesuistes Scholars of whom I speak even now: but as
crafty Layers of good means and habilityes, finding there low matters like to
go against them, prolong the indgement and curry favor with the Judges as
much as the can: yet seeing the plantifes sue them hard, they will labor tooth
and nail to refer there cause to those of the counsel, hoping by favor and
instance of them, they may sooner win there process, then in any open audience.
And if the perceive that all this do not avail, what will the do? the will
hyer some manslayer, to kill there aduarsarie by some villainous treacherye:
even so this counsel so crafty and politic, understanding of an assembly of
states, or any general day of hearing, either in Germany, France, or Spain the
send in continent thither, and what by favor and corrupting with bribes, the
will use the matter so, that nothing shall there be debated, which concerns
any way the kingdom of Rome: unless it tend to the advancement and
furtherance of their Domination. And if therebe any Chancellours or other
learned personages, who have authority and mean to moderate and order matters
as they would have, they are saluted with congratulations, and promises of
great rewards, and by that means won to their side. As for murders, they
have spilled more humane blood since John Hue Bohemian rose up in arms, to
challenge his Domination against them, then all the quarrels and manquellers
since Noes flood, in all the broils, brawles and quarrels that they have made.
Take only but the battles that they caused to be given by the Emperors
against the Bohemians, and against the Almans: the persecutions in England, the
wars of France and Flanders, and all those that the cruel and bloody
Inquisition has destroyed, both in Italy and Spain: and the slaughters that
have been in many towns of France, and in many other places by their means
only, and you shall find that they are cause of the death of more then a
million of men: and women: and all becanse the would keep there cause from
debating in Parlaments and national Counsels. Whereby we see they hane all
devises and crafts in their heads so ready, which may serve them to preserve
their Government and continue their purloyning of money from other nations: who
in no wise can come near them to practice any such subtilties, they are so
gross, and such sleepy heads, that their is none amongst but the best
spirits, not subject to be passionate, who can discover there iugling, and fine
conueances.

Cap. 34.
The brief confutation of a Pestifrous book, published in France, by the name
of (the Catholic Englishman).

THis nation and there partners enuiyng the Government of the good French, who
being wearied with so many troubles and miseries, were amiably united to live
peaceablly together, Catholics and Protestants, the borrow the Eloquence of
some Italionate Frenchman, who falsely terms himself the Catholic
Englishman, abusing the true use of this gift by the which (as Caecero says)
men which were altogether rude, rusticall, cruel and savage are transformed
into a more sweet and socyable nature, to use it as a trumpet and torch to
give allarum, and to kindle the burning coals of choler, and vengeance in the
herts of all Catholics to make them run headlong into heat and rage of stomach
like unto a Bare ravished of her whelps, to sack and destroy all those who
dare open there mouths against the Italian Domination, under the name of
Popes: caring not by this pernicious council to make all Christendom so
weak: that it might without great resistance be invaded of the Turckes, to
abolish the name and remembrances of all Christen people for ever: for by his
council he goes about to make the Catholics believe, that it shall suffice
them to fly like dogs upon the Hugonots, to pull out there throats to rout
out there names, and to vanquish them quite for ever: But this there cursed,
crafty and captious council, has not had such issue as they would have
wished or looked for: it has but abridg the life and hastened the death of
those that first took it in hand as namely of the Duke De Ioyeuse, and the
Lord de Saint Sauueur they be most affectionate partners, with great ignominy
and dishonor of so shameful a flight of so many, who accompanied them both in
there actions: As also with the great reproach. disgrace and overthrow of men
given to the Duke, De Aumalde and all his toupes at the battle of Senlis,
without speaking of five or six armies beside, which without ever striking
stroke by sickness and long travels ruined of themselves. Besides the
Parisians inflamed and bloodily bent to destroy some body else then the
Catholic Englishman shot at, have gotten but travels, troubles, and
inestimable charges by their malice, having suffered the enemy to come and
beat them into there own gates, to saise upon there nearest towns, with out
ever lending aid to any. And further then all this, they have seen there own
suborbes pillaged, and there forces, which the judged invincible, destroyed
before there faces, at the battle of Yury being in chaunted by the venomous
and pestilent Eloquence, both of there pernicius Englishman, and also by the
blooddy sermons of one Francis Pinsenac very like unto this false and pretended
Catholic, unless as I may guess it be the very man himself, or his familiar
friend of Orleans that has put forth this blooddy book: which may ravish and
quite carry away with the force of his lively Eloquence agreat part of the
Catholics that read it, to enterprise the slaughter and manquelling of those,
who do not adore all that comes from Italy, Where I might spare it if any
good had ever come to France by it, or by any that are employed on that part.
But seeing that it seems that this nation is created for the scourge and
extreme ruin of the more Northren people, when he takes so their part,
making it good to the utter ruin and overthrow of us all. Does he not
discover, that he believes neither hell nor heaven? But is a villainous Atheist
prefering the worldly profit and honor, which he draws from this party
before the love of his country, for the which as Caecero, says, Every honest
man ought not to refuse death. And not as this wretch, to hasten it ruin. O
very rare and seed of a viper: who seem not to have bine borne for any
other good, but the destrution of thy Country, which thou ought to love
more dereely then thine own life. O pernicions Physician, whose Phesike is an
hundred times more dangerous then the malladie it self: who in steed of a
gentle purgation ministres Antimoyne not prepared, and rank poison, making thy
self ignorant, that seeing a sect is so far grown, that it is able to hold
out by ware, and that it cannot be rooted out by public Justice, how it must
be left and referred to the Divine Justice and not to kindle a cyuill war
there upon, which does but kill and corrupt men and bring al Religions to naught
being the greatest plague and the extremest callamitie, into which men may run
themselves hedlong. But out of what schole has he set this his blooddy and
tragical doctrine? Not out of this great and faithful law giver Moses, who
says Thou shall not kill: nor out of the Royal prophet David, councelling men
To fly from evil and do good, seek peace and ensue it: Nor out of the other
prophets, who have endured grievous persecutions, and never moved any of there
dissiples to persecute again or take any vengeance at all, nor of all the
sects of philosophers, as of Socrates, Plato, Pythagoras, Aristotle, and
others, who always labored all the could to wine men to peace, quietness,
goodness, gentilnes, and mildnes whereas this fellow will imprinte in there
hearts all rage, cruelty, outrage and madness: whereby appears, that he is a
very limme and instrument of this old and subtle Dragon, who made Cayne
conceive in his heart the murder of his own brother Abell, the same which
moved the priests of Jerusalem, unnaturally to saw in twain in the midst,
this heavenly and divine Prophet Esaye, and to persecute the process and
condemnation of Jeremy, He shows himself seton by a more blooddy spirit,
then ever were Marius and Silla, who shed so much of there own Citizens
boodes: but rather more like to Phalaris, Catiline, Nero, Commodus, and other
such cruel and saluage beasts, al together void of all humanity toward
there own countrymen. His shameless impudency, and his so insatiable thirst
after blood, is so apparent that it is not to be hid: for he represents
himself as a Standerbarer of Christ's catholic church, who ought to here his
voice, and do after his commandments: who pronounces in the fifth of S.
Mathewes Gospel that The merciful, pitiful, and peace makers are blessed,
and that we must forgive, if we will be forgiven. And the Apostle S. Paul
writing to the Romans teaches us To have peace withal men, without taking any
vengeance, which belong only to God: And that if our enemy hunger we shonld
give him to eat, and if he thirst we should give him drink, surmounting his
malice, by our mildnes and mercy. And last of all S. John in his first
Catholic Epistle, says, That he which hates his brother is in Darkness, and
cannot tell whether he goes, because the Darkness has put out his eyes.

Cap. 35.
How this false Catholic Englishman void of all humanity, transformeth
himself into all cruelty and rage.

SOme were then to examine this bloody book, wherewith he would infect all
Christendom, with the rage and rancor that possesses his furious stomach,
whereby he goes about to set the people of France together by the ears, to
destroy one another, like fierce Dragons and cruel Tigers, it argues his
cowardly, most dastard and effeminate spirit, for these are things that are
never in a man that has any magnanimity or greatness of courage in him:
Wherein he shows that he is the very disciple and trumpet of the malign
spirit the devil, that in shape of a filthy and stinking hee-Goat, uses the
like speeches unto sorcerers and witches, who having forsaken Jesus Christ, go
unto his sabboths to do him homage, where he gives them none other lessons,
but to put in practice vengeance, murders, and cruelties, whose footesteps he
follows right, pretending to overthrow in man all the clear light of reason
and understanding, and utterly to extinguish that which makes him foresee in
his actions, whether they tend to his honor, profit, and security or no,
before he undertake them, to abse and make him stoop to blind beastly and
furious passions, so to make men fly one at another like mad dogs and cruel
beasts, when we see any advantage of the side that we take: for his drift is,
to make the Catholics root out the Hugonots, as a people not to be tolerated
in religion: yet there is no people under heaven that agrees so well with them
as they: be the Jews, Turks, or Tartarians, against whom thou should
rather scum of the froth of thy fury and heat to combat, and employ the flood
and force of thine eloquence, then conspiring the total ruin of Christians,
against those who receive and allow of all the books of the Bible, and the
four first Councels, with whom having none other quarrel but for humane
Constitutions, thou ought rather to take part. And furthermore I say, that
the truest and best Catholics and Protestants, are for the most part the
surest and best friends that any City or common wealth has, and there is but
the Cockle which grows among this good wheat, and other dogs and hogs, who
smelling out any commodious profit by the Italians and their supposes: much
like himself, who for reward of his forged crimes and lies: smells out some
Crosiers staff, miter, or Abbey, under a false mask and show of religion,
passing not to be recognished for the true son of the father of lies, and
ancient slaunderer the devil, when maliciously and untruly he brings the
mighty Princess Elizabeth, for an example of wonderful cruelty against
Catholics, to make our French Nation conceive a great hatred and fear of our
King: wherein I think, that his father the devil would have been ashamed
himself to have published such impudent lies, for as much as this gracious
Princess the Queen of England, and our King of France, whom he represents
as her imitator: have never been accused of any blame and reproach, but to have
been too merciful and pitiful toward such pestiferous mates, and seditious
spirits, as is he himself, whom I should have made known for the most
pernicious and damnable enemy of all Christendom, that ever was on any side
whatsoever, as him that has fastened the author of his hope upon a particular
and temporal commodity, caring nothing at all to be cause of the subversion
of the common weal, and to deprive himself of life everlasting. But because I
am prevented by others that have answered the book, I will not enter further
to confute any particularitie thereof. I think now by a most manifest and
brief description, I have set before the face of the Readers, as well the
means as instruments, by the which the Italians know how bravely to conserve
and maintain their Domination, to the great shame and dishonor of those that
are subjected thereunto as slaves: wherefore it is now convenient to manifest
and propound the remedies, by the which all noble and gentle spirits, lovers
of their own liberty, may easily deliver themselves from their slavery and
thraldom.

Cap. 36.
The first remedy, by overthrowing the foundation stone, upon the which the
Roman Domination is builded.

AS it were a small matter for a Physician to be able bravely to discourse of
the causes, beginnings, augmentation and nature of any disease, if he should
not give remedies to cure the same: so it shall be requisite to set down the
mean whereby men might as well in times past, as also hereafter, throw away
this Italian yoke, and keep their money in their purses, without enriching
strangers with it: for this matter, I will begin at the foundation stone, upon
the which they have built, augmented and elevated there so great and lofty
Dominatious, that it has no bounds here on the face of the earth, as have the
kingdoms and empires of Emperors and Kings: but being elevated (if we will
believe them) as high as heaven gates, shuts and opens them even as they
do the doors of the Consistory at Rome. In some this foundation stone is,
that Saint Peter had his Apostles seat at Rome, and there was martired:
whereof follows, that the Roman Bishop is his successor, and has
universal charge over the whole world. For the first I deny, seeing that
neither the Acts of the Apostles, nor any other of the Epistles of S. Paul,
has made mention thereof: and that he himself witnesses that he was the
Apostle of the Jews, called to those that were of the circumcision. For the
second, yt he was martired there I confess, for that those of Rome and their
Emperors, to make a triumph of Jesus Christ, and of his doctrine, and to
quench their insatiable cruelty against Christians, had caused S. Peter to be
transported to Rome, from another place where he was detained first prisoner,
to put him to death ignonimiously, and make him a public spectacle to the
world. But for having by this cruelty and injustice, deprived the world of so
famous and excellent servant of God, that they should be reputed his
successors, there is no reason at all: nay contrary, I will stand to it, they
ought therefore altogether to be disinherited: for was there ever any man so
impudent, that for having murdered another, would dare to challendge his
succession? And if he had been borne at Rome, and appointed Apostle to the same
place, which he was not, neither they have made themselves unworthy of all
successorie, right and title. For this were a pretty matter, that for using
all cruelty, and committing bloody murders against the servants of God, men
should get domination and principality, as well in earth as in heaven, it were
far wide to say so, and the greatest absurdity in the world, that men might
imagine. Nay contrary, Christ menaceth great punishment for the like matter,
when he cried out, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou which killest the Prophets,
thereby denouncing her ruin and overthrow by the fire of Gods vengeance,
foretelling her destruction to come, and the miserable estate wherein she is at
this present hour. If then this were sufficient to deprive Rome of her
succession, yet furthermore, were she worthy to be deprived for her rebellion
against the Gospel, and the doctrine of S. Peter, wherein she has perseuered
since the death and passion of Christ, having brought forth the most
detestable monsters for Emperors, as Tyberius, Nero, Calligula, Commodus, and
Heliogabalus, which have ever been remarked to live under the vaute of the
heavens: who as cruel beasts estranged and degenerat from all Christian blood,
by reason of ye enormitie of their lives, could not suffer any such clear
light to shine there near them, being also set on by their sacrificing
Priests, Pagans, and Idolaters, who only taught publicly at Rome, soon to
extinguish the same. But if there were any good Bishops there, they lay close,
and did not openly discover themselves, and were no part of the body of this
people, being indeed sent thither, from diverse other parts: personages of
great learning and eloquence, rather to make residence there, then in any other
part, for that this city was still replenished with learned men, cunning
Philosophers, and Pagan Orators: against whom it had not been for Pastors
meanly learned to have disputed without overthrow and conviction. Yet all this
has nothing elevated the Italians, above any other people of Christentie, for
having Domination over them, but rather it brings lower and abaseth them, as
a testimony of their great resistance and rebellion to the truth, and the
teachers thereof.

Cap. 37.
Constantine the Great, King of England, apposed himself against the tyrannous
persecutours of Christians, that Italy brought forth.

But if ye come to ask me, what Nation has more right to have the Sea of an
universal Bishop erected in it, then Italy? I answer, that as Italy has made
it self unworthy, by bringing forth the murderers of S. Peter, and of other
tyrannous and persecuting Emperors, having a long time made resistance to the
Gospel: so those have best deserved it, who being pushed forward with an holy
zeal of Gods glory, and of the salvation of men, having abandoned their
lives, kingdoms, and treasures, to make passage for the Gospel throughout the
whole world, in destroying the doctrines of Pagans, and all idolatry which had
reigned before, more then two thousand years, all over the world, except only
among the Jews. Now what nation has that been, of so hautie and magnanimous
courage, which has done God so signal a piece of service. Surely it was
England, which having brought forth that great, and thrice sacred Constantine,
who of a Pagan that he was, making profession of the Christian faith, and
receiving Baptism, straight began to war upon Maxentius the Roman Emperor,
a most cruel murderer, and a great persecutor of Christians, whom he
vanquished, and planted the true Gospel and kingdom of Christ, not only in
the I Will, his native country that bred him; but also at Rome, the receptacle of
all Idolatry, and from thence made passage for it unto Alexandria, the
capital City of all Africa, to Constantinople, and all that country
bordering toward Asia, enlarging the kingdom of the son of God, far and
wide (which seemed at that time to be banished out of this world, by the
continual wars of the Romans) destroying and overthrowing wheresoever he
went, that of Satan, showing himself to be the Executour of that which Jesus
Christ had foretold in the twelfth of S. John, saying: Now is the judgment of
this world, now shall the Prince of this world be cast out. O that the wonder
of thy holy and almost divine enterprises, do make thee go far beyond all
humane creatures? for the light that thou made to shine in the world,
surmounteth as much that of the holy Kings of the old Testament, as does the
light of the Sun, the cleernes of the Moon. And as for that which the
Apostles and other faithful Pastors which went before thee, it was always
diuined, and entermingled with the darkness of superstitious Idolaters, which
had full course among the Emperors and Kings of the earth: but thou great
Instrument of the Eternal, thou have chaced far out of thy sight, all the
sacrifices and services that men did dedicate unto the diuil, according to the
witness of S. Paul, who says, that the Gentiles did sacrifice unto him. And
more then this, it is thou great Monarke, that have so firmly planted and
established this light in the world, that what assaults so ever have been made
to extinguish it, yet could it never altogether be put out and defaced. If then
one so great and divine a benefit had proceeded from Rome, as is from England,
who could imagine how great prerogatives and honors almost divine, they would
challenge from other people, whereas nevertheless the Emperor sprung out of
Italy, have ever been the most signal persecuters of Jesus Christ, and of his
Martirs: for all that they have cast such clouds over the eyes and judgment
of other peoples, that they made themselves only deemed worthy to have the
Sea of the universal Bishop: and by means of this prerogative, have made all
the Kings and Princes of the earth, kiss the Pantofle of their Prelate and
Bishop. What would they have done, I pray you, if they had fought as much for
the advancement of the Gospel, as they have done for the suppression and
extinguishing thereof? It is very likely they would have exacted honors and
homages, more then divine of those which should live under the obeisance of
their Domination. For this nation craves never so little subject to work upon,
to make it self to be wondered at, and to bring the Septentrionall and
Occidentall peoples under their coram and subjection, for that they are people
less ingenious, and nothing to compare so subtle as they are, which is a thing
altogether strange and wonderful.

Cap. 38.
An example of the Italians subtle dealing with the Admiral of Castillon.

FOr manifest proof hereof, I shall not need to seek out but one only
familiar example, well known of all, of the deceased Admiral of Castillon,
who was reputed a man of as great counsel and experience, as was any in
France: But the Queenmother and her Council of Italians, having a quarrel at
him above all other, made it well known, that the best French policy and
craft, could hardly avoid the subtle snares and embuscadoes of the Italians.
For seeing that by force of arms, they could never prevail to vanquish or
overthrow him, they resolved to provide for him, baits of peace and truce: by
the first conclusion whereof, they seized into their own hands, all the
Cities, Castles, and all the munition that was in them, which all the Forces of
Italy, had not bin able to take in twenty years. Perceiving this, they devise
to set again upon the Prince of Condie and him, as persons destitute of
refuge, to retire themselves, with any Forces, but yet the Lord De la Noue, by
his great wisdom and accustomed valor, stood in some good steed here, having
seized again the town of Orleans into his hands: they perceiving the Army of
this Prince raunging almost in the heart of France again, straight judged, that
they had half taken them napping already by this hook, and that they might
hereafter very well overtake them. Having cast this hook to them the second
time, they surprise them once more: and so dispossess them quite by this bait
of a second peace, of all their strong Forts and holds once again. Whereby
many began greatly to mistrust them: but to take away all suspicion, they
practice quickly a confirmation of their former peace, by conclusion of a
marriage, by this utterly to ruin and cut the Admirals throat. He trusting to
it, was taken in the net that was laid for him. So that this may well show,
that all our subtilitie is but a sluggish slight, in comparison of the quick
carriage of the Italians, by reason that their clymate is more Meridionall, and
the region of France more Septentrionall. True it is, that this great workman
of the world, hathenriched those that inhabit the more Northren countries,
with many other goodly gifts, as to be more strong, more fair and lusty,
witness many great Philosophers and learned men, and this might serve us for
instruction, that seeing we are endued with more strength, and are the greater
number, we should chase them out of France, and not suffer them to usurp any
Domination over us at all, nor to accompany any of our Princes or great Lords,
that might trouble or alter our state. This is a very good preservative to
save and deliver our selves from their wiles and subtle slightes. Very true
it is, that it is a great shame for them who name themselves Christians, and
have been baptized to use so much treachery in their dealings, whereas their
ancestors who were but Pagans, and knew not God, did keep their faith
inviolable to all, to be a greater credit unto them in all their actions
whatsoever.

Cap. 39.
How the Bishop of Rome being created universal, other nations should not
suffer the Italians to have him only to themselves.

LEt us come now to the point I spoke of, how that I did not purpose to blame
ye Popes persons, nor dispute against their title of universal Bishop,
referring those that would take delight in such disputation to the Treatise of
the Church, made by the L. of Plessis Mormay. But this is the point that I
prove, that seeing the Italians hold him for the universal Bishop of
Christendom, it must needs follow by the nature of contraries, that he can be
no more particularly tied to Rome, but that he is also as well Bishop of
France, of Germany, and Spain, who cannot be conversant and particularly
resident in all these places at once. Therefore his Sea ought no more to be at
Rome, then in other places; but he should wander over all Christendom, as did
the Apostles, seeing that they hold that S. Peter Apostle of the Jews, came to
Rome, being six hundredth leagues distant and more, from the place from whence
he came. So that if the Pope be resident any while in Italy, he ought to do
the like also in other provinces and countries: otherwise he should deprive
them of the right which unto them apperteineth. Wherefore they should never
abide that the Romans only should keep to themselves the Bishop common to
all: to prevent them, least by that prerogative they should rule the world at
their will, and dispose and alter all things at their pleasure. This shall
very well show, that whatsoever we conceive and persuade our selves of the
subtilitie and policy that is in us, they shall still for ever far go beyond
us. Witness the compositions made between King Henry the second, and those that
inhabit but the nearest borders of Italy, who retain some sparks and beams
of their subtilitie hidden in them. As the Duke of Sauoy, to whom this King
with the assistance of those, whom he deemed the best advised and most sage
parsonages of France, yielded up a great country which he and his ancestors
had conquered with infinite charges, combats, and victories. And yet without
any blow stricken by ye agreement of one marriage all was rendered: and all
Lumbardie likewise by the same policy. Must not then hereafter all Forthren
peoples awake themselves out of their so fluggish dullness, and not suffer
themselves to be overcome with ye sugered words of this nation, although they
be enterlaced with ye sweetness of religion, or profit of the common weal? And
above all things to take heed how they deal with them in any case, for they
will be sure to have the surest end of the staff. But if every nation had
practiced this in times past, and taken resolution of that which concerns
either their affairs of Estate, or of religion, never making the Council of
Rome privy thereunto: out of how great miseries, troubles, calamities, wars,
quarrels, divisions, and hatreds, should Christians have saved and delivered
themselves? But at the least, we shall be preserved in time to come, by
experience of these oppressions that are past, which cannot choose but be to our
great good and profit.

Cap. 40.
That the Council of Italy never made conscience to cut off the authority of
the Pope, when they smelt that there was any thing for them to be gained.

WHen we come then to remember, how they make the people believe that the
Church cannot stand without an universal Bishop: who without ever looking to
that which might follow thereupon, allowed very well of all that: They
incontinent having this advantage, made him proper to themselves, and by such
devise have usurped a domination over all the world: and prepared a way to
fetch great sums of money out of all parts of Christendom, under the name
and authority of this their Bishop. Whose authority notwithstanding they
never make conscience to abridge, when they smell any profit for themselves:
how did they practice in the great Pardons which were sent abroad in the time
of Charles the eight, and Jews the twelfth, by the which general remission of
all sins was given, and Paradise opened to all those, that would go in
pilgrimage to Rome: Wherein I say, that they did limit and restrain the power
of their Bishop: for being universal, as they maintain, so also is his power
extended over all, and not restrained or tied within Rome. Wherefore did they
this then? but for a fine devise, to enrich their City, by the concourse of
diverse strange peoples, who flocked thither from all parts of the world, to
go into Paradise, preferring by this mean, the inventions of men, before the
commandments and decrees of God, and the way that he shows them to attain
to heaven. This is an evident token, that this nation being most subtle,
measures all things, as they see they may turn her to profit, and augment
her authority.

Cap. 41.
That other kingdoms may create and constitute Popes within themselves,
because the Italians refuse their Pope of Rome to be common to all.

NOw if there had been in other nations any craft or sutiltie, any thing near
like to that of Italy, after they had perceived how by this prerogative they
were brought under the jurisdiction of the Italians, and dreyned of their money
by this country, if they had straight pretended that the universal Bishop
ought as well to visit, and be resident among other nations and principal
parts of Christendom, as at Rome: and in case the Italians would not consent,
to have told them plain, that every nation should have proceeded to the
election of an other, in every several country: as the Frenchmen for their
part, who held that the Gospel was first brought unto them by S. Dennis, and
that therefore he is their Apostle, to constitute the Sea of their Bishop at
the Temple of S. Dennis for France: and for Spain at S. James Church in
Gallitia: so in like manner for other nations. And in case hereupon, they
should enter into choler and storm at this, they might be answered, that S.
Panl did admonish the Corinthes to follow him, even as he imitated Christ. And
in good faith, it is honor enough for these Romish masters, in imitating
them, to establish the like order and government, as they allow best of among
themselves: for truth it is, that the true manner of honoring and worshipping
of Saints, consists in doing our uttermost to imitate and follow their
footesteps. According to this, even as they would never consent to be deprived
of their Pope, without whom they cannot bear sway in the world, and purloyne
money from other nations not so quick spirited as they: so in like manner, if
the French would look well into their affairs, it were necessary for them
also to make a Pope among themselves, to serve their own turn. And by the
example of the Romans, they should endeavor their uttermost, to raunge under
their jurisdiction, not only a whole kingdom, but also other nations more
Septentrionall, who are less ingenious then they, and principally this might
be effected by the Prouensals or Gascons, being a people more meridionall then
the other Frenchmen. As for ye English, although by reason of the great
traffic they have into all parts by sea, they are not a people altogether so
dull spirited and gross, yet they confess, that the French have subtly
recovered that of them, by conclusions of peace, which they by great victories
had conquered from them before. So that it is very like by this mean, that if
in imitating the Italians, there were a Pope constituted but in France only,
yet he should have under his jurisdiction, England, Scotland, Ireland, Norway,
Friseland, and all the Netherland. By this shift, they might fetch in coin
from these parts, after the example of the Romans and the people of Italy, who
have had a hand of such people: whereas if the French had practiced such
conter-pollicies, whereas the Italians contemn them at this day, as gross and
barberous: they would have made as much of them, otherwise as a nation and
people as pollitike, crafty, and subtle as themselves might be. All which is
to show, how far they excel us in invention and subtlety of spirit.

Cap. 42.
Arguments in defense of a Pope, if there were any in France against him of
Rome.

BUt if any object, that the Italians would never endure ye, for because he
were first in possession of one only Pope: I agree well to that, so they were
the stronger: but when we see that many of our Kings have passed clear through
the country of Italy, without any contradiction, and gone as far as Naples,
and that those that at any time went about to withstand them, were by and by
overthrown, we must needs think, that it were great disadvantage for them
to deal that way, but if on the other side, they would go to dispute and
combat of words, to discide whether the succession of S. Peter and the
lieftenancy of Christ be tied to Rome, or no: we shall need but to send them
to combat in this dispute with the Lutherians, who maintain according to the
saying of Virgil, that the property and true description of Rome is to
contain seven mountains, thereby giving us to understand that it is the City
remarked in the Apocalips, to be the seat of Antichrist: Now in ye town of
Saint Dennis in France, there is no such matter, therefore such quality cannot
be attributed truly to the Pope as the have given him. But some may reply, ye
the people would never believe so much in any other Pope as in him of Rome, to
that I answer: that if they had made one of as subtle a priest as him of
Bellouet, if no man had gone about to descrye his knavery (as some did) he
might have easily prevailed for that point: for there was never any Pope of
Rome, who for his own persons sake, nor for his miracles, that ever was so
followed with so great troops, as was he of whom I now speak. But if they
went about to terrify the French Pope, by excommunications and interdictions,
so that he would but practice ye like against theirs of Rome; it is most
certain, that whosoever would but look on the one and the other, should see
the Italians far more black in the face and more melancholic, and the French
far more cherefull and Iocande then they. See her then in mine advise are
medy which being put in practice of us as it ought, will ruinate the Domination
of the Italians and the counsellof Rome, in the persons of there Popes, which
likewise would quit cut of the way whereby the transport all our silver from
us, As for those who would not nor could not away with the Pope, shall by that
means keep themselves exemted from there Domination, without paying them any
money at all, no more then ye protestants do, which will have nothing at all
to do with them. And here I will advertise the Readers of a fine devise to
fear the Romans, and to make there Popes tryple crown shake on his head, if
they had but the news carried them, how that the most Reverend Cardinal of
Vendome were elected Pope in France: it would make them all quake for fear,
and put them in worser case then if an Army of ministers should go thither to
set upon them: But if any Frenchman should, to make them more certain of it,
tell them again that he were wonderosly affectionate to the mass and to the
ancient ceremonies, they would think him more ass and sot then sottise it
self, because that is no part of the grief that tormenteth them, but the name
of their Pope only. And if the Spanyard likewise would but follow this
example, the lead of Rome that the have sold for a dearer price then the finest
gold in the world, which men come to seek so curiously out of all parts,
shonld tarry with them at Rome, to help them to make there gutters of there
houses, cestrenes to hold there water, or Carracters to print what they please
withal.

Cap. 43.
How the Roman Ecclesiastic knaweth the people of his own country, and
teaches those of other nations to do the like to their countrymen.

BUt because the Italians is so subtle and wary, that he will slip none
occation, but he will take it fast by the hair as soon as it is present, and
will never let go his hold til he have made thereof all the commodityes that it
may yield: see he deleth hardly with his own countrymen to there great
hinderance and loss. Now they detayne a good piece of their gain from them,
who making up part of tbe body of the commonwealth, hold there assemblies a
part, and nevertheless the themselves are present at the assembles of others,
who moreover can of themselves publish and by there own reasons confirm that
which they will have established and set down* no man so hardye as to open his
mouth to speak to the contrary, which is the easiest mean to obtain any
thing whatsoever a man would have in this world. For look into the Sovereign
courts and other Jurisdictions, where in there are many learned and eloquent
Lawyers, although they be suspected to plead the weaker causes: yet so it is,
that if they have this advantage to propounde only that which concerns the
judgment of the cause, being no adverse party or advocate that dare speak any
thing to the contrary: they will be sure to discourse and plead in such sort
and with such dexteritye, that the Judge and the Assistances shall be so ravished
and carried way by there reasons that they shall obtain victory of the cause,
were it never so unjust. Now the Roman Ecclesiasticke having won this advantage
to himself to the great prejudice of the Nobilytie and the Commons, and having
beside given light and instrution to those of other Countyes to do the like,
have robbed all other Estates of there goods and dignityes; tryumphing and
swimming in riches themselves up to the chin: caring not a straw to go against
there profession which should be by contempt of the world to afpire to heaven.
For proof hereof, there was a president who was very curious to count all the
revenue of the Kingdom of France, and having made his computation, he found
that the some did amounte to twelve thousand Millyons and that the
Ecclesiastics, who are not the hundredth part of the people carried away seven
parts hereof: Whereas in the old testament they had but a tenth: never speaking
of any oblations that the have at Baptismes, churchings, confessions, and the
great ransomes that thy extort after the death of the deceased husbands of
poor widows, orphans and pupilles, under the coullour and pretense of their
long prayers: all which ought in deed to be employed to the instrution of
children and the marriage of poor parentles maidens: besides in all the
Churches of Cittyes, a man of any honor cannot escape there nets, but he must
leave behind him some half Teston, a matter of two groates if he will not be
in disfavor of these Ecclesiastickes. Touching any charges, watchings and
travels that they should be at, to teach, reprehend and comfort the people as
S. Paul requires, these great pillars of the Church, the Cardinals, Bishops,
and Abbots, they draw back and will not come near them, and yet it never
ingendereth any remorseof conscience, to take fifty thousand crowns of
yearly revenue, referring the exercise of their charges to their courts, who
after their example discharge themselves by their Vicars, and their Vicars,
they hang all upon the begging Friars, so that the Nobillitie and the people be
well served between them all by this shift, which shows very well that they
can devise shifts and means now for their commodity in this world.

Cap. 35.
Very fit means to hinder the Ecclesiastic for meddling with that which
concerns the Magistrates.

TOuching the Magistrates to whom they are bound to give all honor, and yield
them all subjection, they rob them in part of their Jurisdiction exempe
themselves from their power, and taking themselves the prerogative of honor,
that they owe unto them. And further, that which is to be noted more strange,
in steed of supporting the poor Priests who have all the heavy burden of
their charges upon there backs, they still over load them with so many
seruises, and cut them out so great quantity of matter to sing, that those of
Cities, in less the^ ten or twelve years become so hoarse, that they are not
able to serve any longer, but must be cast off to go seek where they can, by
reason whereof, seeing them at some sollemne feast, surcharged with such
quantity of services, whereas they sing on their part: for my part I bewail
their miserable condition, esteeming it worse, then that of poor flaues and
captives in the Roman Gally, and cannot choose but argue those of great
inhumanity, who have ouercharged them with so heavy burdens: not only against
all good reason, but also against the ordinance of the son of God, and the
brief form of prayer that he has taught us: but also against all humane
order, observed in tendering of petitions unto Kings of the earth, which are
abridged with as few and short words as may be possible. See wherefore it
were most necessary to stop ye course of such Italian influences, not to
suffer our selves to be handled at their devotion, and not to depend any longer
of them, as heretofore we have done: but to find out the remedies hereof, it
is not an easy matter amongst the Northren people, because that such drugs do
not grow amongst them, no more then do the Palme-trees and their Dates. But
even as one country brings forth oftentimes poison, and the preservative
far the same, even so, he that would preserve himself from their domination
and draught of money, that they use to draine out of other provinces, shall
borrow a good piece of wisdom, found out at a time of great need by the
common people of Rome, to restrain the course of the domination of their
Senators, who had them before at advantage, to villanize, abase, and reduce
them into bondage and slavery, at their pleasure. The common people perceiving
that they had their counsel apart, where they might take secret deliberation,
to increase their authority, and to pull down and gnaw the people, which
should be hard things for them to remedy, because the Senate did consist of
very learned men, great Orators, and full of majesty, advised themselves to
create Tribunes for their own defense: which should oppose themselves to the
ordinances of the Senate, in case they did any thing diminish their liberty,
and should keep the Senators short, that they should not tirannize over them,
nor draw their substance from them, as before time was their common practice.
By this mean the people was no more exposted in pray to the Senate, but
maintained still themselves in their own liberties: for even as the body of
man is very well at ease, when none of the Elementall qualities does suffer it
self to be overcome with the contrary: so that commonwealth evermore
flourishes, when none of her parts do suffer it self to be in subjection to
the other.

Cap. 45.
That it is very requisite that the Magistrate should set his hand to the
reformation of Churches, because that will never be done by means of any
Pastors.

ACcording to this, there is no more effectual remedy to prevent the
Ecclesiasticke, least he gnaw the rest of the people: then to choose out in
every town some learned and virtuous man, which is not of the same quality,
not too much addicted to ceremonies and superstitions, who must have an eye to
their counsels, constitutions, and preachings, and who must also discover their
end: to the end they may see whether they go about any thing to the preiudise
of the Nobles, of the Magistrates, or of the people: and if they do, to
withstand them therein, having power and authority to assemble the people, to
advertise them by speeches and Orations in their Temples, how that they go
about to deceive them. If in the time of Constantine the Great, such Protectors
had been chosen, they would never have permitted the Ecclesiastics under
shadow of Purgatory and prayers for the dead, to have deprived the lawful
heirs of so many Counties, Lordships, Barronies, Feefarms, and other lands,
whereof they have robbed and spoiled them, nor that the goods of Hospitals
given to the poor, should be eaten and swallowed down by them: for although
that they would not contradict such doctrine, yet perceiving that under the
color thereof, they pretended to make traffic and sale of the kingdom of
heaven, and to sell for fair ready money, life everlasting: they would have
gainsaid them, and reproved such thieves, who under a false appearance of
bringing men to heaven, pretended to pick their purses, and to make them loose
that which they had on earth: they would have taken order at the least, that the
poor should not die for hunger, languishing and crying, seeing the Priors of
Hospitals to devour their good, singing and making merry. See then this is a
good remedy whereby we might keep fasting the Italian and the Ecclesiastic,
and make them content themselves with their own, and to keep within their
own limits. For to hope that ever they will reform themselves, they never did
it yet, nor never will. For if you look since the death of Iousa to Jesus
Christ, between which there is more then a thousand years, you shall find
that the Ecclesiastics never ceased to corrupt the true service of God. By
reason whereof, he gave them over into the hands of their enemies. And how to
restablish them, he raised up Judges and Magistrates: how also after they had
Kings, he inspired many to reform and reduce his true service, having been
abastardized by the Ministers and ordinary Priests of his Church. And why, I
pray you, were Prophets sent? But to accuse and convict the ordinary Pastors
of their impiety, rebellion, and disloyalty. After the manner of which
Prophets, S. John Baptist terms them a generation of vipers: and Jesus Christ
calls them, thieves and robbers. And S. Paul in his time, cried out against
their abuses. And in the time of Constantine, they had divided Christendom into
more then twenty several sects, all which this holy parsonage cut off in his
time, reducing them all to one uniform confession at the Nicene Council. By
whose example, Kings and Magistrates ought to set to their hands: and out of
the miserable dissipation wherein we live, to restablish one true way for the
service of God, as Moses did command them: to wit, that they should meditate in
his law day and night, to keep it themselves, and to cause others to observe
it also. And not to expect till the Pastors reform it: whereof a great number
seek but to enrich themselves, and to sway over others.

Cap. 46.
That it is very needful to withstand the enterprises of Churchmen, be they
Priests or Ministers, and to choose protectors for the conservation of the
people.

ANd to take away the doubt that some may propose, to wit, if such Tribunes are
necessary among those who have cast off the Popes yoke and have Ministers. It
is certain, that the reason is all one: for to be persuaded, that they are of
better borne, and of more gentle nature then the sacrificing priests, issued
out of the race of Abraham, there is none appearance. But to go no further then
to the Apostles themselves, if we look but to the mark that they leuelled at
before the Ascension of Jesus Christ, and before he had sent down his holy
spirit upon them, we shall see that they were enflamed with an ardent desire to
be promoted, to rule and bear sway. So that, if once they be tolerated to set
down articles and constitutions in the Chnrch, every one thinking himself
wisest of all, and far to go beyond his predecessors, will endeavor to
invent and bring in some new article, so that they will proceed so far at the
last, that the Church shall find it self replenished with humane traditions
again, in steed of the Romish Ecclesiastical constitutions before abolished.
And so it shall fall out as a thing most natural and common to all Pastors,
that they will cause their own inventions to be observed more strictly, then
the commandments of God, and the precepts of his most sacred wore, as well by
depriving their sheep of the Lords Supper at their pleasure, as also by their
public exclamations in their Sermons. So that also the violence that some use
in seeking out curiously, those which had transgressed some articles of their
discipline, has made men and women by thousands to revolt from their
Churches: and most true it is, that he which too curiously seeks out the
doings of other, often forgets to examine his own, which is quite contrary
to S. Paul's instruction, who treating of the Lords Supper, commands Every
one to try himself. Whereupon the leagued Cautons of Swisserland, one of the
best peoples in the world, have abridged their Ministers of this power, which
they of France labor to establish amongst them every where. But if there were
Protectors of the Magistrates, Nobles and Commoners, might not they very well
stop the course and progress of these matters? teaching them this lesson, that
seeing they attribute to themselves none other quality or condition, but to be
the servants of the living God, that there is nothing more repugnant to their
profession, then to presume to make laws in ye church, which is the kingdom of
God. And that there was never any servant to King nor Prince, that durst
attempt to usurp any such prerogative, how well soever he was favored of ye
king. And who was ever so saucy a servant, that being left to serve and wait
upon the spouse of his Lord, forgot himself so much, that he would rule over
her by his own laws and ordinances? And what greater blindness can there be,
then to think to light by our counsels the fountain of all light and
wisdom, which is eternally resident in God? Who if he would be assisted with
any other counselors in the government of his Church: has he not Angels and
Archangels by legions? Has he not Noe that great Heralt of justice, Abraham
the father of the faithful, Moses, Enoch, and Helias, the Prophets and
Martyrs, and more then five hundredth of the faithful beside, which rose from
the dead after the death of Jesus Christ, as witnesses S. Paul. All which in
knowledge, holiness, and experience, go a great way beyond the best and greatest
spirits that may creep on the face of the earth, in the prison of their
bodies. And by such and such like reason, to keep them within the bounds of
their vocation, which is, that in showing themselves faithful Ambassadors and
messengers of God, they may in nothing go beyond the commission that they have
in charge.

Cap. 32.
That it is the duty of Pastors to plant the Faith, and to root out vice and
sin, and not to make laws.

FOr confirmation hereof, and to prove that there is more doctrine and
instruction in one only Epistle of S. Peter and S. Paul, nay to speak of
less, in one only Chapter, the fifth to the Galathians, then the most perfect
and holiest men in the world could ever accomplish or fulfill. And to the end
that the Pastors should endeavor themselves to root out the fruits of the
flesh, and to plant those of the spirit, they are at large set down. First to
wit, for the fruits of ye flesh these: Adultery, fornication, filthiness,
dissolution, idolatry, empoisonings, enmities, strifes, enuies, anger,
quarrelling, seditions, sects, murders, gluttony, drunkenness, and such like.
Secondly, for the fruits of ye spirit, these: Charity, Joy, Peace, Patience,
Clemency, Bounty, Faith, Mercy, and Temperancie. See then here is more work
cut out in this one Chapter, then they and their disciples will ever be able to
do, and in doing this, they shall but do their duty: beside consider all the
instruction of the whole Bible, and you shall see a bottomless sea of doctrine,
wisdom, and good lessons to teach us to live well, seeing that this only
Chapter does teach us more then any man in the world has been able to perform
and follow truly. But he that would in good earnest come to the reformation of
the life of men, here is the sovereign mean, to pull up by the roots out of
their hearts, all incredulity, the mother of all vices, to plant therein
faith, the spring of all virtues, as the Lord Du Plessis Mornay, has very
well advised in his book, Of the verity of Christian Religion: wherein he
has wrote a most divine piece of work. For who is he that regarding the
shortness and uncertainty of this life, who firmly believing that there is an
everlasting joy and felicity, into the which, all the faithful and virtuous
enter: and that there are likewise eternal pains provided for the unjust, and
vicious, who would venture to wallow in all vice, to be deprived of so great a
benefit. This is the mark at the which all pastors ought to le^^ll: and not
to make traditions and laws, seeing there are so many in holy scripture, that
in examining our life by the perfection of them, we are clearly convicted and
attainted of our own imbecilitie and insufficiency to fulfill them. For my
part, when I see an assembly of pastors congregated to make laws, to bring and
conduct men more easily to life everlasting, then the Prophets and son of
God, and his Apostles did (although they are taken for Angels in respect of the
rest of the people) meethinkes I see as an absurd a thing as if the fifteen
score blind folks of Paris should take upon them to go mend all the ill
highwaies of Christendom, to make them fairer and straighter then they are: as
cunninger and more skillful to do it, then those that have been employed about
it heretofore. But if you will object, that Ministers have made good laws by
their discipline, against dansing, masking, and dicing. I yield, that at the
first fight, it has a fair show and appearance, but examining it nearer, you
shall find that they take away therein, the authority of the Magistrate, and
usurp that which appertains properly to the Kings and Princes of the earth:
to whom only it belongs, to make inholitions upon such things, to cause them
to be observed by penalties and by privation of the Lords Supper, for that is
exprefly prohibited by Gods word, and so by consequent out of their commission.
Moreover, the Ecclestastickes have ever had this device, subtly to intrude
themselves to the making of laws, and to have matters of small importance,
still referred to them, thereby to have a gap to matters of greater
consequence, as the Tribunes may make ample relation hereof, and prove it by
many sundry examples.

Cap. 48.
That the controversies about the Lords Supper, by which the Pastors trouble
the whole world, are easily to be accorded and quieted, if the Magistrate
would but go about it in good earnest.

WHerefore if we do not take some order for the peace and tranquillity of
Christendom, by some such mean as I have set down, in vain otherwise shall
we look for any firm and assured concord. For those who above all other,
ought to seek for reconciliation between God and man, and afterward, between
themselves, are nothing else but the very instruments of trouble and sedition,
kindling the fires of discord every where, to set all in flame and conclusion.
For to stay till of their own motions there fall out some accord between the
Council of Rome and the Lutherians, and between them again and the
Caluinists, touching our Lords Supper, that will never be no more then between
Caiphas and the Apostles of Jesus Christ, wherefore if there be none other to
step in amongst them, moved thereunto by pitying the ruin of other Estates,
which I have named, who must crave aid of the greatest Kings and Christian
Magistrates, to make them hold their tongues, they will trouble heaven and
earth about this disputation of the Supper (a matter nevertheless very easy to
be accorded between them.) For we all agree to this, that the faithful taking
the bread and the wine from ye hand of their Pastors, receive by this mean the
very body and blood of Jesus Christ, to be united with him, and made flesh of
his flesh, and bone of his bone. What is it that is yet in controversy, but
only the manner and form how that comes to pass? Now the Capernaits,
desiring to comprehend the manner of this eating, Jesus answers them, that,
The words that I speak unto you are spirit and life. As if he should say unto
them: there is none but those who understand the operation of the divine
spirit, and how he gives life unto all creatures, who can comprehend how that
is done. But our soul which is detained prisoner in this body, she cannot so
much as conceive how the spirit of God being infinite and incomprehensible,
has it operation in all yt is in the world: nay, that which is far less, we
cannot imagine how the Angels of heaven, and the spiritual Damons, employ
their Forces to execute the judgments of God, nor the temptations of the
wicked spirit against us: nor how a legion of devils may be in one only man,
nor after what manner they lodge in him. And yet things far less then all
these, cannot we comprehend, as the essence of our soul: and whether it be
within us or about us. For how it can so quickly stir and remove all the
members of the body: nor also by what force the Adamant which is in the rocks
of ye North, can draw unto it iron, being in a ship more then ten or twenty
leagues of. And whereas he calls his words Life: it is to give us to
understand, that as our humane understanding cannot conceive, how God inspireth
life to all creatures, and gives it to some living creatures in the belly of
their dammes, gives it to an infinite number of little Animals, Locusts, and
little Flies, and no man can comprehend the form and manner how he does it, nor
so mnch as this, how many living creatures being pend in and deprived of all
external light, for all that see most clearly: so likewise must we conclude,
that God works in this Sacrament by a divine operation, and altogether
incomprehensible, which man cannot comprehend, nor shall not comprehend whilst
he is resident in this Elementall and corruptible body. It should suffice us
to know what S. Paul teaches us: that, there is in us an interior and an
exterior man. So that in this Sacrament, even as the exterior, receives the
signs of bread and wine, so the interior receives the body and blood of
Jesus Christ, for the nourishment of everlasting life, without making any
deeper search of the manner how it is done. This point so concluded upon, it
shall be meet for the peace and tranquillity of Christendom, that the Tribunes
should humbly entreat Christian Kings and Potentates to employ the power and
authority that God has bestowed upon them, to bury in perpetual oblivion,
all these means devised by the Ecclesiastickes, be it of Transubstantiation,
Consubstantiation, Infinity of Christ's body, and many other quiddities, the
fountain of troubles and divisions in Christendom, by this mean to prevent
the Italians, least for things wherein they have none interest, they ruin also
other Estates of this Continent. And if any debate should fall out between the
Tribunes and the Ecclesiastickes, and that they could not agree, that the King
should assemble a good number of men of profound knowledge and great
experience, and especially those that are best affectionate to the benefit and
quiet of their country, and without any interest in this controversy. The
which should not be moved by the outrageous cries, and violent passions of
mutinous and seditious preachers. And to seek out such fellows as Messieurs
Budee, de l'Hospital, de Pibrac, and Monsieur Groulard, who is at this present
first President of Normandy. And look what the King shall resolve by the
counsel of these learned men* to cause thoroughly to be observed. And to go
about these matters so secretly, that the Italians hear no inkling thereof,
least they by their crafty conueiances, hinder not the happy success of this
business. To foresee this well, it shall need but to make the world believe,
that these assemblies were made for some other purpose, and that some new
occurrence had fallen out, and given occasion to treat of religion, all under
one.

Cap. 49.
That in vain we look for deliverance out of the miseries of France by any
Assemblies of Pastors.

IF we do not use these or the like remedies, our hope shall be in vain to
expect for any goodly effect of Synodes or Assembles of the Ecclesiastickes,
because there shall be always but one or two of the most learned and
eloquentest: albeit the be all of one nation, who shall dispose and carry away
all things at there lust, all the rest serving but to say Amen, and to
subscribe to there advise. For when any one amongst them has got aname to be
profou^dly learnd and to bemore subtle indisputing then others, no man dare
gain say him, ye tremble al under his authority: and if he besome what
styrring and ambitious, and desirous to bear sway: he will make the^ receive
what Articles and laws he list, for yt having studied matter enough to defend
himself with Arguments to reach unto his purpose, yt others shall litile think
of, and perfaming his matters with a little apparent benefit for them, they will
let him carry them away so, and subscribe to whatsoever he would have them.
For that among them there are few or none, who are accaustomed at such an
instant readylie to contradict and resist. But it goes not so with Maiestrates
the greatest number whereof being brought up and exercized to plead in
contradictorie judgment, will not suffer themselves so easily to be carried
away, but can tell how to withstand one another, what study soever any party
has employed and come never so well provided. Wherefore it is a dangerous case
to repose any confidence in the decisions of Ecclesiastical Assemblies, which
in the old Testament, never wrought any other effect but kindled the fire of
persecutions, first against the Prophets and afterward against Christ
himself, his Apostles and infinite others of his martirs: and so conclude,
such Assemblies have never bine but a plancke for the Italians to pass to
establish all there new Constitutions such as are not yet altogether received
in all parts of Christendom thereby to sway over, and gnaw to the bone all
Christen people it follows then hereby, that to take away the occasion of
this abuse, we must have recourse to Sovereign Princes and to there
Maiestrates, when it comes to the question of establishment of the Christian
Church, for so God did himself as we find in the old Testament, and not to
rune to Pastors who being once out of the true way, will always go worse and
worse and ever come into it again.

Cap. 50.
That all Christians are agreed of the place of joy and happiness whether they
must go, but disagree concerning the ways that must lead them thither.

But because the Italian is so quick and pliable, that there is no good order
so well established, but he can alter and bring to confusion, either by seed
of divisions or by corrupting persons by flattery, gifts and remuneratorie
promises as well Magestrates as other protectors of the people, employing their
unto some Ecclesiastickes or others, we must needs seek out and use some
surer and perpetual Remedy against them, And because as I have proved that
there Domination and great somes of money they dreine out of other countries
has no foundation but the bare cloak of Religion, by reason whereof to prevent
lest they surprise us, we must be very careful and diligent to choose out the
truth, for that the derill transformeth himself into an Angel of light, and
is an Ape to the works of God, to rob and deceive us. But not to be deceived,
we must at the first consider and examine curiously all that is proffered and
presented to us for the way of salvation, of what side soever it be, to choose
the best, otherwise our choice shall always be doubtful, having no knowledge
of neither of the ways which we might take. For in matter of Relligion all
have one desire and shoot at one and the same mark, which is to come the joys
of heaven and in this they all agree, but they disagree of the ways and the
form of services that they ought to follow. And because they Counsel of Rome,
teaches one kind of way and makes many take that roowte with a goodly
forwardnes, that they set them in thitherward, and an external form of
service, which with great delight, feeds humane senses very much, practizing
all kind of murders and cruelties, on those that seek to climb to heaven any
other ways: There is also an other sort of men, who by lively reasons and
great persuasions, go about to fetch back from them as many as they can, to
lead them thither by other paths: but the Romans, to prevail in this matter,
say, that yt way whih they teach, is the broad and wide way, wherein the
Fathers have passed, the which is also more common to a great number of people.
The others they say, that this great way whereof they esteem so much, is that
which leads to perdition, and many there be that enter in. And that the way
of salvation is very narrow and straight, and few there be that go that way.
And if that they which follow the great and large way, find it to be the
better, they will not hinder them for going that way: but yet requisite at
their hands, that they will suffer them peaceably to go by their straight and
narrow way, which they take to be the surer passage.

Cap. 51.
That men being contrary in opinions, concerning the way of their salvation,
they must receive instruction of the Ecclesiastical bodies.

NOw in this conflict, if we look only but unto men, and to that which is on
earth, we shall find our selves much troubled, and thinking to choose the best
way, we shall take ye worst, and never reach thither whither we mind to go.
And if in this judgment we depend upon Ecclesiastical Pastors, one shall allow
one way, and others shall teach another, grounding themselves diversely on places
of the scriptures, and the Doctors of the Church. In such diversity, what
should it then be needful to do? we must lift up our eyes, cogitations and
thoughts upon on high, to other Masters and Preachers, who teach us not by the
ears as mortal men do: but by the eyes of a visible, certain and immutable
language: and ask neither gold nor silver, nor domination over us for their
pains: but freely offer us their instruction, with great bountifulnes and
blessings toward us, if we take it thankfully, and we never need to make any
long and tedious pilgrimages to find them out. But it suffices to but go
forth of our habytacles, builded by the workmanship of men, to enter into the
great Palace and Temple of the living God, made with his own hand, in the
midst whereof, he has placed us: to know and admire the wonderful excellency
of his works, and to yield him the glory and honor that he deserves. In
doing this, to make our selves worthy beholders of the same, when we shall
comprehend with all admiration the omnipotency, wisdom and bounty of their
framer, who shines in the same most gloriously: and although that upon the
earth and in the waters of the sea, his sagesse, virtue, power and bounty, is
most amply proved unto us: yet would he give us more ample testimonies in the
concauitie and extendue of the heavens, to draw us nearer unto him, having set
there two great lights, the one lower, the other higher, to the end that by
them as by the Ladder of Jacob, we should go to find him out in his heavenly
Tabernacle, to do him homage, and to yield him all the loyalty, wherein we are
bound unto him, as holding our life and al our goods besides of him, putting
our selves still under his protection. And therefore to carry all reverence and
due obedience toward his laws and commandments, having our recourse unto
him when we are oppressed, or that we fall into any necessity or sickness,
giving him thanks so often as ever he bestows any benefits upon us, in
celebrating the praises that the greatness of his works deserve. By the
consideration whereof, we shall perceive our own infirmity, to learn thereby
to humble our selves before his divine Majesty, and still to have in
admiration the superexcellencie and depth of his wondrous works.

Cap. 52.
That the lights of heaven do draw us to seek God in heaven, and do witness,
that their Creator is infinite and incomprehensible.

ALthough that the lightnings, thunders, clouds, rain, snow and hail, which
are engendered in the middle region of the air, yield such ample testimonies of
the power, bounty, and providence of God: yet mounting a little higher, to the
torches of heaven, whereof the nearest unto us is the Moon, keeping
continually the course that God has assigned her, to give light in the night,
and to moysten all bodies: and from her let us mount higher by degree and
degree, to every Planet, till we come to Saturn, elevated highest of all, and
from him to the starry firmament, and we shall see a number of those that are
far bigger: for we cannot contemplate the firmament with his blazing torches,
infinite almost in number, may we cannot behold at one time the one half, but
we shall be ravished to admire the force and greatness of the maker, who has
framed a piece of work so excellent, above al other wondrous things? Now we
have been led so high with our bodily eyes which can go no higher, we must
have recourse to the eyes of our understanding, the which being lightened and
conducted by the brightness and light of Gods word, shall make us mount yet
higher into two other heavens, to come where S. Paul by a trance and
rauishment of the divine spirit, saw Jesus Christ the son of Justice, and
many other unspeakable things in the glory of God, having full confidence and
belief, that in his essence being divine, infinite, omnipotent, glorious, and
quickening all things, according as David witnesses: comprehends in him all
things, without being comprehended of any, and that in his perfect light and
glory, all Angels and blessed spirits are lightened and live. But because that
his infinity, majesty, glory, and brighnes, cannot be beholded of us, for
that it would ravish all our senses, and our sight is not able to endure so
pure and bright a light: whereof Eliseus and Isaias being great Prophets,
having beheld but one only beam, have been thrown down to the ground, and
not able to stand to behold it any longer. But I must return from this
bottomless sea of glorious brightness, and come again to the torches of
heaven, which he has set in his great Pallaice, wherein he has placed us
creeping upon the earth, to receive instruction at their hands: and for
breuities sake, I will go no further then the clear and pure Sun, as the
most perfect and accomplished image of his Creator and maker, which
represents best unto men, the wonderful profoundnes of his great virtues.

Cap. 53.
Of the Sun, the very portraiture of his Creator, and what are his works and
operations.

ANd first I say, that even as men cannot comprehend the quanty of his essence,
being a thousand times greater then it appears to our eyes, as by
demonstrations all Astronomers prove, nor likewise the quality thereof, nor
the manner how it casts his heat and light over the whole world. So also can
we conceive neither by our understanding nor exterior secnes, the greatness or
quality of the divine essence; nor how it has produced it operations in the
creation of the world, in the conservation of the same, nor the manner how it
works to create in the faithful the new man, which fights against the
flesh. Likewise as this great celestial light is in perpetual operation and
moving, to run his great race about the whole world, always doing good, and
bringing infinite commodities to other creatures: so God is always watching and
in action for the benefit and preservation of his creatures. Moreover, as when
a thick cloud has deprived our sight of his beams for a month together or
more, and that this let being taken from us, we begin to see his beams again,
which bring a certain joy or gladness unto us, and drive the cold far from
us: so the faithful never seek to behold God in his works and virtues, but
that they receive great pleasure and delectation. And besides, as when this
divine image retireth back from us into Capricorn, the Caldes coming from the
Northparts, and from the frozen sea coming to afflict all living creatures,
spoiling our mother the earth of all her trim and good ornaments, and making
her naked and ugly to behold: so when God angry at our sins, takes his holy
spirit from us, the prince of this world, of the air, the God of this age, the
ruler of darkness, which is, the devil comes to assail, and enuiron us, to
tempt us and bid us battle, and to annoy us many other ways. But as this
great celestial light goes not from us to forsake us: but to distribute his
light to the people which live under the North Pole, and that by his long
absence, we know better the benefits that we receive by his presence: so God
sometime holds his face from us, to the end that desiring him we should seek
for him, and showing us his countenance again, we should taste better what a
benefit it is to enjoy always his presence. For as this blazing torch coming
toward, being leaped backward to approach unto Cancer, begins to renew the
face of the earth, and to beautify her with greenness, and with an infinite
number of herbs and flowers of diverse colors, giving life to many hundredth
thousand millions of little Annimals, to serve for food to birds and fishes,
to feed their young withal, who by an harmonious melody, full of all joy and
gladness, celebrate the bounty of their sovereign the Sun, which they receive
by such instruments as it pleases him to use to heat again that part of ye
earth, from whence he had absented himself so far, wherein he magnifieth the
omnipotency, bounty and wisdom of his maker, which has attributed to him
so many virtues, to the end that we should wonder at him in his so beautiful
and perfect workmanship: so also he pulls down our presumption, for that we
cannot show any such like pieces of workema^ship, nay, we cannot so much as
conceive by our understanding, how he gives life to so many living things, and
how one only flower is clothed with such diversity of colors. If it be so,
then the greatest and quickest understandings are surmounted by the operations
of one of the creatures of the Almighty: how shall we comprehend those of the
divinity, whereas it works in us of it self, as in Baptism, the water of
regeneration, or in the Lords Supper, in the eating of the body of Jesus
Christ, or in the unity of the three persons in one only divine essence?
Whereby appears that this celestial body is to us of it self a most
excellent Preacher, to make us leave of the vain disputes of the manner hwo God
works in ye sacraments, to content our selus simply with the ordinance that
he has given us in instituting them, and never to go further for the matter.

Cap. 54.
That this light reproves those who detain men in worshipping images, and the
works of their own hands, to seek God by them.

THis same Preacher also reproves the spirit of me, of a most brutish error,
when men being drawn by him to the knowledge of the most high God, by an
elevation of their spirits toward the highest heavens, they turn their back
to him, seeking him here in earth, in buildings made by the handy work of men,
forgetting the lesson of S. Steven, the first Martyr, which was: that God did
not inhabit in Temples made with the hands of men. Which the Sun can
likewise prove unto us by an argument a Minore ad Maius. Thus, if it be so that
all the forces of men are not able to build an house big enough to enclose and
contain me: how is it then that they are so foolish and presumptuous to think
to lodge him that is infinite, and has his dwelling in the inaccessible light,
of the which I am but a spark? how dare they think that he may be contained
nor comprised in houses made by men, and that the temples built by them, and
that their tapers and candles are more agreeable to him then we his great
lights, who without waxing old or consuming, do distribute continually to the
world, so great and admirable a light? For as for their temples they are but
earth: and grant that they be vawted with stone, covered with brick, lead, or
state, yea were it with gold and silver; all that is taken out of the bowels of
the earth. So that all your buildings stand you in no more steed then earthes
and holes do to the Foxes, that is to preserve you from the injuries of the
vehement heat, rain and cold: but you are not in any wise by their means the
nearer to God, nay rather when you are in his temple of the world, they let
you, that you cannot behold his wondrous works, putting as it were a bar
between heaven and you. And as for the images that ye place within them in
contempt of us, by your most detestable ingratitude, seeing that God does
preserve you by me and the rest of the celestial lights, and does bestow on
you all kind of blessings, is it not then a great oversight in you, that in
forsaking us who are the workmanship of the Creator, ye will prefer before
us images made by the devise of men, albeit they approach in nothing, neither
in matter, greatness, quality nor effects, to those that are the handie work
of God. For first they are made of an earthly and dead substance, which comes
nothing near our greatness: without any moving or operation: and without the
heat and light which we have. Moreover, they are but lying Doctors, as Jeremy
the Prophet says: For they have no power, life, wisdom, light, nor bounty,
neither can they see any thing: is it not then falsely done to go about to
represent by them Almighty, who is the welspring of life and light: and him,
who is all goodness it self, and afterward to translate unto them the honor
that appertains unto him? Further, one is pictured that he is thrust into the
side, and blood issuing out, which was never so: another shows a laughing
countenance, and never laugheth. Other are pictured with eyes, and they see
not, some with ears and they hear not, and others with a mouth and yet they
speak not at all. Whereby appears, that there is no verity in their
witness, and that all that they can do, is but to transport the money aut of
our purses into the Italians hands, or to some other of their supposes
employed in their services only. Nor we for our parts, being the true
celestial images, do not represent any lie to your eyes, and the testimony
that we yield to the Almighty is most true: we have not required any
oblations of your gold or silver, nor any other service or adoration, as the
Italians have done by their dead images: and nothing else do we request at your
hands, but that you will yield to the Almighty* the glory and honor of all
things as apperteineth to him, not giving away any part thereof, to any
creature that ever was, or is at this present under the firmament. See here
briefly, what is the instruction and lesson of him who marches as King among
other Plannets.

Cap. 55.
How that Italians are proved to have abused the world, in making men go to
Jerusalem, by the form of the firmament.

COme we now to this great, gilden, and azured Heaven, whose speech is all one
as before, publishing from one Pole to the other, and over all the world, that
what account soever men make of their earthly Temples, they come nothing near
it in beauty, greatness, long continuance and lust. For the greatest tempell
that ever was built, was but of half aleague in lenght, and the Astronomers
afferme that their is fifty nine Millions of leagues from the earth unto they
starry Heaven, and from they other side as much whereby it should follow that my
roundnes should contain very near three hundred fifty and four Millions of
leagues, and yet for all that cannot contain the infinite essence of God, How
then do men suffer themselves to be abused worse then brute beasts by the
Romans and their Italian Council, who make them believe that they can shut him
into there pipes in their Temples, to behold him therein, and to carry him
under their Canapes to the end to rob you by this mean of your money, and
altogether to begiule you. They same heaven being round and equally distant in
all parts from they earth: does manifest unto men that their is no one place
more nere to him or his heavenly glory, then another. In this he conuinceth of
a shamefastlie and falsehod the Roman Counsel, and those that mainetaine it,
who to approach to God, caused in times paste great toupes of men to trot so
far as Jerusalem and Rome, to go the sooner into God almighties Paradise,
although indeed this was but a mask and shift found out and practiced by the
Italians to advance and increase their Domination, and so to fish money out of
Judea Syria: notwithstanding by this consinage they have caused to perish in
these voyages, that they made them to undertake both Christian Kings and
Princes, and more then two millions of men, speaking not of their great
travels, perils, maladies, and other sorrows: besides that they have made them
endure, whose chance it was to return from so long a vyage. These are then
they goodly and they Celestial lessons which are given us from above, as most
excellent preservatives against the craft and cautelous dealing of the
Italians, by the which if we be not al together out of our wites, we shall be by
them set at all liberty and wind our necks out of their Domination, and by
they same means will keep our money in our purses, to help us at our need,
and also to do our friends good, and these that we shall see stand in any
great necessity.

Cap. 56.
The harmony of they holy Scriptures of the Bible and of the heavenly
creatures to humble man to give glory only to God, and to seek him above in
heaven.

But to the one that we may be armed on every side, God has not only provided
for us these heavenly instruction: but also to instruct us more familiarly, he
has left us his Apostles and Prophets to teach us all after one manner, and by
the same lessons, of they number of which if we will take the most heavenly, to
wit, King David in his Canticles, I say they Prophet, S. Luke and S. John in
their Gospels, S. Paul to the Romans and to they Galathians, and S. Peter in
his first Epistle; we shall find they swetest harmony and goodlyest
Concordance that may be devised to be found amongst all the Preachers of his
word that are in the world. And see this is the true touch stone, whereby we
must examine all they writings and doctrines of men: that is to wit: whether
they agree with they testimonies that God gives of himself by his creatures:
which as they publish that all things are proceeded from a supreme and former
cause that does maintain and preserve them: so also must he give him the
hommage of all his benefits, and to have recourse to him as to a bottomeles
fountain, to lade out of him all blessings, as well spiritual as temperall,
confessing his greatness, bounty, and excellency, in respect of his great and
admirable works, to humble us, and to tame this pride growing in us by nature,
in exalting him as the giver of all that which we have, to depend wholly on his
good pleasure, and most holy will: And to make proof of this great
concordance: the royal Prophet David speaks unto the eternal to this effect:
Call upon me when thou art in trouble and I will help thee, and thou shall
worship me. Wherein we see a strict commandment to call upon God, and to gine
him thanks, as an act properly due to the divinity and incommunicable to all
the rest of his creatures: as he speaks in another place, To thee O God, who
art above in the heavens, we lift our eyes.

For to show us the form of calling upon him, which is not to have our
spirits fixed here in earth in the works of men's hands: but to eleuate them
toward the heavens, as Christ himself used saying: Our Father which art in
heaven, and so forth: And as for faith, that it only ought to look up to
God: this Prophet very well proves. In God is my soul well pleased, he
only is my safeguard, and the rock of my defense, he is my saving health, and
my strong fortress, so that I shall not fall, for he holds me up. And if we
regard well, a great part of the Psalms, and amongst the rest, the 104. and
118 to what do they tend but to magnify the excellence, beuty, and greatness of
the works of God? And surely, there is no thing so excellent for man to
practice, as to exercise himself in the contemplation of them, to give the
praise and honor thereof unto his Creator. And all the rest of the Psalms
tend but to extol the admirable virtues of the living God, as his bounty,
power, mercy, justice, liberality and clemency. Moreover, there are certain
principal verses amongst the rest, which by the riches of an immitable
eloquence, do praise, set forth, and above all things advance his holy and
divine law: showing that the sovereign felicity of man consists in the
mediation thereof day and night: forcing himself with all his heart, thoroughly
to observe the same. But after that he has thus spoken of God, of his works,
and of his law: what says he, I pray you concerning men, and of his own
person? when he says. What is man? he is a thing of naught, and all that he
worshippeth is but vanity: and in another place, the same kingly Prophet
says: All are gone out of the way: they are all corrupt, there is none that
does good, no not one. And speaking of his own person, although he were the
most holy king that ever reigned over Gods people, he says: Be merciful to me
O God a pore sinner, etc. and that his mother has conceived him in sin,
praying God to wash him, and to purge him from all his iniquities, as him only
that could do it.

Now having thus much spoken of man and of his doings, to abate and pull down
his pride and presumption, and not to leave him there, but to prepare him to
seek all that which he wants in the person of his redeemer: embracing him by
a true and lively faith, as being him that to satisfy the divine justice,
should carry all our transgressions and sins upon his own back, as David
describes in the 22. Psalm, and the Prophet Esaias in the 53. Chapter of his
prophecy, which they did set down before the coming of Christ, and after his
death his Apostles, well I have proved by a most admirable consent and unity.
He that will then no more submit himself under the Italian yoke, to be raunged
under their Domination: let him read quickly the aforesaid books, and
consider and ponder them well in his mind, weighing diligently every word, and
every sentence one after another: and conferring advisedly the beginning with
the middle, and the end. Let him examine this doctrine with other instructions
that God does give us particularly both in heaven and in earth: not to
approve and make them serve to our fantasies and opinions, but laying all them
wholly aside, to take their instructions, and simply to follow their lessens.
In this doing, he shall learn that we are all Burgesses and felow-Citizens of
the great Temple and sumptuous palace of our God, and that by the
consideration of our vicious and poor nature, he shall be taught to mount
above the heavens, to invoke upon God, and to obtain by this mean, all
things whereof he shall stand in need. And from thence, coming unto his most
holy and sacred word, magnifiyng it as the only instrument of our salvation,
and a perfect declaration of the counsel and will of God toward men: and
having the knowledge of these things, no man shall be able to withdraw us
from this way of warshipping GOD on high, to seek him in Temples, buildings,
and other places of this earth, but if we go to those places that shall be
only to make profession of our faith, to be assistant at public prayers, to
hear the word of God, to examine whether the Doctrine that is taught us be
conformable to these Doctors, of whom I have now spoken: which when we shall
find, we shall embrace as divine and of God, and putting us again in mind,
and confirming those things which the preached, we shall receive it as most
heavenly doctrine: but if it tend to exalt men and their works only to please
them withal, we shall receive it as proceeding from the presumption and
ouer-sight of men, who take themselves to be wiser then God, and for such
stuff as may entangle the people in the nets of seruilitie, and fill only the
purses of worldly Pastors: wherefore, without any regard from whence it
proceeds, whether from Coucels or Synods, or from any other sort of
Ecclefiasticall persons whatsoener, we will reject it, think our selves no
more hounden unto the observation thereof, then to the dreams and tales of
old women. On the other side knowing that life everlasting is given us by the
grace of God in our Lord Jesus Christ, and is offered gratis to all men: what
ginnes soever the Italians and such like can lay to draw our money finely from
us, we shall go by them well enough, making as though we saw them not, and
as though we never heard talk of them, These are then the most sure and
certain remedies, by the which all true Christians may easily wind
themselves out from the Italian Domination, and make a prouiso, that their
money be no more transported to Rome, but tarry at home iu their own purses.

Cap. 57.
The eonclusion of this present discourse.

VVHerhfore thou Spaniard, having they place of the Head, which workest all
that thou can to reduce under thy Domination other nations which should be
the eye of Christendom, thou ought to have as much wit as any other people,
It is not then agreat blindness for thee to behold thy self in such slavery to
the Roman Counsel, that thou art no more then the executour and drudge of
their wills, and that they make the tributarie to them in huge and infinite
sumes of money, whereas thou did never get one penny from them. And thou
French man which art the heart of Christendom from whom should flow all motions
of virtues to encourage the other parts, thou have almost suffered thy self
to be overcome under the spiritual Domination of this nation, by their
flatteries and cautelous shifts, suffering them to put a knife into thine own
hands to destroy thy self, to set all in combustion and ruin, to thend that
they may fish in thine overthrow and destruction? As for Germany, the seat and
residence of the Empire, to the which the Apostles and the first Bishops of
Rome yielded all obedience and subjection, what greater cowardlines, shame and
dishonor can there be on her side, then that in degenerating from their
ancient Cesars, and other Roman Emperors, under the which all the world did
tremble: they are at this present become the slaves and vassals of Rome, and
brought so low as to be glad to hold the Styrrop of some filthy Monk, who has
been chosen Pope. And if heretofore you have had the eyes of your wit and
understanding so much dimmed by the darkness of the time, suffering your selves
to be made so very fools, that they might use you at their pleasure, now in
this great light which shines at this present, and is not yet gone from you,
amend your former faults to recover your honor, and seek to rule and sway
over them another while in your turn, and to get from them again under some
color whatsoever all the money they have in their fingers of yours and your
people paying them now at the last home according to their deseruings and
cursed intentions: and that according to good rule that they have a long time
kept in Christendom, they may have their due desert at the last paid them to
the uttermost.

Laus Deo. Finis. G. B. A. F.
A Table of the Contents of this book.
A Description of Itlie and the causes of the subtilty of that people, cap. 1.
How in the persons of Romulus and Numa Pompilius there were two kind of
gouerments prefigured among the Romans. cap. 2. How the subtle Italian
borrows the name of the Pope to come to his pretenses with more faulitie.
cap. 3. A lively pattern of Italian subtlety in the person of Caternie de
Medicis and her Florentine council. cap. 4. How of any light occasion this
nation can devise to effect great matters. cap. 5. The Roman sows divisions
and pulls away the snbstaunce of a people to enrich himself, and to do with
it at his pleasure. cap. 6. How this nation going about to ruin a country
begins with some one estate, and from thence comes to all the rest by
degrees, and how the French can by no means take such oppertunitie when it
serves them. caq. 7. Upon what occasion the Romans changed there Monarchy
into popular Estate: that is to wit, upon the Rauishment of Lucretia committed
by their King Terquni, cap. 8. How the Romans by pretense of their faith found
means to angment there Domination. cap. 9. The ruin of the first Roman
Domination and the causes thereof. cap. 10. Of they begininges and first
foundations of the second Domination of the Romans in Christendom. cap. 11.
How in creating an universal Bishop at Rome the Romans entered into possession
of a fare more excellent Domination then that the had lost before. cap. 12. How
they people follow none other Religion, but that which their Pastors teaches
them, and how they Romans give us one according to their own nature, cap. 13.
A comparason of the Divine service invented by the Italians with the council
of some subtle Physician cap. 14. That they err not at Rome for any diversity
of Religions, so they tend only to maintain their Domination cap. 15. That the
Romans are not contented to stay themselves with that which is sperituall, but
would also dispose the kingdoms of the earth at their pleasure. cap. 16. That
to make the kings of ye earth vassals tributary to the Romans they sow wares
amongst them and use censurs. cap. 17. The council of Rome sets Kings and
Christian Princes together by the ears, and the way how they discover all
their councels and enterprises. cap. 18. The great forces of Excmmuniation to
put the kings of the earth in fear, to make them their tributaries, and the
magnanimity of Kings of France. cap. 19. That it is a very false pretext that
they take to refuse the King for his Religion sake, seeing the have a spite at
all his race, and with them no more well, although they were never so great
Catholics. cap. 20. The great subtlety of the council of Rome in getting
into their hands the soueraignitie of the newfound world conquered by the
Spaniards. cap. 24. The causes why the money that is transported to Rome is
called by the name of quintessence cap. 22. Of the excellency of the money
which is transported to Rome out of other countries and how the Italians only
can fetch it thither. cap. 23. How this money which is transported to Rome does
fly with an incredible swiftnes. cap. 24. A descripsion of certain learned
men, which has alwaie feared they council of Rome and the causes why. cap.
25. The first mean the Romans use to mainetaine their Domination cap. 26. A
second mean that the have to keep men in their service still. cap. 27. The
third mean whereby the fortify themselves which the forces of three of the
most mightiest in all Christendom. cap. 28. A demonstration how the council of
Rome wins to their side, Princes younger brothers, and makes their
voluntary vassals. cap. 29. Begging friars sent abroad and employed by the
Romans to set upon those that dare open their mouths against their Domination.
cap. 30. Of the Jesuits service to blind youth with all to the end to make them
adore the Italian inventions. cap. 31. A breife Refutation of the Iesuistes.
cap. 32. The council of Rome is like to certain Pettifogging Layers, who will
not consent to have their causes disputed and heard in open audience. cap. 33.
The breife confutation of a most pestiferous book published in France under
the name of (the Catholic English man) cap. 34. How this false Catholic
Englishman void of all humanity transformeth himself into all cruelty and
rage. cap. 35. The first remedy by overthrowing the foundation stone upon the
which the Roman Domination is builded, cap. 36. Constantine the great King of
England opposed himself against the tyranuos persecutors of Christians that
Italy brought forth. cap. 37 An example of the Italians subtle dealing with
the Admiral of chastillon. cap. 38. How the Bishop of Rome being created
universal, other nations should not suffer the Italians to have him only to
themselves. cap. 39. That the council of Italy never made consience to cut
clear of the authority of the Pope when they smelt any thing for them to be
gained. cap. 40. That other kingdoms may create and constituts Popes within
themselves, because they Italians refuse these to be common to all. cap. 41
Arguments in defense of a Pope, if their were any France, against him of Rome.
cap. 42. How the Roman Ecclesiastic gnaweth the people of his own country,
and teaches those of other nation to do the like to their countrymen. cap. 43
Very sit means to hinder the Ecclesiastic for meddling with that which
concerns the magistrates. cap. 44. That it is very requisite that the
Magistrate should set his and to the Reformation of Churches, because that will
never be done by means of any Pastors. cap. 45. That it is very needful to
withstaud the enterprises of Churchmen, be they preistly or ministers and to
chose protectors for the conservation of the people. cap. 46. That it is the
duty of Pastors to plant the Faith, and to route out vice and sin and not
to make laws. cap. 47. That the controversies about the Lords supper by which
the Pastors trouble the whole earth are easily to be appeased and quited if
the Magistrates would but go about in good ernest. cap. 48. That in vain we
look for deliverance out of the misery of France by any assemblies of
Pastors. cap. 49. That all Christians are agreed of the place of joy and
happiness, whether the must go, but disagree concerning the ways that must
lead them thither. cap. 50. That men being contrary in opinions concerning the
way of their salvation they must receive instruction of the celestial bodies.
cap. 51. That the lights of heaven draw us to seek God in heaven, and to
witness that their creator is in finite and incomprehensible. cap. 52. Of the
sun the very portraiture of his cratour, and what are his works and
operations. cap. 53. That this light reproves those, who detain men in
worshipping Images, and the works of their own hands. cap. 54. How the
Italians are proved to have abuzed the world in making men go to Jerusalem, by
the form of the firmament. cap. 55. The Harmony of the holy Scriptures of the
Bible, and of the heavenly creatures, to humble man to give glory only to
God, and to seek him above in heaven. cap. 56. The conclnsion of this present
Discourse. cap. 57.

