A DISCOVERY OF THE Abominable Delusions of those, who call themselves the
Family of Love.

WHEREIN THEIR FALSE CHRIST, and false Profession is plainly laid open, and
all their gross Cauils clearly confuted.

PRO. 28. They that forsake the Law praise the wicked: but they that keep th
Law, set themselves against them.

REVEL. 2.6. But this thou have, that thou hate the works of the
Nicolaitans, which I also hate.

Printed. M.D.CXXII.

TO THE READER.
AMong the many Tares that the Envious man has sown in these last Days of
the world; there are two principal ones, by which he so preuayleth (among them
that acknowledge a Christ) that he brings many millions of souls to
eternal perdition; which we earnestly beseech may be seriously considered.
One is: a persuasion he works in many, that if they have the knowledge of
Christ in words, and do make a profession of him with their lips and mouth.
and so are accounted Christians by name, practicing some observations, which
have a show of his sacred Commandments, although in deed and Truth they be
the inventions of Men; this they think and are persuaded is Christianity
effectual, and will serve sufficiently to bring them to heaven.

A second is: that when the Devil sees he cannot prevail with diverse in this
perswation, but that they see Christianity is another thing, then a bare
profession of Christ; then by little and little he throws them upon these
fearful rocks of Familisme; to believe and be persuaded, that true
Christianity, and the worship of God, is only inward in the heart, and not at
all in any outward observation, or Bodily performance whatsoever: and that the
knowledge of a Christ, who by his bodily Death suffered for our sins, is
needless; which being effectually wrought in their hearts, they grow
presently to a loathing of the true Christ. and the bodily observation of all
Christ's Ordinances, for the gathering of his Church: for his Ministry: for his
Worship: and for his Church government, and all the appertainings thereof:
hating and contending against all, that in the fear of God, stand for the
maintenance of them. And not so only, but also defend with a high hand, that
men may be saved, without knowledge or Faith in the Blood of the man Christ;
and that Christians ought to subject their bodies at the Magistrates command,
in all outward reverence, at any Idolatrous abomination, Mahometisme, Papisme,
or whatsoever, keeping their hearts to God: all which commands of the
Magistrates, they account but Idle vanities, as shall be showed.

And for the spreading of these, and many other most fearful things; the
Devil has raised up H.N. the most skillful workman of this Craft: and for his
Successors (though botchers in respect of their Master) M.P. who calls
himself the mighty Prince of the Hebrews; and his servant; who writes thus:
Servant of M.P. a true Certif. cap. 1. sect. 10.
It is not the pride of our manly being, that we mean to be equal in this or
that, but only we mean God to be the very fame in M. P. and the servant of
M.P. that he was in H.N. etc. These having written diverse Books, many of which
we have read, by which they have gotten many Disciples, especially such, as
having known much truth (which usually is accompaned with the Cross of
Christ) have not only forsaken that truth, wherewith they were enlightened,
but now do most woefully blaspheme it; whose unjust accusation of us, and
proud boasts, occationeth the publishing of this little work.

And although these especially be dealt with, yet there are diverse others (who
will not be called Familists) that are deeply tainted with diverse of these
things; some, called the scattered flock, who agree with the former, that they
may remain in Babylon, A little book to the Church of Rome. pa. 113.
and there mourn and tarry, etc. And what account they make of the Lords
Ordinances, may appear by that they write of Baptism, In T.L. aduertis. pa.
5.8
which they say, is tears: tears is ye water in Baptism, etc.

Another sort there are, who although they have not the name of Familists, in
that they dislike many of their blasphemies, yet are dangerously affected with
one of their maine grounds: They cry out against outward Church: Ministry:
Worship: and Church government: and feeke and sue to the Magistrate for
reformation thereof; which when they cannot obtain, they submit, and earnestly
persuade others to submit to those things, (which being against their
Consciences) they cry out of, only to avoid the cross of Christ; and they
persuade the people, that seeing they have had comfort in that estate, although
the things they practice be most vile, yet they may remain in the practice
thereof: and they being reproved for speaking evil of that they practice, and
submit to, they have Fig-leaues to cover this their naked hypocrisy; and when
the examples of the Disciples and Churches of Christ are brought to reprove
their courses; they answer: These were invisible Churches; the Elect in the
outward Church; and diverse such fancies, whose courses herein, are met withal
in this writing following.

The mean betwixt these we desire to walk in, not approving it sufficient for
justification, to have a Fleshly knowledge of Christ only; or to have respect
to any outward observation or bodily service where the soul or affection is
wanting: For in all the Ordinances of Christ's Gospel, nothing avails but a
new creature: Gal. 6.15. 2. Cor. 5.17 Ioh. 3.5.
and if any be in Christ he is a new creature: and none can enter into the
kingdom of heaven, except he be borne again.

But we do abhor any hypocritical conceits, which indeed are deceits,
where the knowledge and Faith of Christ after the flesh, and those bodily
observations that Jesus Christ commands, is despised and made of none
effect; yea where in stead thereof any manner of Idol-seruice is set up and
outwardly reverenced. Christ tells us, It becomes us to fulfill all
righteousness, Math. 3.
in bodily washing or Baptizing: and as often as we eat that bread of
Communion, 1. Cor. 11.26.
and drink that Cup, we show forth the Lords death, till he come. God has
made our Bodies, redeemed them, preserves them, Psalm. 119.113.
and will glorify them; so as we will glorify him with both, in abhorring
vain inventions, and loving his Law. Christ has coupled soul and body
together, and let no man separate them, in his service. If bodily observations
be abandoned in the Commandments of the first table concerning the worship of
God, Mat. 23.38.
which is the great Commandment: and that we may with our bodies perform any
worship, why is not the Commands of the second Table, our duty toward man
abandoned in all bodily observations? and that our bodies may steal, Whore,
Lie, Murder, and what not? which thing the oldest Father of this Family does
not stick at, as is showed. Page 54.

In dealing with this woeful people, let none take offense that we speak
sharply to them, but consider the causes thereof. They have been and are the
greatest enemies of righteousness that ever were, faining a God, and a Christ,
according to their own fleshly hearts: and have more perverted the straight
way of the Lord, then ever did any; and therefore we having Christ and his
Apostles for our example herein, we trust none will condemn us, but those
that are touched: for if any be offended at this our Discovery, it is testimony
sufficient what they are; we mention the names of none, least they should have
color to say we persecute them. The wicked and hypocritical Scribes and
Pharisees for whom was reserved the damnation of Hell. Elimas the Sorcerer, Mat.
23.33.
Iannes and Iambres, Hymeneus and Philetus, and all the rest, whose fearful
judgments are written; are not so wicked in their blasphemies as these are, as
shall plainly appear; and therefore let all pronounce against them the
judgments that are written, that others may hear and fear, and do no more
such wickedness.

It is merely for want of love of the Truth that men are given up to such
fearful delusions; from which, that we may be delivered, let us follow the
Truth, and that in love; which truth is contained in the holy Scriptures, and
not in the Dreams of H.N. or any other. Heb. 1.2.
In these last days the Father has spoken by his Son Jesus Christ; who was
faithful as Moses. Heb. 3.2. Act. 3.22. Mat. 17.5. Act. 3.23. Gal. 1.8.
Moses sends us to him. The Father sends us to him. And he that will not hear
this Prophet shall be destroyed. And cursed shall he be, that teaches
otherwise then he has taught by himself and his Apostles. And his Name shall
be taken out of the book of Life, that takes from it, Revel. 22.18.19.
and the plagues which are written shall be added to him, that adds to the
words of this Son of God. All which the Lords mouth has spoken.

Thus have we taken this pains for the sake of those that are ignorant of
these things; to the and that they seeing the Pit, may be warned, and saved
from falling into it; which God for his Christ's sake, Grant to every soul.
Amen.

(...)

A DISCOVERY OF THE FAMILY OF LOVE.
THE wisdom of GOD, not only forewarneth (plentifully in the Scriptures) To
take heed of false Prophets, Math. 7.15
and deceivers, in that many are gone out into the world; 1. Ioh. 4.1.
but also teaches to make their madness manifest to all men, 2. Tim. 3.9.
that their deceits and craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive being
made known, all may be preserved from their snare, and be able to denounce
against them the Judgments which are written. Psalm. 149.9.


Our Savior tells us; that after the shortning of those dreadful days of
the abomination of Desolation, men shall say, Lo here is Christ, lo there
is Christ, but believe them not, Math. 24.22. etc.
go not thither neither follow them, And if any shall say: he is in a Desert,
or in a secret place, Go not forth, believe it not, For as the Lightning
comes out of the East, and is seen unto the West, so shall the coming of
the Son of man be, even that bright Coming, spoken of 2. These. 2.8. For the
consuming of that man of Sin. Where plainly we are taught, that the way of
the Lord JESUS in the Gospel is plain and manifest, Esa. 42.16.
For he will lead the Blind by the way that they knew not, and will make
darkness Light before them, and crooked things straight, and the light of the
Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, Esa. 30.26.
and the light of the Sun shall be 7. fold, and as the light of 7. Days, in
the day that the Lord will bind up the breach of his people, and heal the
stroke of their wound; and thither must men go that will find Christ indeed,
For all his ways are plain to him that will understand, Pro. 8.9.
and straight to them that would find knowledge, Pro. 14.6.
and his Wisdom is easy to him that will understand.

But where obscurity and darkness is, a people of a dark speech that thou
can not perceive, and of a stammering tongue that thou can not understand,
thither must we not go, nor such must we not follow, Pro. 5.5. etc
For the paths of a strange woman are moveable thou can not know them; keep
thy way far from her, and come not near the door of her house, for her
feet go down to Death, and her steps take hold on Hell, she waigheth not
the way of Life. This were sufficient, if there were no more, to diswade all
that will not wilfully perish, from harkening unto, believing, or following,
those most obscure, intricate, and tedious deceipts of that people (followers
of that oldest Elder, or ancient deceiuer Henry Nicholas) who term themselves
the family of Love, whose execrable blasphemies are broached so obscurely both
by words and writings (as has been always observed by those that have had to
do with them) that the depth of Satan in them, is of many not easily discerned.

Most true it is, they have much more poisoned this Kingdom in former times
then of late years, at which times diverse discoueries and confutations has
been made; but seeing now they spring afresh, and that they have destroyed the
Faith of certain, near and dear unto us; as also that they have challenged
some of us (with great boasts and brags) to combat with them; and have in
Writing under their hands testified, that we walk in so many evils (the
particulars whereof are hereafter named and answered) that none fearing. God
may have any fellowship with us. In consideration of all which, and to testify
our unfeigned detestation of their profession, as also to clear our selves of
their unjust accusations; we trust no indifferent person will judge of us
otherwise the^ well, for thus publicly dealing with them.

Therefore in the fear of God; with reverence of his Sacred mysteries: with
unfeigned humiliation of our unworthiness: with love to Gods truth: and a hearty
detestatio^ of yt which is evil, we will proceed only to deal in such things
as we have by the now Family, or their favorites been provoked unto. And first
of their Christ.

That they hold another Christ then the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a
Ransom for all men, not only H. N. has published, but also the present
Family in England, do with stifnes justify.

H. N. and the Familyes Christ.

First, H.N. their oldest Elder (or rather their God, as shall plainly appear)
has thus written.

This same true light is the Anointed with the Holy Ghost, Euang. Reg. Cap.
13. sect. 2.
which anointed in Hebrew is named Messiah, and in Greek Christus, he was
also in times past called of certain Rabbis among the Jews, H. N. Christ the
perfection
the Lord his Saboth. And they say that the same Anointed is the 7th day in
the Paradise of God, wherein God rested from all his works, and is the
(Perfection) the which also is very true, etc.

And in the same Chap. thus: Oh that they yet now awaked and took heed in the
word of the service of Love unto this Gracious time, The word of the service
of Love is the Christ.
and gave ear unto the same, that they might understand their safe making, and
so then be rightly and according to the truth brought into the true being,
that is unto Christ.

And again, (speaking in praise of the Romish Priests) thus: Therefore they
were joined with others in the service of the Holyworde, Euang Reg. Cap. 3.
sect 14.
because they let pass the childhood or the youngnes of the holy
understanding, and grew up according to the requiring of the service of Love,
The perfection of the oldest Father is H. N's. Christ.
unto the manly agednesse of Christ, that is unto the true being of the oldest
and holiest Father.

And again thus: Hereunto serve the Parish Priests, as to such procurators or
helpers forward of the Communalties, Euang. Chap. 14. sect. 16.
for to bear a good care over them, and to witness and teach them daily the
holy understanding of Christ; the oldest Father.

Also thus: First exhort. of H.N. cap. 12. sect. 22.34.
If ye will not that the wrath of God come or fall upon you, so deal
faithfully before God and his holiness, and walk with your Spirit in the
lovely and virtuous being, fasten your minds thereto, and build your
righteousness thereon, for that is an eternal fast standing foundation, whereon
all Gods Prophets and holy ones have builded, and is, Christ himself.

So that H.N's. Christ is plainly by his own testimony; The perfection in the
Lovely being, whereunto his Elders do attain, and not the man Christ.
Concerning whom he thus writes.

Oh alas, how great Contention and unprofitable Disputations has there been,
Euan. cap. 18 sect. 17.
concerning the Conception of Jesus Christ in the womb of Mary, and touching
his Birth! but if they all which contended hereabout had known the power of
God, and that also the mystery of the mind and works of God, had been given
them to understand, so should they the^ verily not have contended thereabout.
For his Successor writes thus: Where it is come to pass that all riches of
the Spirit is gone clean away, The salutation of M. P. called the last trumpt.
sect. 12. etc.
there the mind is become a poor widow: and the same widow brings forth a
Maiden to light, which will conceive the holy thing coming of the holy Ghost,
for then the power of the highest shall ouershadow the same Virgin, and she
shall thereby conceive God with us, even the deliverer from all thraldom and
bondage.

We might allege much more of their intricate and tedious stuffo, but it is
wearisome.

According to which damnable Doctrine, his now followers affirm: That men may
be saved by the works of the Law; without knowledge or Faith in the blood of
the man Christ Jesus: yea they hold it a mere fable, and speak of it with
great contempt, that we look for justification with God in and through
another; that we look for justification without us; that we speak of
imputative righteousness; that we hold justification by believing; for in
truth they do not hold that Christ's Death and bloodshed has purchased any
man; but that he was an example to us and such like; for they hold that those
Gentiles, Romans 2. kept the Law, which (say they) was the Christ within them,
and those by this Christ, namely by keeping the Law were justified.

Which detestable blasphemies of H.N. and his followers, (of making Christ to
be a power and perfection in man, which is his justification) might rather be
wondered at then confuted, were it not that the Devil in his instruments
transformeth himself into an Angel of light, to deceive the hearts of the
simple, for whose cause we have endeauored to say something.

What Jesus Christ is; for whom he has endured all his sufferings; without
Faith in whom, no soul can have salvation.
THat Jesus signifies a Savior, Math. 1.2^
and Christ anointed; so that he is the anointed Savior, to save his people
from their sins, is sufficiently known every where in the Scripture.

And although he be God over all Blessed for ever, yet also is he true man,
ordained before the foundation of the world, promised to Adam when he had
sinned, and to Abraham and the Fathers.

The Prophets also declare the certainty hereof, A Virgin shall Conceive and
bear a Son, Esa. 7.14.
and she shall call his name, God with us. Unto us a Child is borne, unto us
a Son is given, Esa. 9.6.
he shall call his name Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, etc. And a
Woman shall compass a man. Ier. 31.22.
And in the fullness of time God sent his Son made of a Woman, etc. This Son
of God thus made Flesh, dwelt dmong us, being sent of the Father to declare and
do his will; in which estate (being like to us in all things Sin excepted)
he suffered not only the cursed Death of the Cross, Revel. 19.15.
but also trod the winepresse of the wrath of God, the agony of which was so
great, that he not only sweat drops of Blood, but also cried, Mat. 27.46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me: and if it be possible let this Cup
pass from me. This being the true Jesus Christ that came by Water and Blood,
1. Ioh. 5.6.
witnessed by the Spirit of truth; thus ordained, promised, Prophesied of, and
performed; And now if it be proved, that what he did, he did it in Obedience
to his Father, yet for the benefit of others, and that without the knowledge
of, and Faith in him no soul ever was or can be saved; we say if these things
be plainly proved, that cursed fiction of the Christ of H. N. and his
followers will appear to be most abominable.

Therefore first will we prove that Christ's sufferings were for others. That
he dyed for sin is manifest. That himself had no sin, is as manifest;
therefore of necessity he must dye for the sins of others. That he dyed for
sin is proved. Yet the Lord would break him, and make him subject to
infirmities, when he shall make his soul an Offering for sin, etc. Esa.
53.10. Heb. 9.10 c. 1. Pet. 3.18.
All the sin Offerings were types of his sufferings for Sin, and he once
suffered for sins.

That he had no sin himself, is proved; Though he had done no wickedness
neither was any deceit in his mouth. Esa. 53.9. 2. Cor. 5.21
For he has made him to be Sin for us, that knew no sin, etc. But was in
all things tempted in like sort, Heb. 4.15.
yet without Sin; 1. Pet. 1.19. and 2.22.
He was that Lamb of God undefiled and without spot. He did no sin, neither
was guile found in his mouth, he was that just one, Cap. 3.18.
who appeared to take away our sins, and in him is no sin.

That he suffered for the sins of others, although what is said be proof
sufficient, yet if any thing might be accounted plain with these woeful men,
manifold testimonies might be added; Esa. 53.5.6.
you see Christ appeared to take away our sins; he was wounded for our
transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace
was upon him, and with his stripes are we healed: and the Lord laid upon him
the iniquity of us all, he powered out his soul unto the Death: he bare the
sins of many, and paid for the trespassers: he dyed for the ungodly: Romans
5.6.8.9.10.
for Sinners: his Blood iustifies others: his Death reconciled us when we were
his enemies: he was given to Death for us: for our Sins: Romans 8.32. 2 Cor.
5.15 Gal. 3.13. and 4.5. 1. Pet. 2.21.24.
he dyed for all that were Dead: Christ redeemed us from the Curse of the Law,
by his suffering, even the cursed Death of the Cross, that he might Redeem
them that were under the Law: who his own self, bare our sins in his Body
on the Tree, 1. Pet. 3.18 and 4.1. 1. Tim. 2.6. 1. Ioh. 2.2.
etc. Christ the Just suffered for the unjust: and he has suffered for us in
the Flesh: he gave himself a Ransom for all men: and he is the
reconciliation for the Sins of the whole world.

Secondly, it is manifest that none can have salvation, but by Faith in those
Sufferings of that man CHRIST JESUS. Mar. 16.16
He that beleeneth and is Baptized shall be faued: as many as receives him to
them, Ioh. 1.12.
he gave power to be the sons of God, even as many as believe in his Name:
Ioh. 3.16.
And whosoever Believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting Life:
he that believes not is Condemned already: Be it known unto you men and
Brethren, that through this man is Preached unto you forgiveness of Sins; and
from all things from the which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses,
Act. 13.38.39.
by him every one that Believes is justified.

The righteousness of God is manifest unto all and upon all that Believe. Romans
3.22.
And Abraham the Father of the Faithful he believed, and it was imputed unto
him for righteousness: Romans 4.24.
And to us also shall it be imputed for Justice which believe: and the Just
shall live by Faith: Gal. 3.11.
And we are the sons of God by Faith in Christ Jesus.

The just shall live by Faith in his Son Christ Jesus; who dare say this is a
fable, to seek Justice in another then in our selves? and that by the Law men
may be justified before God, as after it shall appear they do.

From all which testimonies we confidently affirm, that never any Sinner was
saved, but by Faith in Christ, either believing him to come, by the Promise of
God, to pay the ransom for man's sin: Or that he is come to perform the
same; For they that were saved before his Coming, did believe in him,
according to the promise of the Father: but after he is come, all must believe
(as himself says) That I am he, Ioh. 8, 24.
or else they shall dye in their sins.

All which is so evident that it may be maruailed at, that the Devil should so
besot men with blindness; as that they should contradict so evident a Truth; and
the rather because in words they acknowledge the Scriptures, and in their
Writings plentifully quote them; but indeed it is certain, it is but to blind
the eyes of the simple: For as the Master says, Therefore it is assuredly all
false and lies, H.N. Dialog. cap. 16. sect 16.
seducing and deceitful, what the vngodded or vnilluminate men, out of the
Imagination of their knowledge, and out of the learnednes of the Scriptures,
bring forth; institute, Preach, or teach. They Preach indeed the Letter, but
not the word of the living God. Let them esteem themselves as holy as they
will, they are all a false Christianity, and a deuillish Synagogue or School.
So say his Disciples, That we (out of the Family of Love) understand not one
word in all the universal Bible, and that we are in the way of infernal
darkness.

So that pretend what they will, they reject all Scripture, further then may
stand with H. N. and his fellow Elders in the Family of Love. For thus further
they write.

They ought to beware that, that they distrust not the Eldest in the Family of
Love, H. N. in 1. exhor. cap. 13 Diuis. 11. fol. 31.
nor suspect any manner of evil or vnwisedome by him, nor yet in any wise
persuade themselves that the Exercises, documents or Instructions, which are
taught or set forth before them by the Father of the Family of Love, or oldest
Elder, are too slight too childish, or too unwise for them to follow after, or
to obey, but with perfect hearts humbly and singly minded, as good willing
Children, to receive the same instructions proceeding out of the wisdom and
Council of the Eldest, and to stand even so submitted till they come unto the
manly oldnesse in the Love.

Again, he says: The Scripturely learned man has no knowledge of Gods
matters, In the Prophecy, cap. 8.
he cannot understand any tittle, much less interpret or expound the same to
others, it is given only to the Family of Love to understand the secrets
thereof.

Again, thus: My Children and you Family of Love, give ear to me your
Father, live according to my Doctrine, Jn his 1. exhort. cap. 11. sect. 1.2.
that it may go well with you, take heed to my Doctrine, and what I do set
forth and teach, that it may be a Seal of life, and a witness of truth in your
hearts, for it is your Life.

And again thus: Let your selves now in all your being, nature, mind, and
disposition, Crying voice cap. 3. sect. 11
become renewed through the love in her service, and give all your understanding
captive under the obedience of the Love. And so teaches his Children to say: O
my Father in the Love, 1. Exhor. cap. 13. sect. 2.
I submit my self and all my understanding under the wisdom of thy Doctrine.
Let all judge if these wretches, abolish not the Scriptures, to set up their
own deuillish inventions, what show of the Scriptures soever they make.

But they object against this strict Faith in this man Christ and his
sufferings. Ro^. 2.14.15. For when the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by
Nature the things contained in the Law, having not the Law, are a Law unto
themselves, which show the effect of the Law written in their hearts, their
Consciences also bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing one another or
excusing. From hence they co^sidently affirm, that these Gentiles knew not
the man Christ, nor believed on him, yet kept the Law, and thereby were
justified before God; and because the Scriptures which they pretend to allege
to color their deceits, does so plentifully declare unto us a Christ,
therefore they say: This is the Christ; for you must not imagine, that they say
that any man can be saved without Christ, yet they intend nothing less in that
saying, then that any are saved through the purchase of the Blood of that man
Christ, apprehended by Faith, for that they count an idle Fiction, their evil
Consciences know we wrong them not herein; for we relate no more then what some
of them have uttered, in which we have used much means to procure their
reuocation of that their cursed conceit, that so we might not be constrained to
publish it, but they wax worse and worse every day in their delusions.

Now to show how they pervert this Scripture to their destruction, let it be
well observed, what The Apostle aymeth at in this place. Paul being the
messenger of the joyful tidings of Christ to the Gentiles; Romans 1. cap.
in the former Chap. plainly conuinceth all the Gentiles to be under the wrath
of God, and that by not making right use of that knowledge which God afforded
them, by the inuisiblenes of his eternal power and Godhead, manifested and
showed unto them by the wonderful Creation of the world, which was sufficient
to make them without excuse, Psalm. 19.
in that the Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament show the
works of his hands, Day unto day utter the same, and Night unto Night teach
they knowledge, there is no speech nor Language where their voice is not heard:
The Gentiles (we say) knowing God by these his wonders, yet glorified him not
as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their Imaginations, and
their foolish heart was full of darkness; when they professed themselves to be
wise, they became fools, for they turned the Glory of the incorruptible God
into several Idols, wherefore God gave them up to their own hearts lusts,
etc. they turning the truth of God unto a lie, worshipping and serving the
creature, above the Creator, and so not regarding to know God further by that
means they had, God delivered them up to a reprobate mind, etc. The Apostle
having now convinced the Gentiles proving them to be under the wrath of God, he
concludes: O man whosoever thou art thou art inexcusable; Cap. 2.1.
even as well Gentiles as Jews; and Jews as Gentiles, which also in the 2.
Chap. he goes about to prove: For his fervent desire of the salvation of the
Jews makes him to declare the estate of the Jews to be as bad, or worse then
the Gentiles, that they might see it, be humbled, and fly unto Jesus Christ:
for although Circumcision in it time was profitable if they kept the Law, yet
if they transgressed the Law, their Circumcision was counted as no
circumcision; And the uncircumcision (says The Apostle) if they keep the Law,
shall, not their uncircumcision be counted for Circumcision? was the glory of
the Jew, that he was called a Jew, rested in the Law, gloried in God, knew his
will, etc. This the Apostle seeks to bring down; by showing them that; they
that taught others, should have taught themselves: saying, Thou that gloriest
in the Law, through breaking the Law dishonorest thou God? For the name of God
is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you, as is written, etc. Having now
also convinced the Jew, and comparing the estate of the Jew and Gentile
together, both which had the Law, the one in the heart and the Letter, the other
in the heart but not in the Letter, he affirms that the Gentiles did those
things by nature, which the Jews did not observe by the Letter; whereby they
were more excusable then the Jew, being only a comparatiue speech which is very
usual Ioh. 6.27. Ioh. 3.32. Luke 14.26. 1. Ioh. 2.15.
in the Scriptures; not that either of them were justified before God, for by
nature or Flesh, it is not possible to keep the Law; because it is weak, and
by the works of the Law none can be justified in his sight.

The Apostle having thus done, demands this question; What then? are we
Jews more excellent? Romans 3.9.
No in no wise, for we have already proved, that all, both Jews and Gentiles
are under sin, as it is written; There is none righteous no not one, etc. Now
we know that whatsoever the Law says, it says it to them that are under the
Law, that every mouth may be stopped and all the world be culpable before God;
Therefore by the works of the Law, no Flesh shall be justified in his fight;
But now is the Justice of God made manifest without the Law, having the witness
of the Law and of the Prophets, to wit, the Justice of God; by the Faith of
Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all that believe: For there is no difference,
for all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God, and are justified
freely by his Grace through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, etc. And
that he might be a Iustifier of him that is of the Faith of Jesus. We
conclude, that a man is justified by Faith, without the works of the Law; we
do not make the Law of none effect through Faith, we establish the Law; For
is the Law against the Promise of God? God forbid: Gal. 3.21.
For if there had been a Law given which could have given Life, righteousness
had been by the Law; But the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that
the promise by the Faith of Jesus Christ should be given to them that Believe.
Gal. 3.26. etc.
All are the sons of God by Faith in Christ Jesus; there is neither Jew nor
Grecian, bond nor free, male nor female, but all are one in Christ Jesus.
Whosoever is justified by the Law, Christ shall profit them nothing.

If men for want of love of the Truth were not given up by God to strange
delusions of the Devil, they would acknowledge their horrible error herein,
give glory to God, submit to his truth, and confess, that this in the
Gentiles, Romans 2. is Law, not Faith: Nature not Grace. They say, these were
justified before God by keeping the Law, but you see how plainly God
contradicts it, Gods Justice is manifest without the Law; and the Law cannot
give Life. These Spirits say, They did that by Nature which made them just with
God; when as God says, Nature makes us the Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3.
because it cannot keep the Law, and we are saved by Grace through Faith, we
are freely justified by his Grace through Christ's redemption. So that they do
as manifestly contradict God: take away Gods favor, Christ's justice unto us
through the Redemption of his precious blood, and fet up man's merit for
Justice with God as ever the wicked Jews did: but forasmuch as they are so
confident in it, let us a little further prosecute this thing.

If ever any should have had justice with God through works, Abraham the
Father of the righteous should; but Abraham was not justified by works but by
Believing, that was counted to him for Justice; Ro^. 4.2. etc.
now to him that works, the wages is not counted by favor but by debt: So
that if Justification with God come by works; we are not beholding to God for
it, he pays us nothing but our due; Oh fearful blasphemy! But The Apostle
affirms, that the promise made to Abraham, of being the Father of all the
righteous, was not made to Abraham, or his seed through the Law, but through
the righteousness of faith; Verse. 14.16. etc.
For if they that be of the Law be heirs, Faith is made void, and the Promise
is made of none effect: Therefore it it by Faith, that it might come by Grace,
to them which are of the Faith of Abraham, etc. Confirmed by the same Apostle,
who says; Gal. 2.15. etc.
we which are Jews by Nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles, know that a
man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus
Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by
the faith of Jesus Christ, and not by the works of the Law, for by the works
of the Law, no man shall be Justified.

Therefore taking this detestable Doctrine as sufficiently confuted, we will
conclude with the words of The Apostle, We do not abrogate the Grace of God, for
if Justice be by the Law, then Christ dyed for nothing, or without cause. Gal.
2.21.
Oh that this Scripture might be considered! It is here affirmed that if
Christ's Death make not men just, but the Law, then Christ dyed for nothing, all
other things purchased by Christ's Death (if this be denied) are counted
nothing, and this is to abrogate the Grace of God.

This their stumbling block from Romans 2. being taken out of the way of all
those that will not wilfully perish, the very foundation their new Christ is
plucked up by the roots: for there is not any Scriptures, that they have hopes
will make for them, although some have alleged John. 1.9. This was the true
the that lightneth every man that comes into the world; But we having
answered, that this light is not any power in man, but that man Christ Jesus,
Ioh. 1.14. Ioh. 8.12. and 9.5.
who was made Flesh and dwelt amongst us, etc. who is the light of the world.
This has not been so much urged: also sometimes they allege Cornelius, for
proof of justification without Faith in the blood of Christ; but seeing
themselves fail of proof, that he did not believe in the Messiah by looking
for him for justification; therefore they let it rest concerning this, and take
it up, upon another occasion, which in due place we shall speak of.

These weak and wrested proofs, being the best that ever we heard them
allege, for so great and weighty a matter; the taking away of the purchase by
the blood of Christ, and therein man's everlasting comfort, they have for the
making of this more passable, and to have the better acceptance (for indeed it
is most odious to any Christian heart) they have (we say) invented this
Position. That if men walk uprightly as far as they see in morrall things,
although they be worshippers of Idols, whether real or mental, through
ignorance, and therein continue living and dying, they may be saved; which
indeed is the same in effect with the former, as the wise may discern; For if
men may be saved, that in words acknowledge, or not acknowledge the Lord Jesus
Christ, both being in works adversaries to him, then what is the profit more
unto those that believe in, and obey the Lord Jesus, and those that by word or
works deny him, If both may be saved?

The wickedness of which, we shall also discover plainly, through the Grace of
God.

No Idolater can be saved, except they leave their Idolatry by hearty
repentance, and believe in, and obey Jesus Christ.
ALL flesh desires to find an easy way to Heaven, and who would not dye the
Death of the righteous? But whosoever seeks Heaven by ways of their own
devising, they shall not find it. Indeed Christ says; My yoke is easy, and
my burden light; but that is to those who willingly deny themselves, take up
his cross and follow him; otherwise, straight is the Gate, and narrow is the
way that leads to Life and few find it, and many shall seek to enter in and
shall not be able. The gates of the heavenly Jerusalem (the Gospel, or new
Testament, Gal. 4.24.26.) are open continually, they are not shut by Day nor by
Night, Yea the Spirit, and the bride saying come, and let whosoever will take
of the water of Life freely; Revel. 22.
And wisdom cries without, she utters her voice in the streets, she
calls in the street among the prease in the eaterings of the Gates, Pro. 9.
and utters her words in the City, saying, O ye foolish, how long will ye
love foolishnes, etc. So that there is mercy with God and plenteous redemption;
but it is by the way, that God himself, who is the giver of it, will bestow
it; Is not he worthy to have power of directing us how to come to life, seeing
he himself gives life, and that freely of his favor?

The question therefore now is, whether any can have salvation, by their own
wisdom, walking in their own ways; or by the way, which the wisdom of God
has directed.

We have already plentifully proved, if Scriptures may be proof, That this is
the Record of God (which whosoever believes not has made God a liar) and this
is the Record that God has given unto us eternal life, 1. Ioh. 5.
and this life is in his Son. He that has the Son has life, and he that
has not that Son of God has not life. So that if any will yet affirm that
any can have Eternal life, not confessing, nor believing in the Son of God,
they make God a liar, whose record is otherwise: but this Record of God being
believed, it does declare all such to be liars, as affirm salvation can be to
any that Believe not in this Son of God. If God have secrets which no man
knows concerning this thing, we meddle not therewith; we know none he has:
but according to that will of God which is revealed in his sacred Scriptures,
we dare be bold to say, no sinner can be saved, but by Faith in this Son of
God, Jesus Christ.

That no Idolater can be saved is thus confirmed. Confounded be all they that
serve graven Images, and that glory in Idols; Psalm. 97.7. 1. Sam. 12.21. Number.
25.2.9.
For they are not only things of naught; and vanity; but they bring confusion
and curse unto all that submit unto them. Yea the Lord says, That Idolaters
shall no more inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, then Adulterers, Fornicators,
wantons, 1. Cor. 6.9.
Buggerers, Thieves, covetous, Drunkards, raylers, nor Extortioners: But
Idolaters with the fearful and unbelieving, and abominable, and Murderers,
and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and all liars, shall have their part in the
Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, Revel. 21.8
which is the second Death. Therefore we are commanded to fly from Idolatry,
and separate our selves, 1. Cor. 10.14.
and touch none unclean thing, and then God will be our God and Father, and
walk among us, 2 Cor. 6.17 18.
and dwell there, and we shall be his Sons and Daughters.

Having thus in general proved that no Idolater can be saved, that we may
come a little nearer the thing, let us observe how far Idolatry does extend. It
is sufficiently known of many, that Idololatria, signifies a service of any
likeness, not only of God, but also concerning the things of Gods worship,
which is truly acknowledged by the annotation in the English Bible in Quarto,
upon 1. Job. 5.21. Babes keep your selves from Idols. The words are: meaning
from every form and fashion of thing, which is fet up for any devotion to
worship God: And a great adversary of the Papists says. Dillingham against the
Pa^. pa. 37.
To serve God as we list, and not as he will, is Idolatry. So that any forms
or fashions of Devotion in Gods worship, that is not Gods, or besides Gods, are
Idols; and Christ's Babes must keep themselves from them, else they will bring
them to destruction, as before is proved: therefore not only they that worship
stocks and stones as God, or as similitudes of God, are Idolaters, and subject
to the Curses pronounced; but also all such, as in Devotion to God set up
forms or fashions to worship God by, that God has not commanded; and this is
plainly proved, by those fearful Judgments pronounced against all such as
worship those mystical Idols, The Beast, or his Image, spoken of Revel. 14.9.
etc. Which generally all acknowledge that these worshippers do in words
worship the true God: For these Scriptures are applied to those people that in
words do acknowledge both God and Christ; yet says the Holy Ghost, These
worshippers, shall drink of the wine of Gods wrath, and be tormented in Fire
and Brimstone for evermore. Which estate of confusion all must comeout of that
will be saved; For as it is a habitation of Devils, Revel. 18.2
so the worshippers therein, are worshippers of Devils, Revel. 9.20
though it be in a great mystery, and so perceived of few.

Next it remains to prove, that salvation is promised as to Faith in Christ,
as before is proved, upon Repentance of Idolatry; as of all other sin, so
also to obedience of Faith: not to obedience of the Law; but to obedience of
the Gospel, for that Faith that is not accompanied with Obedience, Iam. 2.19.
is not only a dead Faith, but it is the Devils Faith, and that which shall
never profit any man to Justification. Obedience to the Law had justice in it
felfe, if any could have kept it: but obedience to the Gospel has justice in
Christ; to all that believe and obey him, who has fulfilled the Law for them:
and by the works of the Gospel we are saved. For this is the work of God
(which shall inherit eternal life) that we believe in Jesus Christ. Ioh.
6.29.
Which Faith is accompanied with Obedience of * faith. Romans 1.5. and 16.26.
It is written, Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven but he which does my Fathers will which is in Heaven.
Math. 7.21.


And let it be well observed, that obedience to the Son, is not properly the
observing of those moral precepts contained in the second Commandment, Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self, for that God has from the beginning
written not only in the Tables of stone, but in the tables of man's heart; That
as a man would another should do to him, Math. 7.12
so he should do to him again: and not that only is written in every man's
heart, but even this also, that man should love his Creator above all: but the
manner of this love consisting in obedience to his Commandments for his
worship and service, that was directed in the Law by Moses and the Fathers, If
the Gentiles would have it, they must come unto the Jews, Romans 3.2.
For to them were of credit committed the Oracles of God. But now in these last
days God has spoken (or declared what worship he will have) by his Son,
Heb. 1.2.
whom he has made heir of all things. Commanding all to hear him; who has
showed what manner of persons, he accepts worship of: what his worship is:
what Ministry he has appointed: and what a Church Government he has
constituted; and all other things for the well being of his Church; Which is
his Body, Ephesians. 5.23
of which he is the Savior, who ought to be obedient to him in every thing.
And as the servant Moses, and the Commandments given by him, was worthy of
Honor in that time, and every transgression received a just recompense of
reward, Heb. 2.2.
of which we read of diverse dreadful examples: Leuit. 10.1. 1. Sam. 6.19. 1.
Chron. 13.7.10. 2. Chron. 26.16. etc. Number. 16. cap. 1. Sa^. 13.13. etc. and
cap. 15. read Deuteronomy. 27.36.

So is the Son worthy of more honor in his Commandments in these last
days, Heb. 3.3.
and soter punishment are they worthy of that do transgress them: This is the
Kingdom, Heb. 10.29.
and power in Heaven and Earth that is given to this Son of God, to wit; Mat.
28.18.
to rule over the bodies and souls of men (whom he has redeemed) by the
scepter of his word. This is the government on his shoulder, Esa. 9.6. Heb.
12.28. Act. 2.30. 1. Cor. 15.24. etc.
and the Kingdom that can not be shaken; On which he sits for ever to order
it, even till he have subdued all things; and deliver it up to his Father,
and they that will not that he shall reign over them, by his own Laws, shall
be brought and slain before him. Luke 19.27.


Now if such be the estate of all those that obey not the Son in his Laws,
as if the Scriptures be true it is: then what is the estate and condition of
such, as in stead of obedience to him, contemn his Commandments, and submit
to men's inventions for matter of worship to God? where now is place for that
hypocritical pretense of walking uprightly as far as they see? when indeed
their walking is so far from vprightnes, that when God calls and cries unto
them, and stretches out his hand unto them all the day long; by that measure of
means which he affoordeth them, Romans 10.21
they still gainsay him, and are rebellious against him.

But their objection is: That all they that are ignorant, and either by words,
or works deny Christ, and worship Idols, and see no further, but think they
do well, they shall be excused: to which ignorant conceit we must say
something.

Ignorance shall not excuse any that live in Idolatry, and do not obey the
Son of God.
THough it be sufficient that the Lord has pronounced these Judgments against
such as believe not in, and obey not his Son, but are Idolaters, without
exception of ignorant, or not ignorant; yet that the truth of the Lord may
shine herein as the light at noone day, we have endeauored to take away this
their objection also, and that in particular words.

That ignorance is sin it appears by those ceremonial sacrifices of
atonement which were offered for it, Leuit. 4.13 etc. 22.27. and 5.2.5.15.17.
Heb. 9.7
and the wages of all sin is Death. Also the Lord says: Harden not your
hearts as in Meribah, and Massah, where your Fathers tempted me, etc. though
they had seen my work, forty years have I contended with this generation,
and said they are a people that err in their heart, for they have not (known)
my ways: therefore I swear in my wrath, Psalm. 95.8. etc. Hosea. 4.6.
surely they shall not enter into my rest. And my people are destroyed for
lack of (knowledge.) And our Savior teaches, That if the (ignorant) lead the
ignorant, Mar. 15.14
both shall fall into the ditch. And he that (knew) not his masters will, Luke
12.48.
and yet did things worthy of stripes, he shall be beaten. And they that kill
Christ's Disciples, Ioh. 16.1.
shall think they do God service, because they neither (knew) God nor Christ,
which to know is Eternal life. Ioh. 17.3.
Peter through his ignorance advised Christ not to suffer, for which he had a
most sharp reproof. Get thee behind me Satan, Mat. 16.23.
thou (understand) not the things of God. Again, I know Brethren ye did
it through (ignorance:) Repent, Act. 3.17.
that your sins may be put away. The Gentiles that regarded not to (know)
God by his wonderful works, the Heavens and Earth, Psalm. 19.
which preach and teach day and night to every speech and language, and gives
every reasonable soul under Heaven a measure of knowledge, because they
regarded not to know God, Romans 1.28.
God delivered them up to a reprobate mind. And the Jews had the zeal of God,
yet not according to knowledge, for they being ignorant of the righteousness of
God, Romans 10.2.
they found it not. And Christ Jesus shall render vengeance in flaming fire
unto them that do not know God, and obey not the Gospel. 2. These. 1.8.9.
And those that through the signs and lying wonders of the man of Sin are
deceived, 2. These. 2.10. etc.
they shall perish and be damned, because they received not the love of the
Truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. What store of testimonies are in
this thing. If men do evil though of ignorance, and for the same shall not
enter into Gods rest: but be destroyed: fall into the pit: be beaten: be
delivered up to a reprobate mind: have flaming Fire rendered upon them: and be
damned; all which the mouth of the Lord has spoken. If any notwithstanding all
this, will yet say Ignorance shall excuse any; 1. Cor. 14.38.
we will answer with The Apostle, If any be ignorant, let them be ignorant,
and taste the reward thereof.

The cause of Ignorance is hardness of heart, and unbelief, and not ye want of
means as is plain. If our Gospel be hid (that is, if any be ignorant of it)
it is hid to them that perish, 2. Cor. 4.3. etc.
in whom the God of this world has blinded their minds, that is, of the
unbelievers, etc. And they being strangers from the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18.
through the Ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of their hearts;
So that unbelief and hardness of heart is the cause of Ignorance, and ignorance
makes men strangers from the life of God. Paul did it ignorantly through
unbelief. 1. Tim. 1 13
All have, or might have means enough, had they used that well which they had.

And whereas they affirm it to be injustice in God to condemn all the Nations
of the earth, that have been or are ignorant of Christ. We answer, though it
be plain that Christ is manifest by a measure of means to every reasonable
Creature under Heaven: Col. 1.6.23
For have they not heard? Romans 10.18. yet in this (The Apostle affirms) Gods
justice appears, that such as had but the inuisiblenes of God declared in the
Creation of the Heavens and the Earth, Romans 1.19. etc.
which teach knowledge Day and Night, whose voice is heard in every Language
under Heaven, and they regarded not to know God by the same, Psalm. 1.1. etc
God delivered up to a reprobate mind. If any yet demand why the Cannibals
know no more; the Apostle answers, Because they regarded not to know God by
that they had. Has not God promised that if any seek they shall find? Math.
7.7.
What made the Wise men of the East, to find the Babe Christ, but their
diligent seeking? Math. 2.1.
Men find not because they seek not; Iam. 4.2.
we need not go amongst the greatest Pagans, we shall find too many, who know
not God nor Christ, in our own Nation; now the same cause they have no
knowledge, that is the cause why the Ca^nibals have no knowledge; namely,
because they seek not. The Jews had means enough, yet were they ignorant of
the way of God, and God was found of those that (in comparison) sought not
after him. Ro^. 10.20.
That none need be ignorant, read these Scriptures. Deuteronomy. 30.11. Romans 10.6.
etc. 18.20. Math. 7.7. Iam. 4.2.3.

Some also object: Act. 17.30. In the time of that ignorance God regarded not,
etc. From hence they conceive that God regarded not to punish Ignorance: but
let the place be considered, and it does effectually convince that conceit.
The Apostle Paul coming to Athens, and beholding the blind Devotion of the
Athenians, and reproving them for the same, enformeth them of the true God,
whom (says he) you ignorantly worship, him show I unto you, and having showed
them what that God was, and what he was not: how he would be worshipped, and
how he would not: concludes with these words, In the time of that Ignorance
God regarded not, but now he admonishes all men every where to repent, etc. In
the time of Ignorance God had no regard of your blind Devotion; but now in
mercy, the knowledge of the Gospel being revealed to the world by his Son, he
admonishes all men every where to repent, even you Athenians of your ignorant
worship, else as he had no regard in the time of your ignorance; you continuing
the same, he will yet have no regard of your ignorant Devotion: the like is
said of Caines worship, that God regarded it not. Genesis 4.5.
God has so little regard of Ignorance, that if his own Commandments should
be performed without knowledge, Heb. 11.6.
it were sin; For without Faith, it is impossible to please God: and
whatsoever is not of Faith is sin, Romans 14.23
and the wages of sin is Death. This place therefore may be for confirmation
of what is said, to prove, that God has no regard of any ignorant worship
whatsoever.

But their main objection is from Cornelius, in that he is called a Devout
man, Act. 10. cap
and one that feared God, with all his Household, which gave much Alms to the
people, and prayed God continually: a just man, of good report, among all the
Nation of the Jews; The holy Ghost says of this man: That his Prayers and his
Alms were come up in remembrance before God; Therefore (says the Lord) now
send men to Ioppa, and call for Simon whose surname is Peter, he shall speak
words unto thee, whereby both thou and all thy House shall be saved, This man
(say they) was in the estate of salvation before ever Peter's Doctrine came unto
him, which if it were so, it must be by Faith in the promised seed Jesus
Christ, and then will make nothing for them: where we can see a man or men, in
whom we can behold as much good, as in Cornelius, we will willingly say as much
of him as of Cornelius: But will it therefore follow, that such as live in
Idolatry, and wilfully (though ignorantly) go on in the same, that such must
be declared to be in the estate of salvation? Seeing the Lord has so
plentifully declared the contrary: Can any such thing be said of Cornelius? we
neither read that he was an Idolater, nor refused to receive Christ Jesus when
he was offered.

Thus much Cornelius estate proves, That men that walk in no evil way, but
on the contrary, have many goodnesses in them, God so remembers and respects
them, that he will not leave them, till he have sent Peter's Doctrine unto
them, whereby they may be saved; yea God respects any good in any, as in
Ahab: 1. King. 21.29. 1. King. 14.13. Jonah. 3.10 Romans 1.12. etc.
Ieroboams Son: Niniuie, yea in those that have no more but the works of God
to teach them, as every reasonable Creature under Heaven has; that if they use
that well; and glorify God by that they have, he will not leave them till he
have brought the^ to Peter's Doctrine, whereby they may be faued.

Now that Cornelius, although a just man, fearing God, and his prayers had in
remembrance with God, was therefore in the estate of Salvation before Peter's
Doctrine came unto him, it may be questioned, if not absolutely denied, for
these reasons. 1. Because, the Lord says, Act. 11.14.
Peter shall speak words unto thee, whereby both thou and thy House shall be
saved. If they were in the estate of salvation before, to what end are these
words spoken? 2. It is said when Gods work concerning Cornelius was declared
unto the Apostles, and the rest of the Circumcision, they glorified God saying,
Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life. If they had
life before, what cause had they to glorify God for granting it now by Peter's
Doctrine? 3. Peter relating that God chose him that by his mouth the Gentiles (
Cornelius and the rest) should hear the word of the Gospel and believe, Act.
15.7.8.9.
For (says he) God which knows the hearts bare them witness, in giving
unto them the Holy Ghost even as unto us; And he put no difference between us
and them, after that by Faith he had purified their hearts. Now this being so,
that by Peter's Doctrine the joyful tidings was brought and they believed, by
which Faith their hearts were purified, and then they were in the same estate
with the faithful; who dare be so bold notwithstanding all these manifest
testimonies, as to say: Cornelius was in the estate of Salvation before any
part of these came unto him? Those Jews are said to fear God, when as yet
they had not repented of killing the Lord of Life; The humiliation of Ahab and
Neniuie, Act. 2.5.
came up in remembrance with God, as before is proved. Act. 17.23. and 3.1.
The blind Athenians are said to be Devout, and the unbelieving Jews kept a
constant course in Prayer.

These be the best proofs they have, for a thing of so great consequence, the
justifying of those whom God condemns: Saying, unto the wicked thou art
righteous, Ezekiel. 13.22
thereby strengthening their hands that they cannot return from their wicked
way by promising them life. But we hope the Godly wise will reject the evil,
and cleave fast unto what God has so plentifully and plainly taught, that
Ignorance shall not excuse any that continue in wickedness; For if ignorance
would excuse men, how happy were the Ignorant? Or if one ignorant person, that
justifies himself in his wickedne? might be saved, why not two, and so
twenty. and then where were the period to stay us here? Where were our rule,
which Ignorant should be saved, and which not? Or how could it be avoided, but
all Ignorant persons must be saved how wicked soever, if of ignorance? The
reasons for one (if there were any) would be reasons for all ignorant persons
whatsoever.

And for Conclusion of this thing, they object: That general repentance will
serve from Psalm. 19.12. Who can understand his faults? cleanse me from secret
faults. To which we answer, If there be any Repentance general or particular,
we will not gainsay it, for we acknowledge the righteous. do offend often in
words and actions, Mat. 18.22.
which they know to be evil, the particulers whereof are so many, that they
are not able to understand them, and therefore ought they to pray, Cleanse me
from secret faults, that are hid from me, for want of remembrance, the
particulers of which, if they were of could be related, they would particulerly
repent of them. But Idolaters that live in Idolatry and take pleasure therein,
though of ignorance, cannot be brought within this compass. For let an
Idolater who performs any general Repentance, let him be asked whether he
intend to include in his Repentance, his Idolatry which others know he lives
in, his answer will be, no, in no wise. It is his Idol which is his God, or
God-seruice, which he accounts one of the best actions that he does; For
example: Let one of the Family of Love be asked (one that is not yet deified;
for one that is deified cannot sin, and so needs no repentance) let a
youngling in the Family be asked, whether in his general Repentance, he do
include his bodily worshipping, according to the custom of Mahomet, the Church
of Rome, or wheresoever he lives, the Magistrate commanding it, he will
answer you no, he does not repent of that, For he ought to subject his Body at
any worship which the Magistrates commands, keeping his heart to God. For Gods
worship is not at all outward, and therefore that his practice is good and
approueable. Does he now repent of this in any generality? which he accounts
one of his good actions? Repentance is an acknowledgement of sin, etc. but an
Idolater and Familist, acknowledge their action herein to be good, therefore
cannot repent of them at that time. If any say they have not sinned, Ie^e.
2.35. 1. Ioh. 1.10.
God will enter into Judgment with them, and their sin remains.

Oh, but this is a dangerous censure (they object) not only of those that are
living, but of many that are Dead. To which we answer, we censure none, only
relate Gods censure in his Word that cannot lie, Which word shall judge all men
at the last Day: Ioh. 12.48.
we say of none, whether dead or yet living, that they are damned (except such
as sin against the Holy Ghost, as many of the Familists have) because we
know not in what moment of time they may repent: But this we say; whosoever
they be that sin and never repent thereof, they shall perish; Luke 13.3.
not we, but the Lord says this. Therefore so long as we know men line
impenitently in Idolatry, through what delusion soever, hating to be reformed,
and casting Gods word behind their backs, we can truly say they are in the
estate of condemnation, and shall perish if they repent not of that their
Idolatry, and come into the Arc that saves, 1. Pet. 3.21.
which is the Baptism of Christ; the request of a good Conscience, by Christ's
resurrection. For the profession that must be had and kept, is to draw near to
God, Heb. 10.22.23.
with a true heart in assurance of Faith, sprinkled in our hearts from an
evil Conscience, and washed in our Bodies with pure water.

Having thus discovered the false Christ of H.N. and his learners and false way
of Religion, of those that are running fast after him (though yet it may be
not of that lovely Family) who affirm that by keeping the Law any may be
saved, though they be never so great Idolaters, (as Idolatry is taken of all
but Familists) which wide and brod way, of affirming that any may have
salvation, though they believe not in the man Christ, but be Idolaters,
overthrows the virtue of Christ's precious Death and bloodshed; and all
Religion and Godliness. We say, having discovered the falsehood of these, we
now come to clear our selves of their imputations, which follows thus under
their hand.

Twelve transgressions that ye (commonly called Anabaptists) do commit even
with a high hand, and therefore ye for the very greatest part are
vn-Christians.
FIrst, your greatest Zeal is concerning Ceremonies, and your least is
concerning Godliness everlasting: and further ye contend against Godly
ceremonies.

Answ. In this unjust accusation are contained three things. 1. Wherein our
greatest zeal consists, namely in Cermonies. 2. Wherein it does not consist,
in Godliness everlasting. 3. That we contend against Godly ceremonies. First,
what mystery they may conceive in this word Ceremony (for they use it much) we
do not well know, but if they had no other meaning, than as it is, Heb. 9.1.
(...) translated, Religious Ordinances: or Divine service, or worship: or
Ceremonies: then we say, our zeal ought to be great concerning the Ordinances
of true Religion, or worship to God; for it is the first and great
Commandment. Mat. 22.37
Religion or religious service, or worship toward God, consists in the
upright, hearty and unfeigned submitting unto, with our Spirits, and performing
with our Bodies such Ordinances and Commandments, as Jesus Christ the great
Prophet has commanded; For he that obeys not the Son shall not see Life,
Ioh. 3.36.
but the wrath of God abides on him, and we must observe all that he
commands, which if we will not, we shall be destroyed from among his
people, Act. 3.23.
for we must stand fast and keep every instruction which he or his Apostles
have taught us, 1. Cor. 11.2
for in these last days the Father has spoken unto us by his Son, and if
the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, Heb. 1.2.
and every transgression, Cap. 2.2.3.
and disobedence, receive a just recompense of reward, how shall we escape if
we neglect so great a salvation? Cap. 3.3.
For the Son is worthy of more honor then the Servant: we are Christ's
friends if we do whatsoever he commands, but he that says, Ioh. 15.14. 1.
Ioh. 2.4.
he knows God and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar.

So that if the Ordinances of Religion, or Divine worship, be the Lords, if we
should not be zealous therein, and earnestly contend for the maintenance of
that Faith, Jude. 3.
which was once given to the Saints, we should be justly reproved of the Lord,
as the Church of Laodocea, and that judgment pronounced, Revel. 3.16
I will spewe thee out of my mouth. But they will answer; the Scripture learned
men have no understanding, as in any other thing so in this; For the worship of
God is altogether to be performed within, in the Spirit, and not in any outward
Ceremony whatsoever. With this they flatter themselves in their own eyes,
whilst their iniquity is found worthy to be hated, the words of their
mouths are iniquity and deceit, Psalm. 36.2. etc.
they have left off to understand and to do good; they imagine mischief upon
their beds, and set themselves upon a way that is not good, as shall manifestly
appear, to all that have eyes of any indifferency, when we show what the
worship of God is, as afterward we shall have a good occasion to speak of;
only this may suffice to clear us from any unjust accusation, if we be
zealous for the Lords Ordinances concerning his worship.

To the second part of the accusation, that our least zeal is for Godliness
everlasting. What do they mean by this Godliness everlasting? whether that of
their oldest Elder H. N. the perfection of living in the holy understanding and
upright righteousness in the lovely being, which in these last days is reueyled
by H. N. in the house of Love?

Or do they mean that to be everlasting Godliness, which some of his young
Disciples affirm to be in those Gentiles, Romans 2. A justice in themselves
through keeping the Law, which they call the Christ; neither of these (we
freely confess) we seek after; For the first we do as much detest as we do
the Devil himself, who is the Father of all lying allegories and revelations,
that are not contained in the sacred Scriptures: And for the second we do no
less abhor to seek Justice in our selves by keeping the Law, for then
Christ dyed for nothing, and all that are bewitched with that cursed conceit,
are abolished from Christ are fallen from Grace.

But if they meant no more, but that everlasting Godliness were to do Justice,
love, mercy, and humble our selves to walk with God, Micah. 6.8. Mat. 22.37.
etc.
the sum of all which is, to love God above all, by believing to have Justice
by the Death and bloodshed of his Son, and obaying his Commandments for his
worship; and loving our neighbor as our selves, we unfeignedly desire to
strive after these, and do, according to our uttermost ability. And the
Consciences of diverse of these men, if they were not past feeling, will not
deny this, having formerly acknowledged the same by words and writings, not
only that our profession leads to a holy life in our entrance, in our not
admitting any but such as manifest themselves to us to be new Creatures; but
also in our progress, wherein if any sin appear in any, we have power from
the Lord Jesus, and do execute the same power, either to cast the sin out of
the party by Repentance, or to cast the party out of our spiritual fellowship
by Excommunication, as we are commanded. Math. 18.17. etc. 1. Cor. 5.13.
. And for our dealings and carriages among men, we leave that to the testimony
of them among whom we live: we had rather our actions should speak then our
mouths: Men full of weaknesses we are, we freely confess with unfeigned
humility, desiring to strive toward perfection, wherein when we have done what
we can, we seek our perfection in and through the perfection of CHRIST, who
is unto us all in all things, without whom we can do nothing. Ioh. 15.5.
And this everlasting righteousness both toward God and man, the Ordinances of
Gods worship leads us unto, though contemned of all Familists, in which the
more zealous we are, the more do we attain to everlasting righteousness.

To the last that we contend against Godly ceremonies. Their meaning is, (as
afterward they have explained it) in that we contend against and submit not
with our bodies unto such observations for such Spiritual worship, as the
Turk, the Pope, or any other Superior power, where we live commands. That
we should contend against all vain inventions (for Gods worship) and love Gods
Law. Psalm. 119.113.
The Holy Ghost teaches us: For if we should worship God by men's precepts,
God would account us hipocrites, Math. 15.9.
and our worship vain, but of this at large in his due place, in answer to
their third taxation of us, for not submitting with our bodies to any outward
service, keeping our hearts to God. This may suffice to clear us of the first.

Secondly, you are without the Charity described. 1. Cor. 13. Chap.
FOr answer to which, we say: The particulers of Love are many in that place,
and therefore till we are accused particularly we can give no answer: We trust
if they come to particulers, we should rather prove them to be liars and false
accusers, then that they should prove such things against us; we know nothing
herein by our selves, that men can justly tax us, but we are not hereby
justified with God. But thus much we may truly say, that when our walking was
no better then now it is; some of these younglings in, or toward the Family,
have solemnly protested, they never found the like love as among us, with any
people that ever they knew.

Thirdly, you submit not to every Ordinance of the Magistrate. 1, Pet. 2.13.
TO which we answer, they are false accusers: we give unto Caesar things
which are Caesar's: Mat. 22.21.
but Christ commands us also to give unto God things which are Gods. Now if
we take away from Caesar either by words or practice any thing that is his, we
may justly be accounted Rebels against Caesar. And so all they that take away
from the most high God, the things which are his, shall be accounted Rebels
against the King of Kings, who although he be patient and long suffering, and
deferreth his wrath, yet if once it burn, Psalm. 2.12.
Oh blessed are they that trust in him.

The right knowledge of what is Caesar's, what is Gods, will be the best way of
clearing our selves of this imputation, for concerning this, we not only
suffer the reproaches of this wicked Family, and all their wel-willers; but also
all our persecutions are inflicted upon us for this cause. And without the
distinct knowing of what is Gods: what is Caesar's: men shall greatly do
amiss. It is written here in Peter: Submit your selves to all Ordinances of
Man, for the Lord: So also in 1. Cor. 7.23. it is written: Ye are bought with
a price, be not the servants of men. In some things, we must submit unto them;
and in other things we must not submit unto them, for the Lord has
commanded both; therefore it is meet we should know the difference.

If there were no more but these places of Scripture, they would sufficiently
decide the controversy. Peter says, Submit your selves to all humane
Ordinances, or to every ordinance of Man; a humane, or worldly Ordinance it
must be, that we must submit unto. Paul says: ye are bought with a price, be
not the servants of men: Christ has bought us and therefore we must be his
servants. This is confirmed in diverse Scriptures, Romans 7.4.
That we should be unto him that dyed for us and rose again: Mat. 10.37.
For if we love Father, mother, wife, magistrate, or life, more then he, we
are not worthy of him. And therefore did his servants in the commands of God,
when they were contradicted by the Magistrates say: Dan. 3.16.18.
We are not careful to answer thee O King in this matter. Be it known unto
thee, we will not fall down nor worship, Act. 4.19.20.
etc. And we cannot but speak the things we have heard and seen. Whether is
it better to obey God or men, judge ye.

In matters of God we must submit unto Christ alone, I am. 4.12.
he is the one Lawgiver, able to save and to destroy. The Father has spoken
by him in the last days, giving him all power in Heaven and in Earth;
Confirming it by voice from Heaven, This is my beloved Son, hear him, and he
that will not that he shall reign over him, let him be brought and slain
before him. The truth of this most evident, not only by the Scriptures but
also acknowledged by many Superiors: the chiefest over us on Earth
acknowledges the same. The Kings most excellent Matie says: Apol. for the
Oath of Allegiance. page
I utterly deny that there is any earthly Monarch over the Church whose word
must be a Law, and who cannot err by an infallibility of Spirit, because
earthly Kingdoms must have earthly Monarchs, it does not follow the Church
must have a visible Monarch too: Christ is the Churches Monarch, and the Holy
Ghost his Deputy: The Kings of the Nations Reign over them, but you shall not
be so, etc. Lu^. 22. Christ when he ascended left not Peter with them to
direct them into all Truth, but promised to send the Holy Ghost unto them for
that end. These are his Highness words.

But the Familists answer us; That Gods worship consists not at all in any
outward observation: the which saying of theirs, if we overthrow, a great part
of their tottering profession will fall, for they cannot deny, but we must
worship the Lord our God, and him (only) must we serve.

(...), adoro, is not only taken for to Pray unto, or to beseech, but also to
Honor, with bowing of the Body; and the Scripture expresses the same. First
Math. 14.10. says; If thou will fall down and worship me. Luke says of the
same: Luke 4.10.
If thou will fall down before me. Math. 8.2. And lo there came a Leper and
worshipped. Mark says of the same: Mark. 1.40.
And there came a Leper beseeching him, and kneeling down unto him. Luke 5.12.
Luke of the same: And he fell on his face and besought. Math. 9.18. It is
only said: There came a certain Ruler and worshipped him. Mark explaines it
saying: Mark. 5.22
He fell down at his feet and besought him instantly. The same says Luke,
Luke 8.41.
not speaking of any other worship. Again it is said, Math. 15.25. of the
Cannanite, she came and worshipped him, saying Lord help me. Mark. 7.25.
Mark calls this worship, And she fell at his feet. Further Mark says, The
man possessed, when he saw Jesus ran and worshipped him. Mark. 5.6.
Luke calls this worship only this: Luke 8.28.
And he cried out and fell down before him. Also those wicked Soldiers are
said to worship our Savior, when bowing their knees before him, Mar. 15.19.
they mocked him. By all which and much more that might be alleged, it may
most evidently appear that the wisdom of God that knows best how to
speak, and to teach us, accounts bowing of the Body, kneeling, or falling
down, to be worship.

Further it is said, And there were certain Greeks that came to Jerusalem to
worship, Ioh. 12.20.
at the Feast; Act. 8.27.
And the Euunuch is said to come out of Ethiopia to worship. And Paul does say,
he came to Jerusalem to worship. All which teaches, Act. 2^.11.
that the performance of those serulces and Sacrifices, that with their Bodies
were to be performed, are counted Gods worship, and not only a Spiritual
reverence or adoration, which they might have performed and not have come to
Jerusalem. This may suffice to prove, that any bodily reverence in matters of
God, and bodily services or Sacrifices are called Gods worship; and therefore
utterly forbidden in any Spiritual service, but only in the true service of
the true God. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve.

This therefore is to give unto God, things which are Gods, even subjection
with our souls and with our bodies, to those parts of his Spiritual worship
which he has commanded in these last days by his Son, Esa. 2 8.
This is his Honor, which he will not give to another.

This the servants of God knew so well, that they would not give it to others,
to the greatest Potentates of the Earth, notwithstanding all their commands and
threats, And this through the power of God, we will maintain unto the Death,
and approve our selves to God and all good men, to be neither Rebels to
Caesar, nor deserve just taxation but commendation herein of all, but
hypocritical and Atheistical Familists.

And for what is Caesar's, we uprightly acknowledge that all civil authority
of Magistracy is the blessed Ordinance of God, That all civil reverence and
Honor ought to be given to it: That Tribute and all other duties are to be
paid unto it: Romans 13. c.
That all civil commands of it, ought to be obeyed, And that of Conscience to
God, whose ministers they are, even from the King, to the most meanest
Constable. And that they may so execute their just offices, that they may
notwithstanding, walk with Jesus Christ, be members of his Church; and be
faued. That they have a Sword given them of God to take vengeance on them that
do evil; and are ordained of God, for the wealth of all wel-doers. And this
is all that can be Caesar's, or that we dare give unto any mortal man
whatsoever. So that having now showed what is Gods; what is Caesar's, we
confidently affirm, that the body may not be severed from the foul or heart
in our obedience to both, as these hypocrites the Familists do suggest.

In our obedience to man in all Civil things, that which we do we must do of
Conscience and not for wrath only. Romans 13.5.
And Servants (and so Subjects) be obedient to your Masters according to the
Flesh; in all things, not with eye service us men pleasers, but in singlenes
of heart, fearing God; and whatsoever ye do, Col. 3.22.23. Ephe. 6.5.6
do it heartily as to the Lord and not to men. Also with singlenes of your
hearts as unto Christ. All which teaches, That all our service to every
Superior must be with the heart, and of Conscience, and not with our Bodies
only: and for our obedience to God with our Bodies, as well as our Spirits in
all Spiritual or Divine service, and that they may not be severed therein, is
proved: We are bought both soul and Body with a dear price, 1. Cor. 6.20
and therefore are commanded to glorify God with both. For our bodies are the
Temples of the Holy Ghost, and they are not our own. And the bodies of
Christians are the members of Christ, and these members of Christ (our bodies)
must not be coupled to any Harlot. whether material or Spiritual; And we are
commanded to give up our Bodies a living sacrifice, Romans 12.1.
wholly and acceptable, which is our reasonable service of God. This is plain
to him that will understand. And the Familists teaching the contrary, it shall
plainly appear, they are not only most notable hypocrites, but also
Rebellious against the power of Magistracy.

Magistrates that take upon them to Command in matters of Gods worship, they
do not only require bodily falling down, but also Reverence with the soul
of heart. Dan 3.


Did not Nabuchadnezzar require falling down and worshipping? And do not the
Magistrates in Popery and elsewhere, where constraint to worship is, do they
not require Divine adoration to their divine Service as they call it? let all
their Orders for their constrained and stinted service be looked into, and this
cannot be denied.

And this being the Ordinance of the Magistrate; if it be rebellion not to
submit with the body in such divine worship as they require, because they
command it, as the Familists affirm; then they are rebellious, because they
submit not with their souls, seeing the Magistrate requires as well the one as
the other. And hypocrites they are most notably; for they not only practice
this, but teach it to others; they teach and practice, that in all outward show
and appearance, men should do that which in deed and in truth, they abhor.

And if this opinion be true; That we ought to be subject in all matters of
Religion with our Bodies, at the command of the higher powers, from 1. Pet.
2.13. etc. or any other Scripture; then all perfecution for Religion is
established, yea it is just and lawful; For it is plain, these higher powers
are ordained of God to command that which the Saints are required to submit
unto; and whosoever resists them there, resists the Ordinance of God, and
shall receive judgment; for they are the Ministers of God therein, for the
Saints wealth; and have a Sword given them of God to take vengeance of them
that resist them: therefore we must be subject for Conscience sake; say we,
all these are inhumane Ordinances, as the Apostle says in this place; say the
Familists, in Religious ordinances outwardly and bodily, which being so, then
are they Gods Ministers, The Turk, the Popish Magistrates, and all others, to
command all outward service and worship, even what they think good, and have
Gods Sword to take vengeance on all them that obey them not: and it is for the
Saints wealth, that they thus do, and who resists them, shall receive
judgment, and are not persecuted but justly punished. If this detestable
dream were true, then are condemned all the servants of God in diverse Ages,
that rather then they would either with body or soul submit herein, at the
Magistrates command, suffered many great afflictions. 1. King. 19.18.
The seven Thousand are condemned for not bowing the knee to Baal, and in not
kissing him with their mouth. The three Children in not falling down and
bowing to the Image. Dan. 3.
The Martyrs of Jesus that suffered beheading, because they would not Worship
the Beast: Revel. 20.4
And all that suffered those cruel torments for not submitting outwardly to
that execrable Idol, the Sacrament of the Altar, in times and places of Popery.
If they might have bowed, or otherwise outwardly with their bodies have
testified subjection, keeping their hearts to God, then did they all most
wickedly and were the only causes of their own afflictions, which to think,
much more to say were most accursed.

Again, If it be lawful to bow down (which is to worship as before is
proved) with our bodies to an Idol, who is a Spiritual harlot, and yet that
we may keep our hearts to God, why is it not also lawful to bow down or
couple our selves to a bodily harlot, and keep our hearts to God, seeing
Idolaters shall no more enter into the Kingdom of God, 1. Cor. 6.9.10.
then Adulterers; And seeing the holy Ghost says; He that coupleth himself in
his body with an harlot is one body with her, why is not he that coupleth
himself in his body by bowing down, or otherwise reuerencing an Idol, one
body with it? It cannot be denied, but one is as lawful as the other. And H.
Ns. Doctrine will not contradict this, if it be considered. In his Book called
Documentall sentences, Cap. 13. sect. 8.
speaking of temptations to sin, thus he writes. If they take and lay hold
on us with force and violence, and that then although we cry there comes not
any power or help unto us, for to withstand them in their force and violence,
and that they even so ravish us against our will, so are we guiltless of the
transgressing, for we cried to be released of the tyranny of the evil, and
there is no help come unto us; of which guiltles transgressing, the Law
likewise witnesses, where it says; A woman which is violently taken in the
Field, whereas there is not any help, and so ravished, and although she have
cried aloude, yet got no help, she shall be guil: less of the transgressing,
etc. So that the rule of these hypocritical Libertines is come to a good pass
with them, it is not sin to couple themselves to Idols, which are Spiritual
harlots, by performing all bodily service to them; also it is no sin to them
to couple themselves with a material harlot, if they find no strength (by
praying) to withstand the temptation; An acceptable Doctrine to all Libertines:
who would not be of this Religion?

But what truth was ever yet so apparent, but the enemy of all truth, the
Devil, would have some objection against it? and therefore in this, his prompt
Disciples object; 1. Cor. 9. From whence they collect this argument. If Paul
became the all things, to the all men, that he might by all means save some,
to wit; in practicing with his body as the Jews, or as them without the Law
the Gentiles, in their Ceremonial worship did, at that time worshipping God in
his Spirit: then ought we to submit to all Ceremonial worship wheresoever we
live, in Turkey, Rome, etc. a part of the all things; But the former is true;
Therefore, etc.

That this place they wickedly pervert, is most apparent, for there is no such
thing, as that the holy Apostle should practice as the unbelieving Gentiles did
in their Sacrifices, or services, seeing himself taught so earnestly against
it; Wherefore my dearly beloved fly from Idolatry. 1. Cor. 10.14.
The things that the Gentiles sacrifice they Offer to Devils and not to God,
and I would not have you have fellowship with the Devils, Verse. 20.
ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of Devils, ye cannot be
partakers of the Lords table and the table of Devils, Verse. 21.22.
Do we provoke the Lord to anger, etc. Who can deny this Cup, and this Table,
and these things Sacrificed, to be bodily practices?

But the Apostle in this place, having proved his power from Jesus Christ, to
preach the Gospel, he shows what a fervent desire he had for the promotion
thereof; for which labor he proves by many reasons he deserved wages at the
hands of the Corinths, and that he had power to require the same, but he had
not used it, but Preached the Gospel of God freely therein making himself a
Servant not only unto them, but unto all men, preaching the Gospel unto all
men as they were able to bear it. To the Jews who were under the Law,
becoming a Jew by teaching them the Gospel by the Law and Prophets which was
their own Element, that he might win them. The Gentiles who had not the
Law, Ro^. 2.14. As though he were without the Law, teaching them God, and so
the Gospel not by the Law but by the Creation of the world, which they were
acquainted with, as at Athens. Act. 17.22. etc. That he might win them that
were without the Law. To the weak he became weak not giving strong meat to
babes, teaching them as they were able to bear it, That he might win the
weak. Thus as a skillful workman, he became all things to all men, that by all
means he might save some, teaching all men the Gospel, by those means which
themselves acknowledged, with he knew was ye fittest way to convince them and
convert them. And not to make them believe that he worshipped their dumb Idols,
by performing all outward reverence to them, as these Children of the Devil,
and enemies of all righteousness, yt seek to pervert the straight ways of the
Lord, would persuade; for that had been to have strengthened them in their
wicked Idolatry, that they could not have returned from it.

But first they bring for proof of the Jews, Paul Circumcising of Timothy:
Act. 16.3. and 21.26.
and purifying of himself and others with him, to please the Jews, Therefore
(say they) may we do so to all; to which we answer. God who had given to his
own people his own Ordinances, which were to bring them to Christ, and when
Christ was come, and many believed on him, yet were zealous of the Law, in that
it was of Gods own appointment, the Almighty Lawgiver in mercy respecting the
weakness of the believing Jews, directed his servant the Apostle to observe
some of those Laws, Circumcision and purifying for the present, till they
could be brought to see the end of them; yet taught the believing Gentiles,
Act. 21.25.
that they should observe no such thing; For if they should be Circumcised,
they were abolished from Christ and fallen from Grace: Gal. 5.3. etc
and wished that all those deceivers, that would persuade the believing
Gentiles, to any such course, should be cut off, and bear their condemnation:
yea when Peter and Barnabas by their example provoked the Gentiles to do like
the Jews, Gal. 2.11. etc.
Paul sharply reproved them to their face for their dissimulation, affirming
it was not the right way to the Gospel. All which being confidered, what does
this make for the Familisticall Gentiles, to perform all outward observations
in the worship of the Gentiles, Turks, etc. whose sacrifice is the worship of
Devils? and is forbidden of God as before.

Secondly, They bring Naamans bowing in the house of Rimmo^, 1. Kin. 5. And the
Prophet bidding him go in peace, and therefore may they bow before any Idol.
Let the place be well considered. It is a general Maxim, That no exposition
of any one doubtful Scripture, or collection from it, may be taken, which
overthrows many Commandments and examples that are out of doubt, which being
granted of this hateful Family, this their conceit will vanish. That this
their collection is against express Commandments and examples, is proved:
First Exo. 20.5. Thou shall not bow down, etc. It was not lawful to bow down
to Baall; and the Lord reserved those 7. thousand to himself because they had
not done it. The 3. Children would not bow down, and were of God commended,
and blessed for the same; And in this of Naaman it could not be lawful in him,
in that he asked mercy at Gods hands twice for it, which if it had been good,
he needed not have done. So that it is most plain, it was unlawful to bow
down, before the Idol Rimmon, and therefore will not warrant these hypocrites
in their courses; but it being showed that this is not the meaning of the
place, that the man of God pronounced Peace unto him, in falling down in the
house of Rimmon, for that they had been both against command, example, and
Naamans repentance: we say it being proved, that this is not the meaning, let
us now find out what it is.

Two things may be observed, that Naaman required; one was: That 2. Mules
load of Isreal's earth might be given him to Sacrifice upon to the God of
Israel; The other that God would be merciful to him in bowing down, in the
house of Rimmon, for his King to lean upon and worship. The first of these was
ignorant Idolatry, for the Tabernacle or Temple, was the place of Sacrificing
to the God of Israel, and not elsewhere Leuit. 17. c. Deuteronomy. 12.5. etc.
. The second was no less, if he meant to go on, in bowing in the house of
Rimmon, and prayed God to be merciful to him herein. And far be it from the
man of God to bless him with salutation of Peace in either of these, which he
knew to be expressly against the Commandment of God; but go in peace, trouble
not thy self with these things, which will hinder thy peace, but being now
cleansed of thy leprosy, sin not against the Lord, which heals thine
infirmity, and his peace be with thee.

Or it may be Naaman meant to testify against that Idol when he came unto
it, and prayed the Lord to be merciful to him and strengthen him in that
point; for he professes, he will henceforth offer neither burnt offering, nor
do sacrifice unto any other God, but to the Lord, In which case, the Prophet
might justly bid, the peace of God be with him. These are not contrary to the
Scriptures but agreeable, and therefore may be accepted; But the other is most
contrary, as before has been showed, and therefore to be abhorred.

Thirdly, they say; To separate from any that sin not against the Holy Ghost,
is against Charity. 1. Cor. 13. Love suffers long. In answer to which, the
Lord says; It is not love; Leuit. 19.17.
to suffer any sin to rest upon men, but express hatred; and therefore Gods
people are commanded to rebuke men for their sin; Mat. 18.15. etc.
and if they will not repent, if they be of the Church, to avoid them; if they
be not of the Church of Christ, but unbelievers, 2. Cor. 6.14 etc.
to separate from them and touch none of their uncleanness, as before is proved;
and shall hereafter when this point is more particulerly handled. And this is
love, to make the^ ashamed, that they may come to repentance.

Fourthly, They say Christ commands his Disciples to hear the Scribes and
Pharisees, Math. 23. and perform ceremonial worship with them, Go show thy
self to the Priest. Math. 8.


Answ. What then? because Christ Commands the Leper to go show himself to the
Priest and offer the Offering appointed by Moses for his cleansing, which was
Gods own appointment; therefore hence does it follow, that we may outwardly
observe such parts of worship as the Gentiles who sacrifice to Devils appoint?
Christ commands the one; but expressly forbids the other, as before has
been largely proved.

As for hearing the Scribes and Pharisees, etc. All may see that these Familists
rather then they will want matter, they will say that which makes against
themselves. Christ teaches that after their works do not; but these Iannes
and Iambres, bring this Scripture to prove, that they may do outwardly
according to the wicked works of the Gentiles, which is their offering to
Devils; Though our Savior here expressly bid his people, not do according to
the works of the Jews his own people, if when he came they had not cast him
off. The most that this place proves, is: that if Gods people teach truths,
but practice it not, the truth they teach must be followed, and not their
practices; but if they will not repent of their evil practices, they must be
cast out for being Gods people Math. 18.15. etc. 1. Cor. 5. c. 2. I hes. 3.14.
, and serves nothing to prove, that Gods people may practice according to the
wicked works of ye Idolaters, but the contrary; but of this exposition more
hereafter.

But feeing this Scripture is alleged here by the Familists, for proof of
that which many (that are not so far gone as they) will abhor; yet thus
far take it up, as that they may hear Idolaters, in their Religious
exercises, which is a dependancy of the former; we think it very necessary to
speak something of that, forasmuch as many have been overthrown by that,
upon these rocks of Familisme; for indeed in part it is the former. For it is
this: a hearing of Idolaters to receive some Spiritual benefit by them, else
why do they hear, and yet in their hearts do not join in any Spiritual
fellowship with them, but judge them to be Idolaters, and their estate with
God, to be most fearful: In a measure it is hypocrisy as the former, and
utterly unlawful by the Scriptures.

That it is not lawful to hear lying Idolatrous Prophets, except to reprove
them, and contend against them, is thus proved.
1. THe Lord expressly forbids it. Deuteronomy. 13.3.
Thou shall not hearken unto the words of that Prophet, etc. Thus says the
Lord of Hoasts, Iere. 23.16.
hear not the words of the Prophets that prophecy unto you and teach you
unity, they speak the vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of
the Lord. For if any go to such Prophets to ask for God, Ezekiel. 14.10.
the Lord will punish them with the Prophets punishment, Which is; to be cut
off from Gods people; Cap. 13.9.
not to be written among the righteous; and not to enter into the Land of
Israel for ever. Ioh. 10.5.
Christ's sheep will fly from a stranger, for they know not his voice; and
they are often commanded to beware of false Prophets which come in Sheep
clothing; Math. 7.15. 1. Ioh. 4.5.6.
the world hears them, but they that are of God hears us, says the
Apostle: Lying Prophets are for the wicked; Micah. 2.11
Gods people must not receine them if they come unto them to teach them, 2.
Ioh. 20.11.
much less may they go seek to be taught of them, Let them return to thee,
return nel thou to them. Iere. 15.19.


2. As Preaching or teaching the word of God, and hearing of the same among the
Saints is a part of true worship, 1. Cor. 11.5. Math. 15.9.
so is preaching and hearing among the wicked a part of false worship, and so
their Communion. From which the Saints are to separate, and have no fellowship
with their unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 5.11
but reprove them; And so the wicked themselves account Preaching and hearing a
part of their worship; Psalm. 16.4. and 15.4. and 26.4.5.
which the Saints may not offer, but even contemn such vile persons and
actions; and hate their assemblies, and not company with them.

3. As God commanded that the Prophet that should presume to speak a word in
his name, Deu. 18.20.
that he commanded him not to speak, was to dye; That is; the Israelites the
people of God, were to slay his Body, Deuteronomy. 13.5.
and so to take evil away forth of the midst of them; So are Gods people now
commanded, that even among themselves, they must mark diligentlys them that
teach contrary Doctrine and avoid them: Ro^. 16.17.
and from such to separate themselves; 1. Tim. 6.5.
yea if they were Angels from Heaven, teaching falsehood to let them be
accursed, Gal. 1.8.9. Gal. 5.10.
and bear their condemnation whosoever they be, which being practiced toward
false Prophets, within the Church, or without, the Saints are no more to hear
them; but to declare their estate of Death; as under Moses bodily; so under
Christ spiritually.

4. The Saints are to declare unto the wicked, That God says, what have thou
to do to declare mine Ordinances that thou should take my Covenant in thy
mouth, Psalm. 50.16. etc.
seeing thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my words behind thee, and
because I held my tongue, therefore thou thoughtest I was like thee, but I will
reprove thee etc. This is written for the Saints instruction, Romans 15.4.
that herein they may imitate their heavenly Father: Math. 5.48
For whosoever hears in Gods matters and is silent, he does establish that
which is done, Number. 30.14.15.
And he that wincketh at iniquity when he seeith it, Leuit. 20.4.5.
the Lord will set his face against that man.

5. Our Lord Christ, Ioh. 8.44.
would not suffer the Devil (the Father of all lying Prophets) to confess
him: Mark. 1.25.
yea by his power he made the evil Spirit in the man, Act. 19.15.
reprove those wicked men for meddling with the name of Jesus, 1 Ioh. 2.6.
And we must walk as he has walked; that when we hear the Devil in the
wicked false Prophets, meddle with the name of Christ, or his holy word or
Ordinances, we must sharply rebuke them, and as much as in us is, not suffer
them.

6. The end of the Saints hearing any false Prophet meddle with the word of
God, must either be for edification or else to rebuke them as before, else what
do they there? If to rebuke them, it is lawful, as before is proved. If to
receive Spiritual food from them, they may not, for there is food sufficient
in Gods house, and the Saints may not go to Aegipt to seek food of any
Aegiptian. Esa. 30.1.
Woe unto the rebellious Children says the Lord, that take counsel but not of
me, they walk forth to go down into Aegipt. Esa. 31.1.
And woe unto them that go down to Aegipt for help: For the Lord will say to
his people, Iere. 5.7.
how shall I spare thee for this, though I fed thee to the full, yet they
committed Adultery, and assembled themselves in Harlots houses: yea he does
further say, What have thou to do in the way of Aegipt, to drink the water of
Nilus? Iere 2.18.
or what make thou in the way of Ashur, to drink the water of the River? And
therefore this Prophet of the Lord, when he had none to company with in Gods
matters, Iere. 15.17.
he would not sit in the assembly of mockers, but sat alone.

7. Christ having given sufficient means in his Church, for the edificatio^ of
every member Ephe. 4.16 Col. 2.9. 1. Cor. 1.7. and 1. Cor. 3.21. 2. Chro. 11.15.
therein, it is high impiety for any of yt said members, to seek edificatio^ of
false Prophets, in that it gives that Honor and Matie. that belongs to
Christ in his Church, to the Devil* by whose power that false Prophet
teaches; and the Lord commanded his people of old, that they being separated
from other people to be the Lords, should beware least they be taken in a snare
after them, Deu. 12.30.
etc. and least thou ask after their Gods, saying, how did these nations serve
their Gods etc. So that Gods people may not go hear (which is to enquire) of
any false Prophet, least they be taken in a snare, by submitting to that God,
or that manner which that false Prophet teaches.

8. As the word of God is holy, as other Ordinances among the Saints, for it
sanctifies Church and all Ioh. 17.17 Ephe. 5.26. 1. Tim. 4.5.
: so the word of God is more profaned among, and by the wicked, then other
Ordinances, because they take it to warrant their profane practices; and if
the Saints of God may not join with them in soul, or body, in any of their
profane courses, as before has been proved; much less in souls or bodies,
may they join with them in using the word, which is most of all profaned by
them. Luke 10.16. Ioh. 13.20. Ioh. 8.44. Romans 6.16.


9. As they that hear Christ's Prophets hear Christ, and they that despise
them, dispiseth him; even so they that hear false Prophets which are the
Devils, hear the Devil, and they that despise them, despise the Devil.
Therefore let all that hate the Devil, and would fly from him, so do unto
his Ministers.

10. It is the grievous sin of any false Prophet, to meddle with the word of
God, and his punishment is fearful, and it is no less sin, Ezekiel. 13.9. and
14.10.
and shall have no less punishment, in any that shall go to ask or enquire of
him for God; Verse. 7.10.
the punishment shall be both alike, For it is apparent, Gods people may not
go to ask or enquire for God of any false Prophet, which they do that go to
hear with silence, else (hypocrites that they are) what do they there?

11. False Prophets are strangers from God, and we are commanded not to hear
strangers, but to fly from them: and it is the commendations of the Saints,
Revel. 2.2.
to examine false Apostles, and to find them liars, and the Lords anger is
against his people, Ezekiel. 44.8.
when they suffer Strangers to take the charge of his Holy things, especially
of handling the Word, which halloweth all the rest: and God demands of his
Sons, Pro. 5.20.
why they should embrace the bosom of a stranger? And what do thou in the
way of Aegipt? or what make thou in the way of Ashur? as before.

12. Gods people must not go to the dead to enquire Deu. 18.11. 1. Sam. 28.7.
etc. Esa. 8.19.
which false Prophets are: Ephesians. 1.2 Esa. 29.9. etc.
yea God has covered them with the Spirit of slumber, they are blind and make
such blind as hear them, and their vision is as the words of a Book sealed
up, etc. And shall any servant of God, go to them to ask of God? seeing their
estates is such, and that such things are an abomination to the Lord, Deu.
18.12
which will cause him, to cast us out of his sight.

13. A false Prophet meddling with the Holy word of God poluteth it, Hag.
2.13.14.
and the Lord will stretch out his hand to cut them off, even all false Priests
and Prophets that worship and swear by the Lord, Zeph. 1.4.5
and that swear by Malcham; and commands his people to cast away all
pollutions, Esa. 30.22.
as a filthy cloth, and to say, get thee hence; which doing, this controversy
will be ended.

14. It is as high iniquity, for a false Prophet to meddle with the holy things
of God, which appertains not to him, but only to the Saints, as it was for
Corah, and his wicked Company, Number. 16. c.
to meddle with those things of God which appertained not to them, but to Aron
and his Sons; and the Lord will no less punish false Prophets for their
iniquity therein, then he did Corah and his Company: and as he commanded all to
depart from the Tents of those wicked men, and to touch nothing of theirs,
least they perish in all their sins, even so has he commanded all to fly
from Strangers, and false Prophets, and not to hear them, as at large before
has been proved, least partaking in their sins, Revel. 18.4.
they partake in their plagues.

And whereas usually hearing the Scribes and Pharisees, is alleged for
justifying of hearing false Prophets; which is formerly taken away, yet thus
much we here add. Moses seat was the Chair of Judgment: Moses was Judge,
not Priest; and the Pharisees were some of them of such Tribes as might not be
Priests, (although some Scribes were Priests sometimes. Nehemia, 8. And some
Priests now are Magistrates) which shows, that although Magistrates who of God
have the Chair of judgment, be corrupt, and walk not as they teach, yet the
people of God must hearken unto the Law delivered by them, and do as they say,
but not as they do; and serves nothing to prove the hearing of false Prophets.

For these Scribes and Pharisees are said to teach truth, but not to do
accordingly, but false Prophets teach falsehood, and therefore are called false
Prophets, with plainly shows, these were no false Prophets, Math. 23. for
false Prophets may not be heard as is before largely proved. And for Phil.
1.15. Some preach Christ through envy, supposing to add affliction to Paul's
bands, which was the Apostles joy, that he was counted worthy to suffer for
Christ, as Mat. 5.12. Act. 5.41. not that he ioyed in the envious preaching of
Christ, that was miquity which he ioyed not in. 1. Cor. 13.6


If any object that false Prophets preach many excellent truths, therefore may
be heard, we answer. If they were Prophets of Israel, speaking sweet words in
the name of the Lord, and teaching also in some things the vision of their
own hearts, and not out of the Lords mouth, the Lord affirms, they bring no
profit to his people, and therefore commands them not to hear them. Nay they
bring hurt, for they bring themselves and all that ask of them for the Lord to
confusion, as before is proved.

Further we say: and it is found most true, that the more truths they bring,
they deceive the more, and inthrall their hearers under their bondage: For the
less truths that false Prophets have, the less they deceive, as all may see,
and are most rejected of those that have any Religion, even so should the
cunningest false Prophet be, if they should teach falsehood only. These are
their stolen waters, Pro. 9.17. and 7.21. etc.
and hid bread that allureth the passers by, to run after them: and herein is
the mystery so cloaked, that few perceive it. Why should it be strange to any
Godly man, 2. Cor. 11.14.
that seeing the Devil transformeth himself into an Angel of Light, and that
so do his ministers, and perceiving that by falsehood only, he cannot continue
his hellish courses of deceiuings; that he should suffer many, or diverse
truths to pass, that under them, he might color all his falsehood? never
false Prophet of whom we read of in the Scriptures, but they had some truths
mixed with their falsehoods, to make them more passable; but let Gods people be
wise, to try them that say, and make such great show that they are Prophets,
and are not, but do lie, and let them declare unto them, that their end shall
be according to their work. Verse. 15.


And whosoever will not receive the love of the truth, by those means that God
has appointed, but will go to enquire for God, and his Truth, at the mouth of
false Prophets, because of some truth they teach; It is just with the Lord, 2.
These. 2.51.12.
to give such up to strong delusions, that they may believe their lies and be
damned. And again, none can hear or receive any truth from them, but therein
they hear, and receive the Devil, by whose power they teach, as before is
proved. Besides they must also swallow up all their falsehood and be silent,
when they hear the Lord Jesus in his holy Truths blasphemed.

Thus it is apparent, neither hearing nor any other Spiritual action, may be
performed with the Body, in which the heart and affections is not present,
contrary to this execrable and hypocritical Doctrine of the Familists.

Having now clearly refelled all the objections of the hateful courses of
these Baalamites, and Nicholaitans, of prostrating the body at any Worship,
although it be the Gentiles, that sacrifice to Devils, and not to God; or any
other that although in words they profess God, yet in works they deny him. We
may now proceed to other of their taxations of us.

Fourthly, ye submit not to Christ's ministry, namely, those which live, and
teach according to Gods word, and the Book of Common prayer.
IN answering of which: First let it be observed, who they account Christ's
Ministers, concerning which; thus they speak. To be called of God, is; to be
raised up to the work of the Ministry; replenished with gifts necessary
thereunto; and to go out under that outward form, which God in that age
wherein he lives, has ordamed, viz. That outward form which the Magistrate
appoints in Turkey, Rome, or elsewhere. So that with these Elimasses, they
are called of God to the work of the Ministry, that have ability to Preach,
and go out under the outward form of Turkey, Rome, etc. Which to submit unto,
or have fellowship with in any of their Spiritual services, so much as in
hearing them, to receive any Spiritual good from them; or any other lying
Prophets, that run, and God sends them not; is utterly forbidden, as
plentifully has been proved.

But the Ministry of Christ which is appointed in his perfect Testament, to
wit, the Ministry of Pastors and Deacons, Phil. 1.1. 1. Tim. 3. c.
we do submit unto with all reverence, in all things, according to the word of
God.

And for their mentioning the Book of Common Prayer, this is but to color
their hypocrisre, that they might have respect with authority, for they might
as well have mentioned the Romish Masse-booke, or the Turkish Alchoran, as it;
For they affirm that all Religions are lawful, if Authority command them.
Servant of M.P. in his natural wise man. 2. Book sect. 14.
In these words; Even so because of Gods peace, ye shall submit your selves
unto all manner of Religion, set up by Laws, wherein there is a pretense of
Godliness; for all sorts of people cannot attain unto the true God service,
at the first; Therefore ye shall not only obey all Religions, not dispising
the Turks, because of their unbelief; but also ye shall submit your selves,
unto all Laws and Authority of the Prince, from time to time, like obedient
peaceable people. Considering we are not appointed of God as Lawmakers, and
we must be no Law-breakers, but Lawkeepers; for if we break the Law, and dye
therefore, are we not guilty of our own Blood? yes verily.

Again thus; There are many vanities used in the world, The same in 2.
Reformation, sect. 10.
and it is both needful and necessary, for us sometimes, to use our selves
after their manner to live in peace with them, etc.

Fifthly, ye deny the Distinct degrees of Christ's Ministry.
Answ. Ye liars are of your Father the Devil: we acknowledge the distinct
degrees of Christ's Ministry, as before; but we deny the degrees of the
Ministry of Mahomet, and the Antichrist Rome-and all other, that are not
heard of in Christ's Testament.

Sixthly, some of you take in hand Ministerial works, whereas not any one of
you is called of God thereunto.
Answ. What it is to be called of God; with these Familists, we have formerly
showed, to wit; to be raised up; to be guifted; and to have that outward form
of calling which the Magistrates in Turkey, or else where ordains. We
acknowledge that whosoever does take in hand, any Ministerial work, and is
not raised up of God thereunto, and replenished with necessary guiftes to the
same, they do most fearfully transgress. Our Consciences are clear herein,
that none can justly tax us; but for going out under that outward form the
Familists speak of, we do detest it, as the Devil, whose revelation it is
unto H. N. and his cursed followers. The true Ministers of the Gospel, are not
Ministers of men, nor by men, but by Jesus Christ; Gal. 1.1.
neither by his immediate voice from Heaven; or by that way which he has
ordained in his Testament 1. Tim. 3. Tit. 1.
: and other outward forms for any Minister of Christ, know we none.

Seauenthly, some of you take in hand to Prophecy, whereas ye are all without
the testimony of Jesus.
Answ. THat we are all without the testimony of H.Ns. Jesus or Savior, which
is, the estate of perfection in the lovely being, or upright righteousness as he
calls his Doctrine, unto which only his illuminate Elders do attain, which
he calls Jesus Christ, as before is proved, we freely acknowledge, and do
much loath and detest that deuillish fiction; but the testimony of the true
Jesus Christ, God over all, and true man, like us in all things excepting
sin, we bless his Name, we have, and purpose to hold fast unto the Death,
of which, besides what here we have said; we are ready to render a reason, to
any that shall require it.

Eighthly, ye are totally ignorant of the 6. Principles. Heb. 6.
Answ. WE freely confess if H. Ns. knowledge of the 6. Principles, Heb. 6.
be true; we are totally ignorant of them. Therefore we will in short set down,
from their own mouths and Pens what they understand of diverse of these
Principles, and show wherein we differ, and leave them to the judgment of the
Godly wise.

First, concerning repentance from dead works, they teach: that none need
repent of performing any bodily service to any Idol, as before, but that they
ought to continue therein; making all the beholders conceive, they do as they,
inwardly, and outwardly; when as they in their hearts, loath and detest that
service. And when they are come to the Family; they teach, they sin no more:
For they write, That in this City of Communalty, there is no more evil,
Spirit. land. Cap. 33. sect. 9.
nor evil suspicion, nor yet sight of evil in them; for within the same, one
does neither see, nor think any thing, but all good, etc.

2. Concerning their belief of God, thus they write; See and mark ye
beloved, H.Ns. man's falling away etc. sect. 1.
in the beginning when God made all things well; then was the Lord one Lord of
his Kingdom, and one God of his works; there was also no more but one God,
and one Man, and they were one, and had in all one order, being, and nature;
For God was all that the Man was, and Man was all that God was. And elsewhere,
thus he writes; H.Ns. Epist. to 2. Daughters of Warwick. sect. 22
God had Created the Man, that he should be of one life, one being, one
Spirit, and of one Nature with God, etc. If this be the true Eternal,
everlasting, unchangeable, and incomprehensible God, that had no other Order,
being, and Nature, then Man, let all that know the true God judge.

And concerning their belief of Christ, we have formerly related, that they
hold not the Man Christ, that was conceived and borne of that Natural woman
the Virgin Mary, for that is a thing ought not to be striuen about, but the
Perfection of H. N. and his fellow Elders of that lovely Family: or a Power in
man, whereby they can keep the Law, without Faith in the Blood of the man
Christ. This is H. N. and his followers Christ.

3. Concerning Baptisine, This he writes: Let your selves in all your being,
nature, mind, and disposition, Crying voice Cap. vlt. sect. 11.
become renewed through the love in her Service, and give all your
understanding captive under the obedience of the Love; and humble your selves
so under her service, to the end that ye all may become washed in the Love,
with the pure water of the Love, for to become washed with her pure water, is
the upright washing, and the true Font of the Regeneration, or new hirth. So
that to be captiuated in H. Ns. love and her Service, is the upright Baptism.
And where that comes not to pass unto them, Epist. to the 2 Daugh. sect. 20.
there is not the Christian service ministered, let them make themselves so like
fashioned to the Scriptures as they will. And for the Ordinance of water: he
calls that, Epist. sect. 11.17.
Ceremonial, Elementish, and men's own Baptism. And M. P. that mighty Prince
of the Hebrews as he calls himself, says; John's Baptism is full of many
great holy grave shows, M. P. burning light. Cap. 13. sect. 10.
but in power weak as Water, he can eat no man's meat, drink no Wine; ne
strong Drink, therefore must his Head be taken off, for he shall not govern
Disciples still; we were glad therefore to depart from him, for his going out,
was the coming in of Jesus.

4. Touching their opinion of laying on of hands we are ignorant.

5. Euang. Reg. Cap. 35. sect. 8.9.
Of the Resurrection of the Dead: Thus they write; Behold in this present Day
is the Scripture fulfilled; and according to the testimony of the Scripture,
the raising up, and the resurrection of the Lords Dead, comes also to pass
presently in this same day, through the appearing of the coming of Christ in
his Majesty; which resurrection of the Dead, seeing that the same is come unto
us from Gods Grace, we do likewise in this present day to an Euangelie, or
joyful message of the Kingdom of God and Christ, publish in all the world,
under the Obedience of the love; in which resurrection of the Dead, God shows
unto us, that the time is now fulfilled, that his dead, or the Dead which are
fallen asleep in the Lord, rise up in this day of his Judgment, and appear
unto us in Godly glory, which shall also from henceforth live in us
everlastingly with Christ, and Reign upon the Earth: So that all may plainly
see, the resurrection from the Dead, is with these men, or rather Devils, to
get into H. Ns. Doctrine of the Love. And because these Godded men that are
Godded with H.N. their God, do dye as well as others, and being demanded what
becomes of their Bodies after their death? some of their younglings have
answered us, they conceive, their judgment is, that the soul goes into God
again, and so becomes God; and their bodies lie and become as when they were
not, which opinion may well stand with all their other execrations; For if the
bodies rise not again, the^ no question they may as well worship an Idol, as
the true God, and commit all their abominations, for after this life, there is
neither reward nor punishment for the bodies; Oh fearful wickedness!

Lastly, Euang. Reg. Cap. 3. sect. 2 3.4.
concerning the Eternal Judgment thus they say: When as now in this same day
the wicked world becomes Judged with the Lords mighty hand, which wicked
world is reserved or kept in store until this same day of the love to the fire
of Hell, for to be condemned in the self same day of the Love, for evermore,
to her eternal cursing, and judgment of the fires cruel vehemence: And
again, Sect. 4.
verily now in this same day when as now all ungodly and selfe-wise, with all
unrepentant persons, and false hearts of the Scripturelearned, etc. inherit
with much smart and grief in the vehement cruelty of the fire of Hell, the
terrible condemnation, then shall the people of God, Spirit. land. Cap. 27.
sect. 11.12.
namely the whole co^munialty of the love, etc. rejoice them in all love, etc.
And further thus: After this time no time more; After the which there is no
life more to be waited for, for the same life continues for evermore. This
estate of H. Ns. love and her Service, it is with the Familists the Christ; It
is the Holy Ghost; the Baptism; the Resurrection; the everlasting Life; the
eternal Judgment; and all in all: Of all which, we are destitute, yet herein
we have knowledge, that they are abominations fetched out of the deepest pit of
Hell, and such as we are persuaded, were heuer before uttered by the mouth of
any mortal man.

No marvel now that H. Ns. Scholars say, we understand not one word in all
the universal Bible, and that we are totally ignorant of the principles of the
Family, who to set a gloze upon their wicked forgeries, abuse and pervert, Heb.
6. and other holy Scriptures, to their own destruction.

Having now discovered some of H. Ns. principles, The sum of the true Faith.
we will in short set down our Faith, concerning these 6. Principles, Heb. 6.

First of Repentance from dead works, we do believe, that every transgression
of any Law of God is sin; 1. Ioh. 3.4. Romans 6.23.
and the wages of every sin is Death; and so a dead work: That no man by
reason of weak Flesh, can keep the Law, Romans 8.3.
and therefore by transgression becomes dead in Sin, Ephe. 2.1.3
and so by weak Nature the Child of wrath: For the Law causes wrath, Romans
4.15.
for where no Law is, there is no transgression: but the power of Gods word,
contained in the holy Scriptures, 1. Cor. 15.34. Ephesians. 5.14
(and not the Revelations or Dreams of H.N. nor any others) awaking man, and
setting his sins in order before him, and the fearful terror of Gods wrath
against him, Act. 2.37. and 16.30. Act. 2.38. and 3.19.
causes man to be pricked in his heart, and to cry out, what shall we do to
be saved? To which God answers; Repent of thy sins; confess them; sorrow
for them; and reform them. But man seeing by the same holy Scripture, that
this his repentance, or any other thing that he can do, cannot appease Gods
wrath, nor satisfy his Justice for his sin; he is invited hereupon to fly
unto Gods Grace, by the Redemption purchased through the blood of his Son,
who is God over all, and took our Nature upon him; and became Man: Dyed for
us: and is risen again in his Body, ascended into Heaven sitting at the right
hand of his Father, making intercession for his servants, even for all that
obey him, Heb. 5.9.
through whom alone we have Redemption even the forgiveness of our sins.

2. Thus by Faith in the Blood of Christ, is this Sinner sprinkled in his
heart from an evil Conscience, Heb. 10.22.
and must also be washed in his Body with pure water.

3. This is the Baptism that saves, not only the washing away the filth of
the Flesh, but in that a good Conscience makes request unto God, 1. Pet. 3.21.
by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ: Yet not only the good Conscience is
Baptism, but also washing with material water, into the Name of the Father,
etc. For to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, which is the estate of Grace, or
true Christianity in this life, called the Kingdom of Heaven; Ioh. 3.5. Ephesians.
4.5.
We must have Water and Spirit, Christ has coupled them together, as his one
Baptism, and let no man separate them.

4. By laying on of hands, we conceive is meant the whole ministry of the
Church, which consists of those Offices mentioned in Christ's Testament. All
which, are to be entered into, by laying on of hands as these Scriptures teach
Act. 6.6. and 13.3.
: For other laying on of hands, by which extraordinary guiftes were
communicated unto men; we understand they were miracles given of God in the
primitive Church, for the confirmation of the Apostles authority, who taught
things that never before were taught, Heb. 2.5.
which that they might be credited, they did such things as never men did; And
if any Familist can do Miracles as did th Apostles, the^ might they have had
some color to write, and bring into the world new Gospels, as they are not
ashamed to do.

5. Concerning the Resurrection from the Dead; We believe that our souls shall
be separated from our bodies by natural Death; That the Body returns to earth
whence it came, and the Spirit to God that gave it, Eccles. 12.7 1. Cor. 15.
until the day that Jesus Christ shall come again to Judge quick and dead;
Then shall our Bodies rise again, even these bodies, Ioh. 19.25. etc.
and with these eyes shall we see our Redeemer.

Lastly, we do believe, and look for to our great rejoicing, the blessed
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, to that Eternal judgment, wherein he
shall Judge both quick and dead according to their works done in this Flesh, 2
Cor. 5.10
whether they be good or evil, Revel. 20.12.
to an Eternal being, to wit; Them that by continuance in well-doing seek
glory and Immortality, Ro^. 2.7. etc. 1. These. 4.17. Romans 2.8.
they shall come to Eternal Life; where they shall be ever with the Lord. But
those that are contentious and disobey the Truth, and obeyes unrighteousness,
and have done evil, and have not repented thereof, They shall come forth to
the resurrection of condemnation; Ioh. 5.29.
indignation and wrath shall be upon them, burning in the Lake for evermore
with the Devil and his Angels. Mat. 25.41.


Now let all Judge whether we be totally ignorant of the 6. Principles, Heb.
6. as these accusers do suggest; or rather that themselves are not only
ignorant of them; for if they were, their sin were the less, but they deny
them, and that after their enlightening.

The 9. transgression they accuse us of, is; Ninthly, you will not be reformed
by the Light which God has manifested in these latter times, and whereof much
is in the Book of Common Prayer, and in the Homilies, and in the Book of
Ordering of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.
Answ. WE having asked some of them, what Light this is, that in these latter
times God has manifested, for we conceive God never spoke, nor ever will,
after his speaking by his Son, in these last days; who by himself and his
Apostles, has delivered all the Counsel of God, sealing it up with these
sentences. If we or an Angel from Heaven teach any otherwise, then we have
Preached, Gal. 1.8, 9.
let him be accursed. And if any add to what they have done, Revel. 22.18.19.
God will add the plagues written by them; or if any take away any of those
their words, God will take away their names out of the Book of Life, (we say)
we having asked them, concerning these things, they have answered us; God has
spoken to the world at three several times; First by Moses and the Fathers. 2.
By Christ and the Apostles. And thirdly, by an everlasting Gospel in these
last days, alleging Revel. 14.

Which what Gospel should it be but the Gospel of the Kingdom which H. N.
has published to the world; in which many of his poisoned Doctrines is
broached, concerning which he has given himself a stately style, far
exceeding the Apostles in all their writings, full of blasphemies, which is
this: H. N. through the Grace and mercy of God, Euang. Peg. Cap. 1.
and through the holy Spirit of the love of Jesus Christ, raised up by the
highest God from the Death, according to the providence of God and his
Promises: anointed with the Holy Ghost, in the old age of the holy
understanding of Jesus Christ: Godded with God in the Spirit of his love: made
heir with Christ in the heavenly goods of the riches of God: Illuminated in
the Spirit with the heavenly truth, the true light of the perfect being:
elected to a Minister of the gracious word (which is now in the last time
raised up by God, according to his promises) in the most holy Service of God;
under the Obedience of his Love.

The blasphemies of whose writings are so gross, as these wretches are very
strait to whom they affirm that this everlasting Gospel is H. Ns. the Light
which God has manifested in these last days; yet apparently it is it, and no
other; For they speak plainly to whom they dare trust, as they know, we well
know; and disperse his Books to those in whom they have some hopes, requiring
most solemn protestations that they shall not let any see them, who they know
to be adverse For often they write, keep secrets from unbelievers.
: So that it is plain, this light which they much boast of, and have told
many of us of, is this Gospel of H. N. which is so far from light, being
compared with the holy Scriptures, that it is damnable darkness; from which, we
trust our God will always keep us.

But they tell us, much of it is in the Book of Common prayer, in the Book of
Homilies; and in the book of ordering of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
wherein all may see these hypocrites, still would shelter themselves under
Authority, though it be a manifestation to all, of their own hypocrisy; and
of the horrible defamation of the Common prayer Book: for as we said before,
they respect the Common prayer book and the rest, no more then they respect
the Popish Masse-booke, nor the Turkish Alchoran, to wit, in respect of the
Magistrates command; being far from thinking in their hearts, that any of
them contains the worship of God, which they affirm to be only inward, and
not in any outward observation whatsoever: wherein they are most notable
dissemblers, in making men believe, they respect that which they do not.

And what a defamation is it unto the Common prayer Book, and the rest, that
they affirm much of this new Light to be contained therein. Is any such thing
contained in any of these Books, as that men ever had, or can have One Nature,
Being, Life, order, and Spirit with God? That God is all that Man is, and that
man is all that God is: That Christ is the Perfection in the lovely being,
whereunto H. N. and his fellow Elders do attain: That Regeneration or the
true Baptism, is the captiuating of men into H.Ns. love and her service: That
the Resurrection of the dead is the rising to H.Ns. Doctrine: That the Eternal
judgment is in this Day of the Love of H. N: and the life everlasting the
living in the Doctrine of H. N. after which there is no life more to be waited
for: That any Idol may have all reverence performed to it with the body: that
a man being tempted to any sin, if upon crying help come not, he is free
from the transgressing, though he commit the fact: That in this City or
Communialty, there is no more evil nor evil suspicion, nor yet sight of evil
in them. For within the same one does neither see, nor think any thing but all
good, etc. That this Family should make manifest their whole heart with all
their counsels, minds, wills, and thoughts, together with all their doings,
1. Exhor. cap. 13. sect. 12.
dealings and exercises, naked and bare before the Eldest in the Family of
Love, and not cover nor hide any thing (be it what it is) before him, also all
whereunto their inclination, kind, and nature draws them unto, and all
wherewith they become tempted, or assaulted in their hearts. And in their
lovely society, Spirit. land. Cap. 37. sect. 3.
they do not vow, or bind themselves in the matrimony of men, nor yet suffer
themselves to be bound therein, but are like the Angels of Heaven. And there is
no man that claymeth any thing to be his own, as to possess the same to his
own private use; for no man, and that out of every ones good disposition, can
desire any thing to be his own, or yet to make any thing proper to himself,
from another; But also whatsoever is there, is free; and is left free, in his
upright form; There is also no man denied to use any thing in freedom, of all
that is profitable, and needful for him, for they stand all in equity as one
in the Love, etc.

Oh who would have thought that so many abominations had lurked in this wicked
Family! though alas these be not all that are known; and how many more are
unknown, Pro. of H.N. Cap. 22. sect. 16. and keep secrets from unbelievers.
men may imagine, by H.Ns. teaching his fellow Elders not to reveal their
secrets, no, not to their own young ones. This is H. Ns. light brought into
the world in these latter times: but we hope none of this new light, or rather
darkness, will be sheltred in the Common prayer Book, It will not patronage any
of these fearful blasphemies, and therefore the hypocritical boldness of
these Familists will have little thanks for this their affirmation: but before
they come to this Light, observe what they must do. Look who so will know
these things, must depart from all the wisdom of the Learned, from the steps
of the grave Fathers; and from the religious walkings of all the Devout
persons, even all the knowledge men have, must away by little and little, from
every one that shall be saved: M. P. burning light. cap. 7. sect. 23
but before a Wise man can let slip all, there must rise many agonies,
anguishes, striuings, and Earthquakes, etc. For before the Truth shall appear,
the Destroyer must come and make all waste.

All light of Truth must be put out, before they can come to these things. Oh
fearful wickedness!

Tenthly, ye are void of the Christian Faith.
Answ. OF the Faith of H. Ns. Christ, we confess our selves utterly void, and
do bless our God for the same; but we having manifested our Faith in the
true Christ, none will judge us to be void thereof, but Atheistical Familists.

Eleauenthly, ye separate from the holy Catholic Church.
Answ. FIrst let it be observed, what these Familists judge of all that believe
not the Love. Thus they write; All such as believe not the Love, nor are
Baptized into the name of the Father, it is not meet to account such
unbelievers and unbaptized ones, for Christians, at whose hands we should
look for any word of truth, let them esteem themselves as holy as they will,
they are a false Christianity and deuillish Synagogue or School: now this
being their censure of all but themselves. If they mean the holy Catholic
Church to be the Family of Love, as indeed H. N. says, then we must bear this
accusation; For as we never were of it, so we purpose to be divided from it
for ever. If they mean any other Assembly, how are they confounded, to call
that the holy Catholic Church in one place, which in another place they call a
false Christianity, and a deuillish Synagogue or School; can the Devils
Synagogue be a holy Church? But if the Family or any other be a deuillish
Synagogue, Gods people are commanded to separate from them in all Spiritual
fellowship; Separate your selves from this froward generation; Act. 2.40.
have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness; Ephe. 5.11. 1. Cor.
10.20.
I would not ye should have fellowship with Devils in the Sacrifices of the
Gentiles. What fellowship has Christ with the Devil? the Beleeeuer with the
unbeliever; the Temple of God with Idols; Therefore separate your selves says
the Lord, touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you, 2. Cor. 6.14 etc.
and be a God and Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters,
says the Lord Almighty.

Thus is separation lawful, till they have proved that to be the Church of
Christ, which they say we separate from, which we trust they shall never have
cause to accuse us of.

Twelthly, there is not any one of you that is a new Creature.
Answ. What H.Ns. new Creature is, all may perceive, where he says; Crying
voice, Cap. vil. sect. 11.
For to become washed in the Love with her pure water, is the upright washing,
and the true font of the Regeneration or new Birth. And the second Birth out of
the Holy Ghost is in the Oldnesse of time, when the days of the patience of
Christ, in the obedience of the holy and Gracious word, Exhort. 1. Cap. 7.
sect. 29.31.
and her service of Love, are fulfilled, that then the holy Ghost becomes
powered forth through Jesus Christ, over them all that have followed Christ in
the Death of his Cross obediently, and have kept his Doctrine (namely H.Ns.)
with the word of his patience even unto the end, which is every where taught in
his tedious and intricate writings, the estate of Perfection in the love, or
Doctrine of this deceiuer. For he says, The second Birth which is not minded
according to the Flesh, but according to the Spirit of the heavenly Truth
obtains the victory, bears rule with God, and brings forth the Name of
Israel or Christ it self, as before has been related upon another occasion.

This their Godded estate, is their second birth or new Creature, which we do
much abhor, and therefore no marvel, if they say of us, that not any one of
us are new creatures; But such new creatures as the sacred Scriptures speaks
of, that we embrace and follow after, that being sometimes foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and
envy, hateful, and hating one another; but after that the kindness and love
of God our Savior toward man appeared, Tit. 3.3.4.5
not by the works of righteousness which we had done, but according to his
mercy he saved us by the washing of Regeneration and renewing of the holy Ghost,
etc. Hereby in a measure are we new Creatures, Romans 6.13.
not now giving our members servants of sin, nor taking pleasure in any
unrighteousness as before we did; but endeavoring henceforth to give our
members servants of righteousness in Holiness, 2. Cor. 7.1. etc.
and to cleanse our selves of all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and to grow
up unto perfect holiness in the fear of God. For our helps herein, having
not only the power of the Spirit of God in our hearts; but also all those
blessed rules in Christ's Testament, for the guidance of us in the way of life;
in which estate of Regeneration some are Babes: 1. Ioh. 2.12. etc.
some are Young Men: and some may be called Fathers, in respect of a measure
of perfection, whereunto they may attain, only through Christ's perfection,
without whose perfection all men's perfection, is imperfection: through him, all
his, Are able to do all things: Phil. 4.13. Ioh. 15.5.^
without him they can do nothing. The weakest of his members are perfect with
God through him, the strongest are not perfect without him. For only through
him the Father is well pleased, and he is our Justification, 1. Cor. 1.30
and all in all unto us. But that any man can attain unto such an estate in
this life, as it is not possible for him to transgress any Law of God by any
means in thought, word, or deed, we leave that deuillish Dream with H. N.
and his bewitched followers, who account this the second Birth or new Creature.
The Apostles of Christ confessed the contrary. Iam. 3.2. and 1. Ioh. 1.8.

To these 12. supposed evils which in writing they have taxed us with, we will
add a 13th. which we had from their mouths, and it is this.

13. You observe not the Commandment given to the Woman and her seed, Revel.
12. of flying into the Wilderness from the presence of the Serpent.
Answ. THeir meaning is, that we are too open in our profession, through the
which we endure much misery; for so they have said unto us, they would have us
dissemble like themselves, and save our selves from troubles. For M. P. who
calls himself that mighty Prince of the Hebrews, in his virtue of the
Cross corrected, Thus he writes; It is written, Cap. 3. sect. 1
saying; When they persecute you in this City fly into another; that is:
whilst we are yet weak, and not well able to bear the cross; we may do as
Peter did, with mouth deny Christ, but not in heart. And much more of this
stuff he proceeds in; but in diverse places of the margent, he writes; Hide
secrets from the unbelievers. To whom we may say, as Christ said to Peter,
when he dissuaded him from Suffering; Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an
offense unto me, Math. 16.
thou understand not the things that are of God, etc. Are not Gods servants
the salt of the earth? and the light of the world? shall the light be put under
a Bushel? Math. 5.13.
and not set on a Candlestick. Christ commands that what he said in Darkness,
that his should speak it in the Light; and what they heard in the ear, that
they should Preach on the houses; and not fear them that would kill the Body,
Math. 10. c.
and after that could do no more. For he that is ashamed of Christ and his
words, Mark. 8.38
amongst this Adulterous and sinful generation, of him shall the Son of man
be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father with his holy Angels:
For as with the heart man believes unto righteousness, so with the mouth, he
must confess to salvation; Romans 10.10
If we suffer with Christ, we shall reign with Christ, and if we deny him, he
will deny us; 2. Tim. 2.12
This the true Christ teaches whom we confess and endeavor to serve: But H.
N. and the Families Christ teaches them to save themselves, and rather to
dissemble if Authority command it, then suffer any afflictions to the outward
man, abusing for his purpose this Scripture, Blessed is the barren, that
bears not, etc. As also that Christ's yoke is easy, and his burden light;
And therefore brings not his, to suffer persecution to the outward man, but
to do any thing that Authority commands, whose gross abominations has
been formerly confuted, and we trust our innocence defended, against all the
accusations of these Children of that old accuser of the Brethren. The Lord
discover their most palpable abominations, and deliver poor simple souls
from their snares, Pro. 9.18.
for assuredly the Dead are there, and her guests are in the depth of Hell.

Conclusion.
IF these Familists, or any that are not willing to be known to be of them,
do except against any thing either by word or writing, which is here written,
and say that we wrong them, in alleging H. Ns. and the rest, their hellish
sayings, and laying them upon them; we answer them, many of these sayings are
their own, and all the rest for any thing that we know, for otherwise they
would not disperse their Books, if they did not approve of the Doctrine
contained in them, and in all things that we know follow their course; and we
heartily beseech all that shall have to deal with them; that if they be ashamed
of H. N. and this his new light or everlasting Gospel, which they so much
glory of, that they would require them, by writing to be published, to testify
their abhorring of these his wicked blasphemies, otherwise they will not only
confirm all, of their holding the same; but also give all occasion to judge
them to be as they are, dissembling hypocrites, who hold things, and yet
endeavor to persuade people that they do not hold them.

Let them testify their abhorring.
1. FIrst that which H. N. has written of God, That God and Man had one Order,
Spirit, Nature and being; that God was all that Man was, and Man was all that
God was. 2. That Christ is the Perfection in the Lovely being, whereunto their
Godded Elders do attain: Or any power in man, whereby he can keep the Law,
without Faith in the man Christ. 3. That the true Baptism is: To be in the
love and her Service. 4. That the Resurrection of the Dead: The Eternal
Judgment: and the everlasting life, is in this life before the natural Death
of the body: And that the Body comes to nothing after Death. 5. That they
ought to prostrate their Bodies before any Idol or Idol-seruice, at the
Magistrates command, keeping their hearts to God. 6. That the Worship of God,
stands not at all, in any outward Ordinance or observation. 7. That if one
be tempted to any Sin and cry, and there come no help; he or she is
guiltless though they commit the Act. 8. That they do not bind themselves in
Matrimony of men, nor yet suffer themselves to be bound therein, but are like
the Angels of Heaven. 9. That they ought to confess before the Eldest in the
Family, all their evil thoughts, words, and deeds whatsoever they be, and
all that their inclination and Nature draws them unto. 10. That some of them
are come unto such a perfection, that being Godded with God, neither in
thought, word, nor deed, they can sin any more. 11. That no man makes any
thing his own, or proper to himself, but all things whatsoever is in the
Love, is free, and is as one. 12. That any that are ignorant though Idolaters
and worshippers of Devils, and justifying themselves therein, may be saved;
though they know not nor believe in the Blood of the man Christ. 13. That H. N:
M. P. and the servant of M. P. were raised up of God, to publish these things
to the world, in these latter days as an everlasting Gospel.
All these things has Henry Nicholas and his followers published, being
raised up out of the infernal pit, to the deceiving of them that believe not
the Truth, ( which Jesus Christ the Son of the Eternal Father has revealed)
but have pleasure in unrighteousness, being of God delivered up to a reprobate
mind, that they might be damned. If they testify their abhorring of these
things, without scores evasion, or mental reservation, we shall be glad: If
not; let them be content to be called his Disciples, whose Discipline they
maintain. We do herein, as we would be done unto, for we are content that
any whatsoever, shall ask us a reason of our Faith, in any thing, and we will
render it to them.

Now the Lord Jesus Christ, the great and good Shepherd of his Sheep,
disclose, and destroy the lies and snares of this Thief and robber H. N. and
his followers, that the souls of all for whom Christ has paid so dear a
price, may be delivered from their destruction, and be brought unto and
continued in his Fold, to their Immortality of soul and body, in Glory
everlasting, By the same our Lord and Savior, to whom with the Father, and
the blessed Spirit, one Eternal, and everliving God, be Glory and Dominion,
now and for ever. Amen.

PSALM. 111.104. By thy precepts J have gotten understanding: therefore J hate
all the ways of falsehood.

VERSE. 115. Away from me ye wicked; for I will keep the Commandments of my
God.

FINIS.

