Fancies Ague-fittes, Or Beauties Nettle-bed: Wherein, one nights lodging,
will cost nine months Nettling.

Handled in six Discourses, pithie, pleasing, and profitable.

Patere, aut abstine.

LONDON, Printed by G. Simson for William Jones, dwelling at Holborne conduit,
at the sign of the Gunne. 1599.

To the right worshipful Master William Basset Esquire, one of her Majesty's
Justices of the peace, in both the Counties of Derbie and Stafford, Likewise,
to the most vertou^ Gentlewoman his wife: all health and happiness most
heartily wished.
DEbtes, of what antiquitye soever, are not by delay discharged, neither
promises, by long protraction, impeached from performance. How justly both
these (right worshipful) appertain to me, though happily out of date in your
too long expectation: I may be sorry for no sooner compassing, and you in favor
will I hope receive what comes at last, excusing all errors with the common
addage, better late then never. When your worship was high sheriff of
Staffordshire, as some-way to express thankfulness, for the favors then
found, I promised you, that in such forte as this I would erelong salute ye.
But being hindered by a long sickness, as also convenient means to discharge
my promise: I could never till this instant be so fortunate, as to greet you
with any thing worthy your viwe, or sufficient to plead the least part of
performance. And though my conceit heerof may be great, yet how you shall
think thereof may well be doubted, because oppinions are as varyous, as men's
humors are diverse: yet the sound belief I have in your euer-affable nature,
makes me hope, that the meannes of my gift, shall be shaddowed with the entire
depth of great good will, and what wantes in this, in some other hereafter will
be better supplied.

Nor seek I to be free from my former bond of promise, by this silly trifle,
in respect of so great deserving: but rather that your worship would take this
onward, to arm ye with some hope of attayning to the rest, and that withal to
express, I am willing to continue yours in duty, till the very uttermost be
discharged.

Both this, my self and what else remaynes in me, I entreat your worship
kindly to conster on, for you shall find them ready on the least occasion to
use them. In mean while, praying for all happy blessings to attend and follow
you, as also the most virtuous Gentlewoman your wife, whom heaven enritch with
blessed sight of her hopes joy: I humbly commend ye both to his protection, who
has hitherto had care of you, and will evermore comfort you.

The Argument of each several discourse.
Of Beauty. Dis. 1. Of Love. Dis. 2. Of the means to compass favor and
acceptaunce. Dis. 3. Of the considerations of Love Dis. 4. Of Iealosie. Dis. 5.
Of the passions of Love. Dis. 6.
Of Beauty. The first discourse.
I Know not if among those benefits bestowed upon the body, beauty deserve to
have any such account made of it, as we do, of halth, agilitie, strength, and
disposition: because Beauty is not any thing at all felt by the person endued
there with, neither serves but to such as see it, and to them whom it gives
delight. Now to know, if by Beauty there does ensue any commodity, the
question is problematicall, and may be debated as for the affirmative, so
likewise for the negative, for it appears, that nature bestowing beauty on
any, did it to make them beloved, and that which possesses the hearts of men,
may be good right be termed mighty, and draws all sorts of commodities to
it, not having need of any thing in the protection of others. Briefly, it is
well known, what good those famous courtezanes got by it, as Flora, Layis,
Lamia and their like, moreover, it is necessary we should remember, that
Beauty is such a gift of nature, as all the gold in the world cannot give us
the like; for eloquence, science, and gentilitie, are attained only by study
and diligence.

If then no small estimation be to be made of the favor, good grace, and love
of men; we must confess Beauty to be a benefit, at least the cause thereof,
in winning and procuring us such friends. But when (on the other side) I
consider, that those friends which are followers of Beauty, be rather lovers
of their own pleasures and voluptuousnes, so that they love not indeed the
beautiful body, but better may be called enemies, yea traitors to the honor
and good renown of Beauty, then any true friends or well willers: I rest in
my former oppinion, and dare not repute beauty to be a benefit.

When likewise I call ancient histories to memory, I find how hurtful
beauty was to Lucretia, albeit she was most chaste and virtuous, to modest
Susanna, also, and discreet Penelope, mirrours and examples of perfect
loyalty: both they and an infinite number of their like, had been most happy,
if their beauties had not been so much coueted and desired.

In like manner I consider, that such as are followers of beauty, have no
respect but of their own passions, and no care at all of beauties reputation,
because if beauty in some sort does bring commonditie to such as are adorned
therewith, as perhaps to command men's goods at their pleasure: yet can they
not for all that ouerrule their hearts and wills, for many times they give
their goods away to enjoy their pleasure, and they that yield thereto, make
sale both of their bodies and honor, submitting themselves to base prostitution
only for monye. Such women therefore cannot justly term themselves mistresses
when to have a little power of their goods, they make their own persons as
servants to me, so for the bare title of Lady of their money, they make men
Lords of their affections, nay, of them selves so much as may be. We may now
see if beauty be a benefit to such as delight therein, when it cannot be in her
that is endued therewith, because she can neither feel or see it any way, and
in truth, I may here speak as Epicurus did of pleasures, when one demanded
of him, whether pleasure were a benefit or no, and he thereto returned this
answer; that he has but little wit, who when his finger is in the fire, will
ask of other if he feel pain or no, whether the fire be hot, and Ice cold:
meaning thereby, if a delight be pleasing to a man's own self, why should he
question whether it be a benefit or no, since himself both feels and makes
experiment thereof. In like manner I say, that he who has a fair wife, knows
well if he have delight or pleasure, for were not beauty expected and desired,
it would not be so generally sought and purchased, which makes me to
conjecture, that a man having a fair wife or friend, esteems beauty for a
benefit and chiefest pleasure, and therefore Plato gives no other definition of
love, but that it is a desire of beauty, as very amply he delivers in his
dialogues called Phoedrus.

For this matter therefore, the testemonies of so many Poets shall suffice me,
who express in their writings, that generally beauty has been magnified,
exalted and honored, as a great gift of God, and, but that I find beauty to
be enuironned with many perilous discommodities, I should consent with them in
opinion. But I considder that which many great personages have done before me,
of whom I could allege authorities most notable, which might serve to satissie
the greatest loubters; only I will rehearse the reason that has moned them to
such saying, and in declaring the reason, none can contradict me, but that the
proof is clear and apparent. For if I should avouch but the alegation of
Poets, it might the be said, that they speak according to their^ passions,
and women might refect them as their adversaries and enemies to their sex,
whereas if I show the grounded reason themselves may then receive blame in not
giving credit thereto, or else they dare not term themselves reasonable when
they will give no place to reason.

First then I say, that beauty has this discommoditie, it is coueted by every
one, it is most hard to be kept and defended, being a thing sought after by so
many persons, (as it were) continually besieged. For as a garden that is
replenished with all fair flowers and fruits, or a treasury stored with
riches most precious, is in daily danger, and needs especial guardance: even
such and no otherwise is the beauty of women.

This is the first reason alleged by Poets, whereto they further add, that
beauty begets in women great pride and ouet-weening, as Ovid in this verse
testefierh.

Fastus inest pulcris, sequiturque superbi^ formam.

That is.

Beauty makes women to be wondrous proud.

In being then so proud and lofty minded, they imagine that their beauty
should serve them to some end or purpose, and say, that beauty had not been
given them, but both they must and ought to make some use of it. And as we note
one love to beget another, so do we likewise behold, that a woman often
solicited if she be not virtuous, and strong in resistance, she is in danger to
make shipwreck of her beauty, by those entisings which her beauty procured.

Perhaps some will deny, that women are subject to love any other then their
husbands, but then they must confess withal that they are apt therein to be
suspected, especially if they be endued with admirable beauty, yea many times
it comes so to pass, that such beauty has been very hurtful to their
husbands, and extended to the loss of their lives. The example of Vrias may
serve, the husband to Bersaba; but if we shall need any more allegations, it
is too well known how damageable Hellens beauty was to her husband Menelaus,
to Paris, and Deiphoebus, who lost their lives, and made the earth drunk with
effusion of their blood.

It is likewise as evident, that which is written of Abraham, who had a fair
wife named Sara, and because he went with her into Egypt, he said; thou art
fair, and if it be known that I am thy husband, I shall be slain, that they
may enjoy thee, it will be best therefore to call me thy brother. Afterward,
when Abimelech saw her, Abraham was constrained to deny he was her husband.
The history of Gyges and Candaulus is as notable with infinite others that
might be rehearsed. All which notwithstanding, I will not say as some have
done.

Cumque pudicitia rara est concordia forma. Beauty with chastity is sildome
found. For I can prove them liers by numberless examples, of very beautiful
and virtuous Ladies, that have and yet live in honor to this day amongst us,
and so shall do for ever, to their confusion, who have so shamefully slaundred
them.

But for confirmation of my former speeches, that women's beauties is dangerous
to their husbands, I will not let slip in silence, what wise Bias, a man so
much renowned spoke, saying: Beauty much marked and gazed at, is no assurance
to the husband, for though virtue be conjoined therewith, yet is the man in
evident danger, wherefore, the very wisest have been of this opinion, that
such beauty as is most requisite in women, is to be indifferently fair, or as
we say in Latin, Stata forma, aut vxoria forma. They add moreover, since
beauty is a thing which decays and wears old by time, that it is more
yrkesome to him, who has seen his wife beautiful, to note her now deprived
there of, and dispoiled of that flower, even as the trees of their leaves in
winter.

In like manner can I assure ye, that notwithstanding the declaration of such
as are not pursued and followed, but by the immodest and shameless: yet
beauty is never alone, but often times accompanied with many good graces, and
my reason is, that we usually show our selves to others, as they declare
themselves toward us, and the beautiful being imbrased, and well wished by
all: shows themselves likewise reciprocally ssweece, courteous, and affable to
all. But perhaps you will allege some faults unto me, as making them selves
proud, when they hear one praise or reprite them to be fair. Such have no
desert to hold place with honorable dames, because the more virtue is extolled,
the more humble it makes the person endued therewith.

I wall say, as an anncient and great personage councelled young Ladies in his
time, to veiw themselves diverse times in a glass, to the end (quoth he) that
finding themselves fair, they should endeavor to be as beautiful in their
minds, shaming that their bodies which are vile and corruptible, should be
more goodly then their souls, which are divine and immortal. In like case, if
they descerne themselves to be foul and misshapen, they should labor to
recompense that difformitie by their good minds, and such goodly graces as
best beseems them.

Such ought to be the daily practice of those which are fair, because it
seems a thing very odious, to see a beautiful body not adorned with good
graces and virtues, which want procures great grief in many beholders,
pitying so fair a creature should be in such sort blemished, where others
are quite contrary, that deserve serve less loking on. Therefore, when such
shall request favor at men's hands, well may they in scorn and derision be
answered, that their own imperfections makes them not regarded, and so they
continue chaste, because none cares for them.

It is the nature of a woman, the more one importunes her, the less she
regardes what she would gladliest have, which makes them to observe it as a
general rule, to despise them most that chiefest sue to them: for the love
which they bear to them selves, hinders all love else they should bestow on
others, then which there can be nothing more contrary to love, namely this
Philaftia, self love, or vain opininion of our selves. But I mind not here to
to allege those inconveniences, because the argument would have but a bad
foundation, only I say, that if a wife addict her self to love any one, it is
not in regard that her self is fair, but because she esteems him fair whom
she loves, for we see the hard favored to be as amorous, and stand upon terms
to be entreated, as they that are fairest, and best may brag of beauty.
Wherefore it is a thing most certain, that nothing else but the fair form of
the countenance, the beautiful color and pleasing looks of young personages,
such as are in the only flower of their age: is that which does attract
affection, set open the windows of good opinion, and by little and little
kindles the fire, which afterward breaks into loves chiefest flame.

Now many times it happens, that diverse (through the folly of their parents)
striving to quench this affection and passion, by force and without reason, do
nothing else advantage themselves thereby: but grow into more trouble, as
contending with smooke, whereas if they would give them head or liberty,
before such wretches as are lewdest and most voluptuous, they would over throw
them in their own naughtiness.

Hereby may we then perceive, that whereas love should make such personages
gen: tle kind and affable, to them which frequent their company, it turns to
the contrary, making them melancholique, froward and out of all order. Then
let us not marvel, why our elders described love to be inconstant and
variable, or like to the sun, which daily seems to quench it self, and yet
every morning renewes his light again: for this is my conceit of love, that
as it is mortal and perishable, so it cannot be constant in one and the self
same kind.

But to come to the conclusion of that before rehearsed, concerning Beauty, I
will conclude with Aristotle, that of two virtuous women, the one being fair,
and the other hard favored she which surpasses the other in beauty, shall be
more praised and esteemed then the other can be. And the like may be said of
two personages virtuous and wise, the one being rich, the other poor: most
certain is it, that the rich man shall be in more account then the poor,
because the one will be more contented then the other. But if beauty or riches
shall necessarily bring their vices with them, then I will conclude otherwise.
Orif any one will object unto me, that he has occasion of offending, either
by beauty or riches: then will I like wise answer him, that he has the more
need of virtue to make resistance.

Of Love. The second discourse.
Love has been of all men so extolled and esteemed, that antiquity made a god
of it, as being the most forcible passion in us, to wit, the only cause of all
our actions. It was not then without reason, that they of elder time did so
worthily celebrate the same, and that not only men subjected themselves
thereto, but the Gods likewise were under loves controlement.

And not to use but this argument only, to show how it is combined with our
senses, and that it is the efficient cause of whatsoever we do: in mine
oppinion may be deemed sufficient in this case.

All our actions are to some end or purpose, as Aristotle expresses, to some
apparent good; why then you will confess, that each one is amorous and
desirous of that end, purpose and apparent good, then consequently whatsoever
is done, is done for love: for each man looues and desires that which is his,
because he thinks it good, profitable, and needful for him, as the covetous
man, he is amorous of his riches, the envious, of his revenge, the incontinent,
of his beastly pleasure, the virtuous: of his virtues, and consequently, each
man does frame and level all his endeavors, to the end of pleasing him self,
which title or more Plato gives unto it.

I will not here trouble my self in collecting anthorities from our elders,
who have so highly exalted the power of love, only I must say, that there is no
passion in us more strong and piercing, as may be discerned in them that affect
and love honor who dare boldly oppose their lives against the cannons mouth,
as valiant enemies and dispisers of death: others for the love of their
Mistresses, to do such things as else were impossible, even desperate hazard
of their goods and lives

Now herein make I no jot of difference, between the love which a man bears
to a woman, and the love he caries to any goodly thing: for I stand upon those
terms of definition, which Plato himself has given to love, namely, that it
is a desire to enjoy whatsoever is beautiful. For I call that beauty, which a
man thinks to be good, and (as he in the beginning of his Ethicques calls it)
the apparent good, which is the end of al our actions. Likewise Plato, speaking
of this beauty disputes it ingenerall, as the beauty of a virtuous man is
nothing else but his virtue: which (says Cicero) if it appear to the eyes of
men, we may easily presume, how lovely it makes him to them that beholdes it.

But to particularize this matter, we will speak of the love of man toward a
woman, and then must we say in truth, that it is a thing so natural, as there
is no need of other proof, seeing by common sense we understand and call that
natural, which by nature is as usual to beasts as men.

And therefore let me say of him that feels not this passion, as a Courtezane
did of one which made love to her, who showed himself so cold and dull in his
amorous blandishmentes: that though (quoth she) I have moved many men, by much
less kindness then I have shown to thee, yet I find all this favor lost
which has been bestowed on thee, because thou appearest to be no man, but
rather a hard and insensible stone.

And verily the physicians do show by the anotamie of our bodies, that a man
being composed of flesh, blood, and his other parts, must necessarily be
subject to the humor wherewith he is borne: as he is to yield to hunger,
thirst and other appetites, which partake with the disposition of our blood.
Plato speaking of Hermaphroditus, that is both man and woman, says, that man
at the first was made both male and female, which semes to have some
correspondence with others holding the same opinion. But man (says he sone
after being divided into male and female, has ever since had the appetite of
re^oyning and coumting himself together again, (as we discern by desire of
kissing imbrasing, and such like,) as he was at the first created.

But Aristotle tells us an other reason, which seems more true and likely,
because the union whereof Plato speaks, is not to be so again conjoined,
neither can man likewise have any hope thereof. He says, that for the
conservation of either sex and kind nature has given a desire of ingendring,
as well by men as beasts. Hereof may we say, as Cicero does in his book of old
age: that man sowes, plants, grafts, buildes, leaves his books for his
posterity, not bauing any thing inciting him hereto, but that nature would
have all things preserved in the kind, wherein first of al she brought it
into the world.

And this is an influence as common to beasts as men, issuing from the
providence of nature, as hunger and thrist is given to man as well as beasts,
to the end he should maintain his body, which takes alteration by euapored
norishment, and desires continual: new fomentation, and so hunger mstructeth
man when is meet time to feed himself.

But leave we this love or indignation natural, which rather is beastly then
humane, and let us speak of that love, which addresseth it self to the mind,
when a man loves a fair person, wise and of good grace. And to speak
ingenerally of beauty, it ought to be as well understood of the mind as the
body: for one is amorous of the mind, to acknowledge in the other person,
somewhat or other agreeing with our nature, such as is liking and agreeable
with us Now to know what joy one mind has of an other, we may answer, that
as one body is glad of an other body, so one mind of an other, so the
fruition and delight is in the same manner simpathized. Then he that loves,
desires that the thoughts of his mind, may unite and join themselves with the
thoughts of the person beloved, and as the body of the one receives the others
body in corporal pleasure, so the mind might meet with another mind, and
give it self thereto, as in communication of hearts, so of wills, serving one
another use, and taking on either part a mutual concord in desire, and no
greater delight can be spoken of, then when one finds himself as well
beloved, as he does love. This may we further discern, in that God desires
our love of us, urging it to be given with all our heart, by reason (on his
behalf) he loves us infinitely: we must then confess, that pleasure goes
before love, which is a delight conceived in the mind, as he which desires the
pleasure of a woman, apprehends in his mind and imagination the delight he is
to m^oy, and so sometimes, as if he had performed it, is he pleased and fully
satisfied, which is the thing that we call to love.

In like manner, he that loves a virtuous body, desires to be in her good
grace, and so reciprocally to be beloved. Behold then wherein the benefit of
love consists, nor ca^ any assign other cause of the good which is felt by
delight of the mind, then that we find of our selves, which makes every man
well borne, desire to be reputed, esteemed and loved of every one, especially
the^ who^ he loves and reuerenceth, as of his prince, of honorable gentlemen,
and al his other well willers beside. Nevertheless, because it happens often
times, that when one speaks of love, we rather vnerstand the love which a man
bears to a woman, then that which one man caries to another: so may I well
say, and that by good right, a man loves a woman more then he can do any man
whatsoever, for there is no one but will confess, that two cords or strings
bind and hold more strongly then one can do. If then it be so, this must
necessarily be likewise granted, that man and woman being joined together in
body and mind, their love is more firm and strict, then that of man to man
can be, being lincked together but in mind only. Yet will I not deny for all
this, but that a stable and firm bond is found in one man's mind to another,
for their virtues: if then the virtues in a woman are not such, as may answer
and agree with them in her husband, then doubtless I must confess, that the
love between men is much more great, then the other of a man toward a woman.

But in equallitie of virtues, I say a man loves a woman better then he can do
a man, because man is not a mind only, nor a body only, but a mind and body
joined together, and while the marriage of the mind to the body indureth,
there is such society between them, that the one suffers the others
infirmity, rejoices and pertakes in contentment or otherwise.

It appears then, that the mind depends altogether on the body, as is
plainly noted, because the body is the organe and instrument of the mind, and
as the memory of man loses it self, when the vessel of the brain is
offended or abused: so likewise does judgment and common sense, for we see
there is no difference between a fool and a wise man, but the health and
disposition of the brain and not of the mind, as the mind being made of one
and the self same matter, but performing their functions by the bodies organes.

So we see, that a man distempered by wine fuming up into his brain, becomes
like a fool or a frantique man: then hereby may we well perceive, that there
is a agreat simpathie and coniunctio^ between the mind and the body,
whereupon, I conclude the love of men toward women to be great, when the mind
and body delight and meet together by conjunction.

And because some will say, there is not found so great amity between a
brother and sister or kinsman, as with her that enjoys more pr^^^te society:
even so the delight is better agreeable, man being no no way participating of
any thing, then by means of the body. And if we should need to produce
divinity, we know that God requires as well the service of our bodies, as of our
minds, the sacraments are applied to the body as well as to the mind, and the
body as well as the mind, must participate (after this life) of good or evil
in the other world, in brief, without the body, a man were not a man, neither
could be capable of knowing any thing: which may be gathered by the disposition
of our common sense, whereto all the other senses apply themselves and that by
sight, hearing, and the other as helpers, the soul receives enstruction, which
sight, and hearing being taken from man, he is then no other but as a brute
beast and insensible.

But it is true, that I make great difference between the delight of love in a
beast, and the other propper in a man, for that in a beast, it goes no further
then the body, with out any more matter, and is not moved but by nature only
to engender, but man has the delight of the mind and did such pleasure of the
body serve to no other end, but to express the contentment of the mind, yet
were it as necessary, as our speech to be an instance of our thoughts,
neither can a man declare his good will and intents, but by the ministry of
the mouth, and other signs of the body. In like manner, the greatest affection
is made apparent by kisses, mutuallimbracings, and other apt instances of the
body and I dare affirm, that the man which truly loves, never finds the
delight of the body so pleasing, as when he sees his Lady (on her behalse)
dehuer like teshmonie of her love to him, and that with a cheareful heart she
entertaineth him, which makes a man take more pleasure in her he loves, and by
whom he is beloved again, then in any other whatsoever, be she never so
beautiful.

For (as says one, and very well too) when a man receives a present from a
Lord, he regards not the gift, how fair or rich so ever it be, as he does
the good will and courtesy of the giver: so God acknowledges not our
presents, neither cares for them, but our intents and good wills only.
Therefore we may say, that when a man sporteth, the pleasure of the body likes
him not so well, as that of the heart: for if pleasure be had against the good
will of any, it serves not to him as any contentment. Contrariwise, although
he delighted but his body only, yet if he were assured of the others good
liking, it would suffice, being loved again as himself does love.

Moreover, if it be granted, that the body is in such sort espoused to the
mind, as being one with the other, it cannot be but an extreme pain, if they
delight not one in the other: why then it would seem most hurtful to them, if
they should be forced to abstain from a joy so vehement, or abide separation
through constraint, not daring privately or publikly be seen together: who so
thus offe^deth, or seeks to force nature, cannot avoid falling into great
danger.

Why then I must say, that strict and entire amity, cannot long continue
between a man and woman, without the delight of the body, if amity be bred of
one and self same will, not able to endure sinister contraries: why then such
parties shall as hardly command and vanquish their passions, as they receive
good by being in one another sight. and harm when they may not be so
together, or as during not to speak but before witnesses. This is the reason,
why love is said not to continue long between a man and woman, except it be in
such as are tied by the bands of marriage: for between others it cannot be,
either without great danger, or without suspicion and scandale, especially such
secrecy and communication, as is required in love, which makes of two hearts
one, and joins them inseperably together.

As for others, because our law gives us a conscience, if kindness be had,
hardly can it be durable: but between married persons, because the wise have
made a virtue of necessity, alliance is more certain, to wit, more lasting,
having made a communion and society together, of all fortunes whatso uer good
and bad.

But concerning love, it is very hard to be demeaned with a woman, if she be
not his wise or friend in delighting: because nature inuites us to those
imbracings and secrecies, which follow one another in sequence, not to be named
among such persons as intend to live chastely. And this I speak, because
discoursing now of love, I mean not amity, which I reserve for man to man, or
brother to sister, or a son to his mother, which cannot well name it self to
be love, neither the desire of beauty, distinct and separated from amity and
good will: for in truth, the focietie among amourous persons is such as the
body is but a mean of uniting the souls, and here upon diverse I hisitions
discoursing, have made a communication of the complexions, taken from the
brain, the heart, the liver, and in brief from all the animal parts in man,
the life of an insant being disposed and formed thereby, which is the cause why
men are here so moved and provoked whereas other beasts enter as by a kind or
violence: And hence proceeds the passions of the amourous, expressed so
lively by Poets both Greek, Latin, Italian, and others beside ancient and
modern, especially when they have set down nothing, but hane evther felt or
experimented the same sufficientlye in themsciues. so that it is very needful,
if a man will make resistance, to use such extremities, as we read the most
holy persons did, who led their lives in the solitary deserts, and here I
might allege what they have written, but that it is sussicientlye known
already.

But all this notwithstanding, I set it not down as a general rule, that a
man cannot love a woman but in this manner, and for the delight before
rehearsed: for well might I be ashamed thereof, beside, I should do iniurye to
infinite honest and chaste looues. But I sav, that keeping the one and other
from following has nature, therein consists the pain and the merit, since (as
I lately spoke) the most holy persons being in the wilderness, living on fauage
roots, punisinng their bodies with hard garments, drinking water, and sleeping
little, but lying on sharp stones, in breese, not admitting any remedy: yet
have they in such serte been assaulted, as they in their writings have been
constrained to express it.

Now concerning our selves, who are trained and brought up in soft and
delicate manner when we have particular and private conference with her whom
we best love, being fair and gracious, and requiting us with love: if we
could then abstain, the glory would be found the greater, by how much the
pain and resistance was difficult, checfely, when in regard of the affection
we bear our friend, we fear to urge any thing might be vnhonorable. And
herein may the power of love be discerned, which making the lover forget his
pleasure, defrauds his desire, to content her in all he may whom he so dearly
affects. Of such loyal friends are many to be found, whose lovers have had
such authority over them, as, being virtuous, by perswasiue reason they let
pass the pleasure, for the great danger which follows and ensues thereby.

His guide herein, as in all things else is, that the action of a man is (...)
his election, and the election between two goods, according as it is said, a
man for his pleasure leaves the following of honor, which is but the mind of a
cowardly soldier or S^aile like house keeper, timorous to follow the renouned
exercise of war: where contrariwise, the brave Soldier, being jealous of
his honor, beguiles him self of his ease, and the pleasure he takes in his
house with his wife, making the hard field his bed, mountes on the rampartes,
shuts himself into a town, where he suffers extremity of famine, makes his
body a wall against the cannons battery, and does all this for the love of his
honor.

In like sort can I say, that he which truly loves, will abstain from his
own desire, be it but to satisfy the chaste and modest inclination of his
beloved. As she likewise that looks for answerable love to her own, will
endeuer by all means she can devise, that the grace of her mouth, namely her
breath and speech, may besweet pleasing and agreeable to her lover.

But as for such as are united by the bonds of marriage, they remem bring the
inducements of their former loves, and how they labored by all courses, to
congratulat one another in all chaste and cordial kindness: so much the more
ought they to uphold their conjunction, and heedfully have an eye from the very
beginning, to shun all occasions of discention and discord; as considering,
that pieces of wood greenly co^bined together, will be disioynd and misplacd by
the least occasion in the world: but contrariwise, when the joints are well
knit and assured by long proof of time, hardly can they be sunderd, or
separated again by force or fire. And as we see straw does easily take fire,
so may it as quickly be quenched again, except some sudden matter be added to
help and mantaine it: even such should we esteem the love of new married folks
to be, which is not kindled but by the heat of youth, especially the sweet
beauty of the body: so that it cannot be firm or durable, if it be not
grounded by conformity of good and honest manners, which begets a riciprocall
affection of one to the other. Now as for such as cannot endure the first
frowardnes and riotes of their new matches: I may properly compare them to
those, that deem a raisin grape like to another, because perhaps before they
saw vergis made of it. And so concerning the new married, who disdain their
husbands at the first meetings they do neither more or less, then like him
that because the Be stu^g him a little, casts away the quantity of honey which
she then left in his hand. Al things therefore, especial as concern our
affections, ought to be common in marriage, and contrariwise, all outrages and
injuries to be utterly banished.

For if Cato deprived a Roman Senator of his office and dignity, because in
the presence of his daughter he kissed his wife, (which in mine opinion was
sentence too severe:) what imagine you should be done to such as offend,
injury and strike their wives, Say she be hard favored and difformed, it is
less praise to kiss, embrace and toy with her in company, then the shameis
reputed greater, to strike, abuse, and mistear me her, be it never so secret or
how soever, and this has been the fault of very many, as I could make known
by sundry examples.

The delight of love and benesit thereof, according to the opinion of the
wisest; consists in four things: viz. sight, speech kissing, and feeling,
which is last of all and though each of them does merit a most ample discourse,
yet he that would know their several particularities: let him search the
Poets, who have al spoken like most skilful masters, likewise let him peruse
the Philosophers, and among the rest, Plato in his Conuiuium, where very
largely he has set down his mind, and not only have they written liberally
hereon, but proved the force of love, and witnessed the same by their own
endured passions.

As for the first and second points, they are the two senses, whereby all
knowledge enters into a man, to wit, sight and hearing, and it seems that our
soul takes her form by these two senses, for whosoever is deprived of them,
has no difference at all from a brute beast. The Philosophers talk of a
common sense at the beginning of our brain, whereto all the feeligs of the
fantasy do address themselves, and so does judgment and memory likewise.

Love then beget teth it self by the eyes, which are the gates whereby our
conceits do enter and they draw our inclination according to their judgment,
raising a desire which is called love, appoynting it to the mansion of the
heart, which is the reason, that in love we talk so much of the heart: not
because the heart is an only member that has life, but in regard of the soul,
which woorks not but by the organes and instruments of the heart, conuaying all
our other parts to the heart, as the httle finger cannot stir it self, but
by the opperation of the heart, and the heart by our will, which principally
abides therein.

Why then, when the eye has brought to our common sense the sigure of beauty,
fancy (who is nearest neighbor to our common sense) is immediately moved, and
sendes a message thereof to the heart, which forth with desires delight and
fruition of that, which to him appears so beautiful. Now concerning hearing,
it likewise greatly helps love, for communication of the minds together: for
the beauty of the mind consists in reason, which by speech imparteth it
self unto us, and hearing carries all things from the sense common, to fancy
and judgment, imprinting so much in the memory which afterward succeeds, as
prouokes both desire, appetite and will.

Virgill has most excellently described, how Dido became amorous of Aneas,
saying, that having heard of himself his worthy and famous deeds, as also
what dangers he had escaped: his height of valor (which he seemed to have
made good proof of) by little and little entered her mind and opinion, and
urged her to this induction by her self. It is not possible, but he must needs
be descended of very good place, for a villain never could perform such
enterprise: his virtue, his race, and al else so much moved her, as in the end
she was caught fast in the snaries of love.

Virtue, beauty, and honesty are the true allurers of love, and therefore
Terqum was not so much moved with the beauty of Lucrece, as her chastity and
honest demeanor, finding her well exercised and busied in her house, not idle
and slothful as he had done many other, amidst their pleasures, bonquets and
vanities.

Comunication and speech declare what a man is, his wisdom and learning is
not known but only thereby: now knowledge is in me^ according to the thing
which best sits their honor, and whereby they game most the love and favor
of men Therefore speech (by good right) is most requisitem love, to testesie
how and what a manist for it is written, that Soerates seeing a hansome young
youth, said to him; Speak, to thee and I may both see and know thee. Next unto
speaking is placed kissing, and truly, if the pleasure were not felt which
ensues thereby, my self would deem it strange, why there is sometime such
forbearaunce from kissing, and why we love rather to kiss ones mouth, rather
then any one thing as fair and sweet: but experience teaches us, that
especially among the rest, kissing is a great part of delight, a mother
kisseth her son, a brother his sister, and in France it is most common, be
cause it is counted as a saluting, chiefly when one comes from any far
place. Some say, that the minds do communicate thereby, and have written
wonderful matters of kisses: but what is known by sense, has no need of
further proof; as when we see a thing black or white, it is vain to de maund
any other proof; when we handle a thing hard or soft; when we hear a sound
loud or low; when we taste a thing sour or sweet, in all these other reason is
not required And so say I of kissing, it is needless to demand if it be
pleasant or no, for in kissing it makes proof of it self, and so much the
more, because we touch the person whom we kiss, the pleasure is great, and
then is the benefit refered not to the body only, but to the mind: witness
those kisses which men in times past gave to one another, the father to the
soune, and the mother also, apsayne demonstration of courtesy and kindness.

I will unsist no other points then are expressed, but leave them as reserved
to experience perience, for many things are thereby done honestly, which are
not to be named, and many things like wise might be named, which were better to
be kept in secret: as cicero said to the severe and stoicall judges, and
because it depends upon the sense. Now to know what is the cause of love, as
also by what bayts and allurementes he ouertaketh himself: this may not well be
discoursed ingeneral, neither am I of their opinion, that say a conformity and
resemblance procures love between us: for we have scene the difformed love
the fair, the ignorant the wise with admiration, the infirm and weak
magnifiyng hardy and valiant men. Briefly, what so is fair, what so is
virtuous, generally in all, at all times, and in all places, is praised and
esteemed, and that which is vice, is by the vicius themselves reproved. It were
an absurd thing then to say, that love ensues by resemblance, and as Aristotle
says (reciting the authority of Euripides) the earth desires rain when it is
dry, the sick the Physician. True is it, that it is another manner of matter,
the amity which reconciles it self between persons of self same complexion
and inclynation, then in other cases, and the reason is evident: namely, as he
that loves an other for his virtue, is likewise in self same manner beloved of
him again, if he be virtuous. He that loves a woman for her beauty is loved
again reciprocally by her, because he has the like perfection: and then is it
tearmd amity between persons, when love is mutual and in equality; not when an
hard favored or bad complexyoned man, loves a fair and gracious Gentlewomen,
for there may be love in him, but none in her: even so love (not being active
and passive in these two kinds) is not amity. To give then the reason of
love, it behooves to consider the complexion, humor and affection of either
party, for I am of this mind that no other but mutual love can be co^tracted
between beautiful persons: but then we must consider, that beauty in a woman
is gentlenesle, sweetness, affability, and a pleasing disposition; beauty
in a man, is also, dignity, valor, wit, and dexterity in virtue, thus the
beauty of either, is diversely appertayning to the sex. So some do say, that if
gentleness and beauty in a woman pleases a man: valor, virtue and wisdom in
a man, likes a woman, which conduces to the permutation and most ancient
contract among men.

In like manner, to make a general rule of affection in men or women, it is
imposible, because so many men so many several senses and complexions. One
loves a black eye another a gray, in brief, one says, and that most truly:
Love makes more store of fair women found out, then their beauty confirms
them to be amiable or worth desiring only through our own pursuing of
vulgar actions, which each one terms his best apparent good, in regard he
follows and adicts himself thereto, although very diverse and unlikely. This
makes such abundance of froward natures, and is the fountain of all tears,
sighs, complantes and greeuances among them that love, forcing them to such
extremity and violence on them selves, that not tears alone, but blood is
sluiced forth, even in the midst of their desperate siginngs and complaints.

(...) which ensues, because they that love are not so pleasing in their
lovers eves, as they appear to them, neither find they like enterchange of
will, but quite contrary. I or while they agree together, delight is equally
embraced, as if a hard favored man affect a fair woman, and recompense his
want by comely demeanor, valor and wisdom: here hence ensues the only
nourishment of love, when to delight and please a man's choice, he becomes
gentle, debonaire and virtuous, as Plato says in his Conuiuium, and Boccace
likewise witnesses, deciaring the history of rustical: Cynon, a clown and
badly nurtured by nature, yet to compass the favor of a Lady which he loved,
in short while he became so civil gentle, conformable, valiant and renowned,
as no one could equal him in all graces and good parts beseeming a Gentleman.

And though love serud us for nothing else, but to encourage and spur us
onward to virtue, yet were it worthy al praise and comendatio. And to approve
that it does so, how many histories have we which teach us, that love has
been the cause of virtue and gentleness, in such persons as have don reverence
thereto? I refer my self to the wise and cunning decei: of the Tuscanes, who
declared a singular kindness to their husbands, in making hazard of their
lives for them. For they being taken and committed to prison by them of
Sparta, where they were kept very strictly, to try if they could convince them
by certain and undoubted proofs, in those matters whereof they stood accised:
they compassed the means to visit their husbands in prison, preuayling so
effectually with their keepers, that they admitted them entrance, only to and
salute their husbands. When they were within the prison, they cou^ celled them
to put off of their own garments, and being clad in theirs, they should issue
forth mour ning and hyding their eyes, in sign of grief, according as they
hadentred to them, which being done, the women remained there shut up in their
sted, ente^ding to suffer what soever was mean: against their husbands, whom
the keepers let escape, no otherwise imagining, but that they were the women.

See now how on the one side, ardent affection found sufficient help in need,
but for the other part, let us not pass in silence the loyalty of these men,
in acknowledging the good and kindness thus received by their wives.

For being thus got out of prison, they went presently and engirt the mount of
Tangeta, raising the inhabitants and neighboring people to take Arms, entering
into an open rebellion. Which they of Sparta fearing, sent a herald to them, by
whom they grew to such a conclusion: that their wives were restored to them,
with monye and their goods beside, as also diverse other advantages. This
example may serve for a mirror of cordial and vehement love in women toward
their husbands, and the like in men toward their wives.

Let no man then discourage himself, how much foeuer he be disgraced by nature
or for tune: for there is no heart so hard but may be moved in time to pity,
and may by service merit very much, if no other means were left him of desert.
And truly if the heart contain any spark of virtue it will never be
ingratfull, or lack acknowledgement of good will and kindness received: but
will recompense if (at least) with favor and affability.

It is true, that (to come to the last point of delight) it is not only very
hard, but likewise impossible to gain any thing, but by such graces as do
subdue the affections of women, albeit some hold opinion, that obstinate
pursuit, and continual battery is such, as there is no City how strong
soever, but will submit thereto at last, ye the gain so gotten, equals not the
harm which then has no help. And therefore I would adurse such as are in
this case, to consider fust their own qualities, then of their mist resses,
the time and place, which are necessary circumstances. For when a man shall
happen to love a lady, if she exceed him in nobleness of house, he should
think with himself, that it is as great folly in him to imagine he can
prevail, ^s in him who would catch at the Moon with his teeth. If his
mistress be such, as taking advise by his glass, he shall thereby be
councelled, not to pretend any thing to her: then he will consider likewise,
whether there be such matters in him self as may recompense the graces he
beholds in her, not ouerweening himself in conceit, for he shall suffer what
he deserves, and reap as he is regarded. A man ought likewise to be so
discreet, as to use time apt and meet for his purpose, and as the place shall
agree with his mistress: above all, to have a special regard of her
complexion and humor, that he may serve according to her appetites: otherwise,
he shall be like them that but lose their labor, and become ridiculous, in
aspiring higher then does beseem them.

If their be any so unfortunate, that they cannot compass what they would,
whereby to reach the heyght of their intentes: let me send them to Ouids
lesson in his remedy for love, shunning the place and such occasions, minding
other affairs or (as one says) driving out one nail with another, and such
other remedies as are there to be found.

For there is not love so forcible, but time will wear it out, by reason at
first it was engendered by Idleness: then may a man follow other important
occasions, which more does concern his own good and honor.

But contrarywyse, if he see that time may soften her rigor: let him bear
him self so wisely in all his behavior, that he receive no cross through his
own indiscretion. Thus much I deem sufficient to be said of Love.

Of the means to compass favor and acceptaunce. The third discourse.
THe only thing which makes me believe, that such as meddle with the affairs
of love, do fail in many matters, is, because the more part are often evil
entreated, and then publishing abroad the disdain, refusal, and hard usage
sustained by their mistresses, does but diuulgate their own defects, and the
small or no desert remaining in them. For if they were such as might merit
entertaynement, they would not be in such extremities, as daily they are to be
seen A disease is apparent, but the cause thereof being not understood, makes
the remedy to seem impossible: therefore let us immitate the discreet
Physician, who first dilligently enquiring of the hurtful humor, the sourse
of the ill, his progress, and the quality of the person; then applies what
is most needful, and takes away (by the contrary) the cause of the annoyance.

To know that then, which makes a man so repulsed, and gives him likewise
acceptaunce, (being to some the greatest pain, to other the best pleasure in
this world) may seem a matter very hard to be understood: for a man may not
discourse a thing ingenerall, which is known but in particular, and is
likewise as diverse, as the circumstances are contrary, even as one receipt may
not be given to all kinds of Fevers, because they are not of one salfe same
condition.

Gladly would I learn of Ladies, how a man ought to carry himself in love,
by what means he might insinuate into their good graces, how he may be most
welcome to them, and briefly, which way he may soonest please them: according
as Horace speaks of one, who was to entertayne diverse persons near him, one
for one taste, another for another, and therefore he should conform himself
to each ones appetite. Nevertheless, because that which is good and honest of
it self, seems no other to all, in all places and at all times, seeing that
which is comfortable to al, does naturally teach us what is vice, what is
virtue, even as may be said by right of nature: therefore every one may
purchase to himself, those things which best may make him beloved. True it is,
that many things do change of themselves, because the relish of men are
diverse, and in regard that which is good at one time, is reproved and condemned
at another: herein then let us say with the wisest, there is a right way in
nature which never changes, for reason is evermore reason, and truth, truth.

There is another way that is termed possitiue, which concerns only
ceremonies, means and enstructions, to maynetayne this first way of nature:
but that varieth and changes of it self, according to the occurrences and
occasions, as does the fashion of garements, the defense of arms, and such
like matters. So may we say, that virtue is immovable, and evermore such as it
has been: but the outward, thing as speech, the countenance, grace, close
conceits, and other particular matters, must be vnsterstoode according to the
persons, time and place, which are the circumstances, whereby each man ought to
judge of his affairs, least he fall into such offense as the ill advised often
do.

Why then we will deliver, what all men ingenerall should have, and what in
particular each man ought do: for, to be in favor with people ingenerall, he
must have that which is generally esteemed, and the regard which a man makes of
one person only, begets love; the one necessarily preceding, and then love
following, which proves it self by the disinition of beauty, being indeed the
desire of beauty.

Now this beauty is not only taken for that of the face, but it consists
likewise of the mind in women: beauty appears in a well adorned
countenance, a comely sweet grace, pleasing language, breefely, it has such
amorous gesture and behavior, as steals a man's heart that sta^ds to note it.
The beauty of a man is knowledge, hardines, a valiant heart, wise speech, manly
behavior, and not effeminate.

This beauty then is but a gift of nature, both in the one and the other, and
therefore it lies not in us to be beautiful, which makes the more unskillfulness
in giving any precept, except prohibition of belying those imperfections which
we have, with practice to supply what is best beseeming us; as in some to
speak gravely, others more stearnely, needs no great wit to him who has
studied for it: whereas when one finds himself disfauoured by beauty, he cannot
brag or boast but stand like one disconte^ded. And this a thing which judges
it self, according to our knowledge in these cases more or less, and as
matters in themselves are best se^^ing to us: for there be some which only take
pleasure in things done publicly when as to others it is the greatest
coffeehouse in the world.

To this purpose serves the fable of the Ass, who perseruing the dog playing
with his master, leaping on him with his feet, and putting his head between
his his hands: imagined in his gross brain, that if he did the like, it woold
be as well accepted and liked. Whereupon, one day after he came to his master,
thrusting his feet in his face, and leaping on his shoulders: his master
supposing he was fallen mad, commanded him to have so many good bastanadoes,
as he might fit and repent his forwardness at leisure: thus ye may see how it
happens to some, who nevertheless (perhaps) had a good intention.

Therefore it is not to be publicly reperted: Such a Gentlewoman permitted
ament kiss her, let him give hr a green gown, and do other things
belonging to society: whereas if another should intrude himself to do so
much, it might be taken in very bad part, albeit she were not offended with the
other.

Familiarity often times is hurtful to some, as when men take pleasure in
doing such things, which notwithstanding are unfitting in others, sometimes by
long and private frequentation one with another: for it wholely does depend
upon the will, whether she be contented therewith or no, the absolute power of
liking consists in her. If one will press forward by sinister means to
compass her favor: in steed of pleasing, he puts him self an hundred parts
the further off. Beside, if a man be thought by some to be scant gracious, ill
nurtred, unworthy society with persons of honor; yet by others (happily) he is
not so reputed for often times a man hinders his own adua^ceme^t, by not
observing time and apt seasons, as when he dallies with women over wantonly
before men of respect, or uses his follies in a place not fit for the purpose,
or takes a woman in an unhappy hour, in all which there are many that
mightily offend. There are some hours better then other, and (as one says)
the shepheardes hour is most perrillous; when sometimes the most pleasantest
woman in the world, finds her self to be cold in disposition, and very hardly
acquaintable.

But to prevent this fault, it is necessary to observe time, the place, and
person, by slender approches, as, a little and a little, to try our fortunes:
to the end that if a man receive no profit at all, yet he may avoid over much
mocking or deluding of him self. For, by refusal of a kiss, or other more
private offers, may be understood, that he shall not do well in presuming any
further, especially in such cases, which (as it were from one degree to
another) delivers thereof: sound assurance to a man: and this I dare say, that
he who grows carelesle of this precept, shall but harm his own content, and
do himself vnrepaireable wrong. For it is less dishonor to a man to be
denied a small favor, which makes entrance to a greater: then to be flatly
refused altogether with a rygorous disdain, which shall continue him in
disgrace, and never more to be kindly looked on. Whereas if he had adventured
by little and little, the matter would not have seemed so strange unto him,
that at the first offer he was denied possession of full pleasure: who so
proceeds otherwise, will find it scantly to his own pleasing.

I would advise each man therefore to censure himself, whether he be worthy to
receive such familiarity or no, according to the time of his acquaintance with
those persons: there is nothing more unpleasing, then to be ouer-familiar at
the first attempt, as seeking to reap before he have sown; except he be so
graciously favored by the heavens, as to find himself so soon affected, as
he does affect: but the more certain way is, to go on by degrees step after
step, as fearful of those inconveniences which may follow, and (above al) it
is most expedient, to know our own selves, without private flattery; and
remembering our imperfections, to amend, or wisely conceal them, serving our
turn by more apt means: as to use good report, seek benefit by study in the
best letters: or if he follow arms, to win this general reputation that he
is hardy, courageous, ready at all seasons, making profit of that wherein he is
expert, and not to meddle with any thing whereof he is ignorant; breefely, not
to let the worlds eye note his secret desectes.

But if a man be slenderly favored by nature, let him use his mind so, as no
one may regard but what is commendable in him; for a small vice will be excused
by a greater virtue: good grace may be thus obtained, either eloquence, virtue,
knowledge, and whatsoever else is requisite in a man. If the body second not the
mind; then he may say as a certain great personage did, I am indifferently
fashyoned in mind: though I have no comely form of body, thus private gifts
should be respected before external goods, for the graces of the mind are
discerned in such, as have got more advantage by their laudable qualities, then
they that deem themselves fortunate by beauty. And true it is, that such men
ought first to express the goodness of their minds, before they should lay
hold on loves familiarities: for when it shall be known what he is, to wit, a
gracious, honest and gentle person, he will be accepted for his virtues and
deserts.

It behoues him likewise to have a good report: for diverse times we have hard
and seen, that some have fallen in love, even by the good renown of the
parties. To set down here precept upon precept, as all those things which are
required in a courtier, was never my intention, for then I should never make an
end: only I say, he ought to declare himself, in the most complete and perfect
manner that possible he can, he should know all things, especially those that
are most for the purpose, he ought boldly to speak, confirming his saiings not
by vulgar reasons, to use apt examples, comparisons well formed, meet words,
grave sentences, tempering and managing all which good grace, be it in
speaking, or else in companying, such action and gesture is most beseeming. But
beyond all these, to have an especial care, if he expect profit by what he
speaks, to choose time and place convenient for it: for any thing loses much
of his grace, when it is not delivered in as apt a season. Let not his speeches
be offensive to any, if he use words to urge laughter, let it be done
modestly: that they convert not either to terms of flattery, or tauntes and
nippes which may stir the life blood: for the rest, I refer him to Baltazar,
who in the passage of his courtier has written most excelle^tly Yet to these
before rehearsed, I could wish in him humility, for gentleness, courtesy, and
honesty are the epithits of humility: that he should make account of men, if
he will have men make account of him: not to interrupt or break of men's
communication to yield a reason: for his sayings, withoutstanding long upon
discourse, or abusing the patience of his hearers: to carry himself likewise
in such sort, as still to have his eye on them in company, to see if what he
says be pleasing or no, or whether he be sufficiently understood: to think and
premediate before on his speeches, because many times one wearies his trends,
by uttering conceptions not well ordered, whereby he is constrained to stop in
the midway, and so with breaking of his tale, drives away his company.

It is likewise necessary, that his terms be usual and well known, not
far fetched or vainly bumbasted: drawn from words ancient, or coined on
such new stampes, as very few or none do understand them, which makes both them
and the speaker ridiculous. He should not lose himself in his discourse, or
wander to by ways, but should level his speeches to resolved purpose and
conclusion, where into it may have a sweet current and fall, yielding the
whole course queint, easy, and intelligible, least the end be discerned before
the, beginning. But this is more due to a matter of eloquence, and because
there are great personages, who have set down certain rules and enstructions
thereto belonging: I would counsel others to joy in the labors of them that
have so well deserved of us, delivering such good courses for our better
direction.

I reckon eloquence, and a well ordered kind of speaking, to be nessessarie
for a Courtier, as a man who has some need of persuasion, and speech is
mistress of reason in men, being the thing that only forces and provoke
men on: As for gesture and countenance, it is very hard (in this mean
treatise) to specify what a Courtier therein is to know: only this I would
advertise him, that there are two things which may much avail him; the first
is to take example by them that do well, and are of best enstruction; the
other, is to remember the defectes of such as are vicious, and evermore to be
warned by their bad courses. For if the first mean of immitation be not
sufficient, there is no man whatsoever, who sees a man of leaud demeanor, and
worsse looks; but presently will think scorn to immitate him, or resemble
him in any condition: to sheeld himself from derision, and poynting at as a
weak wit, unfurnished, and worthy to be excluded all good company. Because,
when one sees a man commit a gross fault, he should receive this as a lesson
for himself: for we can more easily discern blemishes in others, then good
qualities in our selves.

Let him then make his profit of all, and endeavor to follow the perfection he
shall gather by all: of some, modest and discreet speech, of others, civil
and commendable behavior, and so the rest as their virtues merit immitation,
according as it is said the paynter Zeuxis did, who formed his Venus by the
perfections of diverse choice maidens. He must chastise himself by others
blemishes, and till he be assured of very good footing, not to press in
public, but attend the hour of better ability.

To talk of great matters, with weighty words, letting light occasions
pass like themselves, not dwelling on any, except it be a matter serious and
important: for else he will be noted that in small trifles, he makes a very
mighty loss of himself.

Now because he who would show himself among others, ought not to be ignorant
of all things, which may ordinarily happen in discourse: he should be very
studious in histories, but especially in morral Philosophy, out of which (as
from the fountain) is derived the ground of reason, and no man ought rely so
much upon his own natural judgment, as the boundless riches of others
labors, whence he may learn experience in all things; as examples for
government of a common wealth, for war, deuisions, parlees, and other matters
concerning the weal public.

And although it may be thought strange, that discoursing here of love, I
speak of things which appertain not so much to women, as to men:
nevertheless it is most certain, that they who meddle with love shall most
part of their time meet with grave and discreet me^, yea, in the presence of
their mistresses, where they have fit occasion to stir themselves, by
delivering their knowledge in pollitique affairs, learning and other
commendable qualities: besides it is more auayleable to report them in the
presence of their lovers, then whatsoever they can say all their life time
after to them, concerning love. For a woman (to whom learning, and knowledge in
most important affairs are not usual and familar) reuerenceth and makes great
reckoning of them endued therewith: as one very well says, ignorance
begets admiration, and we grow amorous of such things as we have not,
because the knowledge of them is strange and not common. While then the man
has this advantage over a woman, he may well serve his own turn if he be
wise, and yet without presumption or affection. For presumption is a sign of a
man's pleasing himself, attributing glory to his own actions, despising and
condemning the deeds of others, because himself would be exalted above them.
Presumpion is very dangerous, in language, behavior or otherwise, wherefore it
is evermore to be shunned, as much because it displeases, as also in regard
it hinders credit of whatsoever we say, for each one would keep himself from
an hydden enemy: moreover I have heard, that the art reputed to be most
requisite, is it which makes least show of art, but conceales it self with
greatest discretion.

I would prohibit an other kind of presumpion, which is, when one discouers
himself over curious in speaking: rather covet to be plain and honest in
terms, such as best become nature and true education. Hereto I add a man in
such sort must respect his business, as he make not his love known, before
he be acquainted with the disposition of the person, to whom he has devoted
his affection: for it is the custom of women, to disire what they least seem
willing of, and despise those things they are possessed of, therefore fore if a
man would increase their desire, he must not come to public gaze, but seek
occasion of private acquaintance, as not making express intent to her, or her
goods: neither would I have him to show too much semblaunce of regarding her
love, because some are of such an humor, to fly when they are followed, and
yield when they are least sought unto. I know well there are some of so good
sort, as the only means of obtaining them, is to let them understand a man's
pain and diligence employed for their kindness, and that love is like the
Adamant, which draws the iron to it, begetting affection in the party
beloved. But I leave to men's discretions such kind of managing their affairs,
and as they shall perceive the minds of their mistresses to be ordered.

If they be so happy, as to have well chosen, and evidently discern
themselves in grace, let them be the wiser in keeping and preserving this
fortunate favor, by civil demeanor, and virtuous carriage: for he preuailes
very much, that makes himself treasurer and secretary of his ladies nearest
thoughts, whereto reason is his best guide, which directs him in effectual
disclosing his love to her, at such times as best yeeldes him opportunity
without ever falsifying his loyalty or breach of any gentle action.

Who so observes these courses, shall find much more contentment, then others
do torments in their vain and unfruitful passions, but if his quiet be not
such as he could desire, let him smoother all with silence, and comfort
himself by this versse of the Poet.

To lovers, hard fortune is evermore a common Stepmother. See now breefely what
I have handled in this discourse, concerning the principal means of winning
grace with persons of honor: It now remaynes to speak somewhat of that which
follows, where succinctly is handled the considerations of Love.

The considerations of Love. The fourth discourse.
IN mine oppinion, he that loves, ought to consider, to what end he loves,
the quality of her he loves, and also the means to compass his intent:
least he chance to find his hopes frustrated, as many do that lose their
time, and make themselves ridiculous to the world. And for his better
enstruction herein he must know, that there is both a generality and a
perticularitie, in our behavior toward women.

As for the generality; it is usual to all such as make profession of skill
in courting: that we should be gracious to all, and show our selves such as we
would be esteemed. Which urges a fair mistress to particularize her
conceit, to show such regard as is not common or vulgar, and enricheth her
with the attendance of servant, as also causes the like in men by their
mistresses. For when one addictes not himself to one certain place, but
remains ignorant what may betide him: he can neither conclude on this or
that, but makes a general carriage of himself, not yielding or denying any
one, because he is uncertain who shall be his love. In like manner, a maiden
not as yet stayed in her affection, being in company, shows her self gentle
and affable to al ingeneral, not rejecting any one, but delivering good looks
to all: because it may so fall out, that one of them there present, whom yet
she least dreameth on may one day be the man whom she shall fancy.

For an other reason, a man should show himself generally gracious, as well to
conform his mind thereto, and so be reputed honest, as also of every one to be
esteemed courteous, whereby he may draw the affection to him of all ingenerall:
that so being pleasing to one and an other in particular, the one abiding
here, the other happily further off, yet still good conceit of him meets
together, and such virtuous report is spread abroad of him, as from man to man
his renown is especially regarded.

Moreover, he is not to abuse himself, though he have the good respect and
esteem of others: for honest men are discerned by their actions, as a grave
man said; that the sun disdained not to cast his eye on things scant fair and
that which contenteth the eye, is indifferent to all the body beside.

Here to I must join, that he who would have honor, does fear the disliking
of honest persons, and willingly would not be displeasing to any one, to avoid
procurement of the meanest enemy: for him whom we least account of, may
perhaps do us greatest injury, if he shall report us to be proud and
desertlesse. Therefore beware of offending any man, rather let us demean our
selves, that cach one may generally affirm those things of us, which we would
desire should be best discerned in us.

Nor would I have a man so amorous of himself, that when he has but once
spoken to a woman: because she she was no other behavior but her usual kind
of inclination: presently he persuades himself to be the man must have her,
and so grows forgetful of his own duty. And this which I speak to men, may
be as well applied to women, that they should not lightly believe the smoothest
tongues, but consider, there needs a longer course of time, whereby to get
acquainted with his heart and intenhtion, and a matter of so great consequence,
is not obtained at the first attempt: therefore they ought to be discreet and
judge with the time, which is an excellent mean to know one man from an other,
who is too much known before. And I would have them to observe a mediocritie
in their profes, to wit, that as at the first motion they should not yield,
yet not to reject or cast men off so cruelly, as I know some have done, who so
soon as they are spoken too, will not abide to hear a word of love, but are
so ouer-hastie in returning an answer, that immediately they break into these
terms: They are not as they take them for, nor should they offer them any
such speeches, neither should a civil maiden know any such matters. But men
are so apt in discovering their own follies, and ready to intrapt every well
meaning maid, having their mouths full of love and their hearts quite empty:
these and such like are their nice wanton answers. Then must a man needs take
it very straungly, to be refused before he have any thing demanded or spoken
of such matters as they impute unto him: which apparently declares, that they
long time exercised themselves what answers to make, as serving to al
purposes, either right or wrong, without discretion or difference of such as
speak to them, neither declaring any other patience, but that a fit way is
laid open, to make them discover that they know somewhat: whereas if they were
better advised, they would shape their answers perticularly to the question
propounded, without any iournall course of replying, which seems no other
then as a common song.

Whosoever therefore will be reputed of good mind, and know withal what it
is to answer: ought first to understand the party that speaks, even as if
he were an ambassador, until he come to his speeches conclusion, except he
grow forgetful of his own duty: then may she well reprove, reprehend or by
giving him to know, that she is not ignorant in the valliditie of such
affairs, yet this care likewise must be had, the answer must not be common or
vulgar, as long studied before for windy phrases and frothy circumstances: but
in every part to contain such discretion, that neither in the matter or
language affection be discerned, because some that are not acquainted with the
latin, think it the best course to talk curiously and finnically, flaying or
stripping the latin tongue of choice and truct words, being so over dainty
in their speaking, as no one understands what they say, nor yet themselves
neither. It is best therefore to speak what we know, not that we are ignorant
of, neither should we wade further into any matter, then we may get out with
credit and honessie.

As concerning men, I find fault with some, who know not how to entertayne a
gentle woman, but only in telling her; that they are so exceeding amorous, as
they must needs dye: which often times is uttered with so ill a grace, as they
are rather scorned then any way pitied. Others there be that are so
shameless, as forgetting all course of modesty, urge their solicitings to
honest married wives, who reckon nothing dearer then their honor and
reputation: but such ill nurtred gromes, do I turn over to a certain Ladies
answer, which she made to one who in the like manner moved her, which was as
follows. When I was a child (quoth she) I learned obedience to my parents,
and daily performed it: since I became a married wife, I was taught the like
lesson toward my husband. If then the demand you make to me be just and
honest, go first and acquaint my husband therewith: and if he like of it, then
shall you quickly have my opinion afterward; who can deny, but that this was an
answer beseeming a modest and virtuous woman?

There are other, who will use the like speeches to a woman, as they do to an
Attorney or a merchant, and talk with a young maiden, as if they spoke unto
her Grandmother: cheefely at weddings, or (which is worsse) in maskes and such
like, demeaning themselves so sillily, that they openly are noted to be
ridiculus, and to cover their faces to no other end, but least their shameful
blushing should be apparently discerned. Then are their orations so badly
ordered, as they well deserve banishment, out of all good company, and to go
work out their apprentishippe in other places more meet for them. This ought
to be obscrued as well in men as women, not being bound to any one, but rather
as ready for one as another: wherein they should so wisely govern their
behavior, that love may be more beneficial then hurtful to them. But now I
come to speak of him, who perticulerly affects one woman only, to whom his
fortunes and vows are selemnely addicted

If his love be to marry her, he knows well by what degrees he must proceed,
he ought first to consider both his own quality and hers, then to gain her
good conceit in such sort, as nothing may come to her ear of him, but what
may be pleasing, as being a man generally beloved and esteemed: for a maid
will never let her honor depend on such a man, as in company shall be a shame
both to himself and her, nor will she elect such a one for her guide and
head, whom she may imagine of weaker carriage then her self, for hardly can
she use obedience to him, that has no sufficiency in aduising her, nor
manhood to command, as indeed he ought to do. Let a man therefore consider,
what good parts he has in himself, which either may make him regarded, or
contrariwise despised: else, let it be no grief to him, if he pass by as not
noted and neglected.

In like case, a maiden should show her self such toward a man, as she would
desire to be esteemed, loved and sought after. I will not, neither can I set
down all the rules and precepts, that he or she ought to observe, who will be
pleasing and agreeable one to the other; by reason they are infinite, and may
more easily, be learned of them they keep company withal, by noting in each
one, what is good or evil.

It remains now to say somewhat of him, that loves a woman without respect of
marriage, he must well know the humor and complexion of her, whether she be of
that kind that loves to give the horn, commonly called a short heeld friend,
who are so ingenious, as they raise a slame in the heads of their followers,
before they come scarsly to touch their fingers. Such can well skill of
dispencing with affection, making in snew nevertheless, that they would be
sought to: but being once entertained into company, they are familiar with
every one, make no spare of their kindness, especially where any commodity is
to be gotten, requiting them with nothing else, but the smoke of hope. Of these
there are too many, and they are soon heard of by the rumor that goes of them:
with them it is dangerous to cohuerse, but even to learn fashions and discern
their behaniour, sing them as we do a knife against a grind stone, for no
better benefit is to be made of them.

But for him who in these affairs would begin his apprentiship, him would I
advise to follow far better courses, and employ his leysures to more
auayling. True it is, that if he could so much command himself, as to feign
the burden, without bearing it, dissembling to love, and yet feel no passion:
he might enjoy all the pleasures in the world, and discover the cunning of such
mistresses, whom he should quickly beguile by counter: masquing with them.

For, were it not that a man applies himself to the best enstructions, and
torments himself more then is required: he could not but have pleasure in his
love, making use of the commodities which other gain thereby. But when in good
play, good monye is stakte down, eating and drinking is forborne, and the
nights spent in building Castles in the air, all day walking sollitarie, one
while dreaming on one imagination, then another, now railing against his life,
then curssing his misfortune, and all these complaints used privately to
himself: then has he need to learn true sufferance indeed, for then (the
wisest man in the world so afflicted) shall find he has work enough to to
busy himself withal.

Now as for our fine wanton, that will quickly be courted, she makes it her
living to deceive her followers, and has no other delight, then when by a man
(cold in affection) she perceives now she must bestirre her wits, and
laboring with her devises, she somewhat enkindles him, and finding him grown
a little more tractable, she begins to lift him up with the windy promises of
hope, that afterward when he falls, he may be bruised for ever. This is her
pastime, even as the hunter sporteth himself in the chase, or as the cat, that
plays so long with the mouse she has taken, until at length she deuoures it
altogether.

Suth kind of women take delight to be beloved, only to have amorous
servants ready at all seasons, as hating to be destitute of company, albeit
they scorn and flout them to their faces, foading them off with delay and
dalliance. Sometime they let them come within two fingers breadth of the place
desired, and then start away, as it were many a mile off. One while they give
good looks, then with winckes and noddes appear highly displeased, and all
this is but to make their appetite the more vehement.

There be other, who have servant of diverse sorts, some that they sport
withal in secret, others that must furnish them with expenses, and these do
serve but as shadows to the former, who being never so little misused by
them, will pretend great displeasure, outfacing the other, to be causers
thereof, as having spoken to the defame and disgrace of their mistresses, and
justifying them with oaths to be right honest women: then they must slep in
between them, to allay this tempest, which the pursse-foole well pays for:
albeit he reap no other corn for his harvest. The most part of such women
are thus provided of servants, for diverse diverse respects and diverse uses,
knowing how to draw monye from every vain, although they make no sharp
incission for it.

This I speak, because such as have abandoned them, have first paid dearly
for their acquaintance, as well witnesses that which is written of ancient
Courtezanes, whose covetousness could not be suffised, with the great treasures
of puissant kings and monarchs in former times: as of Demetrius to Lamia and
Flora, who gathered such infinite substance together as they made the Roman
people heirs thereof. And that it is no otherwise, note but the foundation of
those prostituting places, which only came by covetousness: and if any favor
be had of some other out of that place, it will cost so much the more, and the
kindness is the costlier, the more show of honesty it is shadowed withal.

With such, a man must deal both wisely and cunningly, not loving any thing
but what is to be sold, that is, the body, not to regard it as any good thing,
but only to esteem her as a Courtezane, addicted to voluptuous pleasure,
without bestowing more cost then needs, or thinking to appropriate that to
himself, which is common and freely offered to all ingenerall.

Let their covetousness teach thee, that they are only to be had for monye,
howsoever subtly they pretend to love thee: so by discovering their falshoode
and treachery, thou may the better learn to detest their leaude lives.

For they that make merchandise of their flesh, and will sell themselves to all
comers whatsoever: it shall be good to shun their company, except it be to
behold their impudency, and so to grow in hatred thereof, considering thus
to himself, while he is with her, that the embracings she uses to him, is but
for a piece of coin: as a waterman for his stipend carries over all comers,
or as a Parasite in a Comedy, who practices to resemble the party he
presents.

Ovid has given good store of precepts, to such as deal in the courses of
love, to withdraw themselves with little damage, as setting before their eyes
the loss of their suit, the great displeasure ensuing diverse ways, and many
other such like remedies in love.

There is another sort of mistresses that are honest, and contract amity with
such as are like themselves, giving al pleasure and contentment they can one to
another, as in comforting, councelling, visiting, ayding and succouring: and
this love is but among the regarders of honor, meeting with such as are of
their own inclination. With them we ought discreetly to demean our selves,
without giving occasion to be ill thought or spoken of: For when such payres of
affection meet together, they must be entertained according to their esteem
and repute, without offense offered on either side but in all pleasing and
perfect agreement.

Of Iealosie. The fifth discourse.
ALthough it be not so easyly discerned, what Iealosie is to be blamed, and
what to be excused, as it is easy to assure, that all Ileaosie, in whatsoever
person, or for what cause, is evermore an hinderaunce to the mind, and a very
great torment: yet is it first to be judged, whether Iealosie be a vice or no,
and to discide the the same according to the person and occasion. For to
condemn a man so soon as one says he is Jealous, is to be carried away by
the common peoples oppinion only, and blindfold to follow a rumor in a
City, without having regard to the matter proposed. Then fgor our entrance
into this case, we will first define Iealosie to be a griese, which a man has
by being deprived of some good which he has loved, and Iealosie may be
applied to all things whatsoever.

God says, that he is Jealous, and will not have the honor only due to him,
attributed to any other. The Gentleman says, he is Jealous of his reputation:
each one is Jealous of that he esteems dearest, or is most careful and
charie of.

If a husband have suspicion of his wife, that her government is not good or
agreeable to his liking, he is say de to be jealous, that is, he is displeased
to see that wronged, which he thinks only belongs to himself. If a woman
be offended, that her friend or mate keeps not loyalty with her: she likewise
is reputed jealous.

Now to know whether Iealosie in man or woman is vnscemely, vicious and to be
rejected, it is a matter, depending upon circumstances. And in truth, it is a
shame and imurie for a man to be jealous, making him the less esteemed, as if
the cause thereof thus proceeded, that this own consience makes him deem
himself unworthy of that he possesses, or knows his own ability to be
insufficient, and so procures a distrust of himself, as imagining himself
not to be beloved, and that others (more deserving then he) are better
affected, and esteemed by his wife more then himself is whereas if he were of
desert, an other could not go beyond him, nor carry that away which only
appertains to him: in this sort, may iealosie be counted a shame and great
disgrace to a man.

But contrariwise, when I see them that wink at their wives behavior, and
will take no knowledge that they are cornuted, and yet are mocked and poynted at
by others: I cannot choose but blame them for not being jealous, although not
of their wives, yet of their honor. Wherein I can give no better resolution,
then that which is used in all laudable actions, to wit mediocritie, which is
an especial virtue of it self. And let me say withal, that as the virtue of
liberally is between prodigality on the one side, and covetousness on the
other, the one in wanting, the other in abounding, and as the virtue of
strength, is between timeritie and pusillanimitie: even so the discretion
which ought to be in a married man, should be between iealosie on the one
side, and negligence or no regard on the other. For, to be so sleepie in his
business, as (not to see at all) that which all the world discerns, is both
beastliness and inconsideration: likewise, to take offense, and causeless to
carry suspicion tin mind, declares the want of wisdom and discretion.

There is no man of so base and abject spirit, that will suffer one to reproach
him, with his wives giving him the horns, for such monsters are infamous bothy
by fact and right, even as a known and public noted baude: so that were it
but in this respect, the law reputes such as detestable, if they shall
compound and make sale of their wives addulteries. Here hence it proceeds,
and by right is permitted as a matter excusable, for a man to kill his wife,
being found in such an offense, which prerogative is no way tolerated in a
woman. The reason why the fact is more agrauated in the woman then the man; is,
because adultery in a woman, makes doubt of her issue, whether it be by her
husband or an other, which cannot carry like mistrust in a man. Ye shall have
some that allege an other reason, which notwithstanding I will not defend, and
I am certain, that all they who have any feeling of reason, will herein iump
with mine oppinion. For they say, that the man being the head of his wife, as
much to say, as Lord over her, she stands the more obliged in keeping of her
faith and loyalty: If then she fall to violate that strict bond, so much the
more shame and damagement does the man sustain in his goods. The first part
of their reason is not to be condemned, neither indeed do I so rashly censure
of it: but in regard of the conclusion clusion they make thereof, I say they
persume a little overmuch, and show themselves to be very absurd, even (as it
were) in auouching plain paganism. For if they will conclude, that because it
is so, that a man is the head and Lord of the woman, therefore she has no
power at all over him, and so consequently it is lawful for him, without any
contradiction to abandon her and give himself to all voluptuous pleasures: I
say such as are of this oppinion differ not at a I from the paganes, who
indeed do maintain, that when a lewd quailitied man, subject to his own
desires, shul offend with some friend of his, or eis his chamber maid;
nevertheless his wise must not be displeased there with, or any way reprove
him for it: but rather she should esteem the better of him, and that this was
done in reverend respect of her, as not suffering lier to partake in his
drunkenness, beast-like luxury, and intemperaunce at that time.

Perhaps herein they would immitate the kings of Persia, who when they feasted
and banquetted in ordinary and comely manner, they would then have their wives
sit with them at the table. But when they carrowsed and drank till they were
drunk, their wives were commanded to their chambers, and then their
concubines, women singers and dauncers must be with them.

Now diverse (at the first judging hereof) deemed they did well, in that they
would not have their lawful wives, participate with their drunken dissolution:
but then they might as easily herein have considered withal, that under this
pretext of reverence to their wives, they permitted themselves to run into
all corruption and infamy of their lives; for among honest people, never will a
modest wife suffer her husband, to entertayne a strumpet near her, as well for
avoiding discord, as prevention of iealosie, whereunto women are naturally
subject.

But admit that such accidents should befall them, and their husbands are so
addicted to affect strumpets: yet is it great injustice done them, that for a
little voluptuous disorder, they will so much wrong, displease and injury
their wives, and not do at least like the poor silly Bees, who in no case
will themselves touch rudely their proper females, but if any other of their
company wrong them, they will war with them rather then any other.
Notwithstanding all this, there are found too too many, so bad of mind and
disposition, as will not stick to accompany their own wives, coming defiled
and poiluted from the base association of some others: and then behave
themselves in such sort with them, as if all the world were not able to reprove
them: never remembering how commonly it happens, that the faults whichment
commit against their wives, are more rumoured among the people, then those of
their wives toward them. As we may ordinarily note in him, that keeps no good
government in his house and family: If he be deceived by his wife, one of
these too occasions are immediately urged, either that he is blinded in his own
behavior, and has no eyes at all to discern matters happening: or else
himself is consenting to the shame, and has no virtue left in him to
gainesay it, but, as one ouermaistred by his wife, too basely subjects him
self, and so is led about by the nose, as one does a beast.

There are none more infamous and detestable, then such wreched kind of
people, who deserve to be publicly nailed to posts, and of their infamy can
never be spoken sufficient: such a one may be called John John, that goes for
wine while his wife tends her pastime, and if any harm be done, he looks
through his fingers, for fear he should see it, or (like a kind fool) sits
and watches the door.

Contrary wise, when a man is Jealous without a cause, looking with a cloudie
countenance, suspitiously discontented, it is a very great blemish to him: he
stirs others thereby to more forwardnes in his business, then reason accounts
expedient, and happily may so come by some cause for his iealosie, he prouokes
his wife to wax careless of him, etc.

For there is no readier way to bring a woman to loosenes of life, then in
suffering her to see his apparent suspicion, that he reputes her as a woman
dishonest, grues her hard usage, watches whersoeuer she walks, whereby she
perceiving, that her husband reposeth no credit in her loyalty, she presently
takes her self as little obliged to him, by reason the league of community in
faith between them, is broken by distrust on his behalf: then she stands
upon her better deserving, that he is no meet man for her, she too good a
wife for him, and so neglects all duty toward him.

I could, as fitting this purpose, produce sufficient testimony, of such as
have been extremely jealous, some procuring their wives (through their own
bad demeanor to ward them) to commence suit in law against them, whereby such
shame has redounded to the men, that the wives have been found of able
sufficiency, and their hushands to be impotent, faulty, and overmuch to
blame, whereby has evidently appeared, that their own weakness and
dishabilitie was cause of their iealosie.

What comfort or contentment can a poor woman have, to be accompanied with
such a beast, as is every hour watching her, holds his wife as a prisoner,
cannot endure she should speak to any one, because he reputes her frail and
easy to fall? ^^ she but list to a question demanded, she is presently lost,
and the deed has been dooen, though she stird not out of his company.
Herein therefore, there must be used more wisdom and discretion, and they
that will avoid these wicked extremities, must observe those means that are
virtuous and commendable.

One thing most requisite between them which are loouers, is to carry a good
conceit of her he affects, to repose such trust in her, as never to gaze
after her, but let her go on her own consciences direction. heervpon ensues,
that she perceiving his undo inted trust, and how his oppinion is consident in
her: she will not do any thing unworthy of his love, or seem so much as in
thought to deceive him, but yield him like virtuous and mutual affection In
li'e manner, if a husband manifest to his wife, that his trust is absolutely
reposed in her, discouerse his secrets to her, and perfectly declares, that he
reputs her fora right good woman: he does provoke his wife, to be most loy all
and faithful to him, and makes her thus conceive within her soul, that it
were most shame full to deceive him, who is so firm in his oppinion of her.

The law imputes it as an infamy, to him that makes denial of a gadge, in
inrespect it is held as a courtesy to a friend, in whom good conceit and
trust is reposed, and one says, that it is a most villainous thing, to deceive
the faith of another, being holy and inviolable; by much more reason then, if
a man be Jealous and suspicious without cause, does he wrong and injury to
his yoke mate, esteeming her otherwise then anhonest good woman. If once he
grow to that imagination, she well perceiues that he loves her not: which makes
her break all faith and amity, taking just occasion to be at deadly defiaunce
with him, hating him as an enemy which has highly abused her, and so
practices revenge on the wronger of her reputation: for she has nothing
dearer then her honor, without which, she dares not show her face to any.

A man must likewise consider, that a woman is not of such a seruill condition,
as to be governed by fear, for when one thinks to bridle her, then will she
soonest shake it off, and the more she is constrained, the more she resists
and stands against it.

He therefore that will shun falling into these inconveniences ought with
reason, (which is the only bridle, whereby to guide a discreet man or woman)
to check such bad conceits in himself, and do nothing compulsiuely: for the
mind being invisible, and not subject to sense, obeyes to nothing but reason,
and she is the sole gouernesse of al our actions: that if he be a man who
swerues from reason, yet let him not be compared to him that sins, and will
never yield some reason for the cause of his transgression, at least some
outward seeming show of reason.

VVho-so-euer will be beloved, ought himself to love; who seeks to have trust
reposed in him, ought yeeeld like confidence to another; who would receive
good, ought to do good: for we must expect the same measure from others, which
we our selves have extended to them.

Notwithstanding, when I say a man should be saythfully resolved of his wife,
my meaning is, she gives him no bad occasion, to deem otherwise then well of
her, be couse such respects do evermore deliver best conceits of her: for we
repute a man to be wise, when his behavior is thereto according speaking
discreetesy, caryng himselse wisely, and far from the touch of any scandale.
We likewise judge a man to be lewd when we perceive his manners to be
dissolute, imsprising all ouncel to civil demeanor, and bearing himself in
such sort, that he is hated and shund of all honest people. huen so a woman
shall be virtuously censured of, if her habit be like theirs that is virtuous
and honest, if she frequent the company of women well reputed of, and use no
language but what is honorable: where contrariwise, if she follow reproachful
company, persons that are defamed, go dissolutely in her attire, speak
lightly, without regard of shame and modesty, she shall be thought a stragler,
proud, a pratler, bold and impudent.

Now to know for certainty, whether she is not to be taxed with the crime of
dishonistie or no, little can be said therein, by reason the act is so secret:
but such as have bad report, and have gruen occasion to speak sinisterly of
them (albeit they may be verily innocent,) they ought to chastise their courses
and behavior by good examples, that they may shun all hard speeches, both of
themselves and their husbands, ruminating continually between themselves,
this sentence left by the wise man in writing: That good renowue is more worth,
then a rich girdle of gold.

Honor is nothing else but populare reputation, it is no part of the
conscience: but he that fears not what men may say of him, (as Caccro says)
is wicked and destestable. On the other side, Saint Augustine tells us,
Whosoever gives a pardon to his own conscience, and neglects his good fame,
is cruel to himself and full of impiety, and this is it which we term to
be scandalous. It is not enough then to have innocence in the heart, we must as
well escape the giving of occasion, to men of evil report: of which occasion
I can speak no otherwise, but even as honor depends on the people, and them
that are wise: so if a man will have honor, he must govern him self, as the
wisest and best reputed among the people do, and not deserve any other sinister
oppinion. If then a woman do demean her self, in such sort as has been
declared, and yet her husband (neuer-the-lesse0 will be sick in the brain,
and foolish of his conceit: it remaynes to his own peril, for she is no jot
dishonored thereby, but himself, that without any cause became distrustful
of her. Now let us see whether Iealosie be most dangerous in a man, or woman.

Some hold, that the woman being weaker then the man, and less able to
supporte the assaults, which iealosie continually afflictes the mind withal,
she therefore is the more subject to passion: and in this case might a number
of women be named, who being deprived of sense and understanding, have
frantiquely and furiously run about the streets. I can alleges no other
reason in this behalf, why in her it should grow to such an extremity: but
that a man feels not like defect of pleasure, when his wife does stray in
secret, as a woman finds in her self, being defrauded of her due, as when
her husband parts with that to another, which properly and by right is none
but hers. As for the woman, questionless she challenges a mighty interest
not so much in regard of the pleasure, as the breach of interchanged love,
seeing her self frustrated of the faith and kindness, which she was wunt to
find effectually manifested, and beside, perceiving her self half parted and
separated from her moitie. Notwithstanding all this, I find that iealosie is
much more hurtful in a man, then woman, because over and abous his perfect
discovering, that the faith of marriage is violated (the self same
consideration being on the wifes behalf) he feels withal a shame and
infamy, with such ablemish and dishonor, as is no way or at any time, repay
reable again.

And yet many princesses have been noted to love and reverence their husbands
exceedingly, albeit they have had bastardes by others, rather renewing then any
way hindering their love: but when honor once is wounded, it is a matter
almost impossible, for a man afterward to give his wife good looks, and not
prove her as a bad creature, when once she has forfeited her faith given to
him.

Many examples of virtuous dames are registered in writings, that patiently have
endured this injury of their hufbands, nay more to see their concubines kept,
even in the very same house with them: the old Testament, as also the
histeries Greek and Roman, want no store of them, who have enfranchised their
servants, that have given entertaynment to their husbands. But among men of
generous nature, ye shall never find any one, that would endure so much as a
suspicion oneof their wives: witness Julius Caesar, who did repudiate his
wife, and when one demanded him the cause there of, he answered; because he
would hauchis wife void of suspicion, by much more reason then would he have
her free from detection of crime.

Suspicion is that which brings dishonor both to man and woman, therefore
Iealosie (of it self) is as yrkesome to bear in a man as a woman, and so much
the more in a man, because thereby he loses his honor.

To tell what kind of pain this iealosie is, exceeds possibility of
expressing: for if the loss of goods, of birth, of friends, or of parents,
be such as torments and makes a man inmeasurably passionate, how grievous then
will be the loss of his wife to him, of whom it is say de: Aman shall leave
sather, mother, and all, and cleave unto his wife? If that bond and conjunction
cannot be deaided or sundred, but by death only: what shall become of him, who
sees him self disioynd from amity, and yet (for all that) stands tied by his
person? much better were if for him to look upon death, then continually to
have before his eyes the cause of his affliction, and see his enemy still
remaining alive, reviving daily the remembrance of the heinous wrong done him.

And even as a man deemes him self happy, when he is conjoined in good and
durable amity with a wife, by whom he is entreated honorably, serving as an
aid and consolation in his affairs: Even so on the contrary, he reputes
himself unhappy, when in sted of wife, a dear friend and choice companion, he
finds a deadly emmie, one that has done him unrecoverable shame, one that
delights in his death, and with whom he has no assurance of his life.

Of like quality is this estate in a woman, when she sees her self forsaken
and despised. She that has no honor, but by her husband, finding her self to
be contemned and despised, to behold a base strumpet preferred before her, to
endure her brauadoes, instead of being supported by her lord and spouse, to
whom she is vowed and dedicated, to whom she has given her goods and person,
for whomse choice she iefused very many sufficient offers, of whom she might
have been much better regarded and honored: what life (I pray ye) is it to be
thought that she poor soul endures? There is nothing that more offends any
one, then to see himself despised and contemned: as also nothing more
contenteth the heart, then to feel the love and affecttion of well willers, and
iaclosie never comes without conceie of scorn and disdain A woman seeing
her self married to a man, and giving her self only to him, no other are to
be regarded by her: not finding the like in her husband, and honestly knows
not how to reuendge her wrong: what does she then but weep and lament? yet
with all she considers with her self, that the faults in a man are
corrigible, and tif should he see the like blemish in some oher bad body, who
therefore goes as hated of all men; it would be a means of his amendment.

I have seen diverse, who have dearly loved their wives, after they have
sundry tvmes before gone away and forsaken them: but this does hardly hold in
some Linde of men, because infamy remaynes in the woman, not in the man. God
is more ready to pardon and forgive a sin, then man is, he forgets (withal) a
sin so soon as he has pardoned it, but a man does continually remember it,
in regard that honor is like to a glass, which being once broken can never
be made whole again.

We have spoken of iealosie in man and wife, let us say somewhat of the same
in amorous persons, and to speak truly, I find, that love (not being
fastened by by the scale of marriage) is daily subject to the changes of
Fortune: for one while it hopes, a another while despayres, now full of fear,
then by and by assured, now doubting, then rioting, now in favor, then
rejected, often ending and beginning again, according to the oppinion of
Plato. It is an estate of no certainty, and therefore from such as are subject
thereto, iealosie can very hardly be absent: for delight is not tied thereto,
but if it be, it is with great danger and inconvenience.

Therefore it is impossible, but iealosie sometimes must be meddling therewith,
yet not in such dangerous sort, as in the state of marriage because where faith
is not given, if any impeach happen, it is more excusable, then when faith
feels it self neglected and abused.

Contrariwise, it seems that iealosie in love is commendable, because thereby
is witnessed, how highly a man esteems her whom he affects, as being angry
and displeased at unkind words, or greeuing for the absence of his lover
according as one compares the case to a mother, that mournes for her infant,
whom she supposed lost: which if she should not do, her affection might be
said to be very small. For which, I would advise some mean, as in all other
things, for it ensues often times to great inconveniences, by brauadoes and
repulses given and taken: Therefore it becomes them, to deal wisely and
discreetely in these affairs,

As concerning iealosie between two friends, certainly it is to be reproved,
by reason distrust engenders disagreement, declaring the little credence and
repute which each holds of other: for there is no man, but he will be offended
at the injury received by his friend, the rather, because his hope is
frustrated, and he finds not his friend so entire, as he suppoed him to be.

But in what amity or friendship soever, icalosie ought not to be, without
some cause expressed and known. Likewise, it is very hard to hinder it, when
the occasion is great, and too apparent. Who loves any thing dearly. fears
the loss thereof, and takes it more grievously when it is lost: The like eason
of sorrowing for such loss, agrees with deep passion when it cannot be
attained, but far exceeds, when it is quite lost indeed. For, to apart
with a thing peaceably possessed, is very irksome: whereas things never enjoyed,
cause the less greeuance:

It is not possible for a good mind, that loves truly, and does whatsoever he
can for another: but he must needs be displeased, when he beholdes his love
not to be requited, but is answered with strangeness and ingratitude, as if
all his seed has been bestowed upon a barren soil, and all his travail
proves fruitless, returning him no profit. But they who once are entered into
a league of true amity, ought on both sides very carefully preserve their
allianuce: for if at any time it chance to be bruised and broken, if it
unite again afterward, it is very wonderful, except consideration of that
which caused the breach, do prove the means to help it again: else it had
been much better for either part, that such a union had never been between
them.

Of the passions of Love. The sixth Discoure.
Love is a passion so forcible in our souls, as therein all affections are
contained and comprised. Four things there are that do torment our minds, and
hat in such sort, as they seem like the winds that toss a ship up and down:
to wit, hatred, love, fear, and hope. These four passions are in love, and in
such order are they there, as they can never be excluded thence. The Poets in
their writings, have left us sufficient testemonie thereof, but muchmore is
that which we feel and find in our own selves: Therefore, in regard of these
four affections, a man is hindered in judgment, and so (by good right) is
love figured and set forth to be blind. These four, one after another in
their several degrees, do occupy and labor the minds of the amorous, and
holds them (as it were) in a continual traualye: for when hope lifts up,
fear and distrust castes down again: love makes a man imagine it a
pleasure, but then some unkind cross turns is to grief, and then he grows
in hate of that which impeached him in his pleasure. But above all, that which
procures most pain, is the private love we bear to our selves. which at
the first fight may seem very straung: because he that looues not, hates him
self, as one affirms, and there is nothing more contrary to love, then
this Philaftia, which is nothing else but love of our selves.

Notwithstanding, because I have so found it by experience, I say, that he
which looueth, and is not again requited with the like, feels nothing to him
more insupportable, then to see himself misprised, not listened to nor
regarded: for then he grows to contempt of himself, that he is not of any
worth, hansome or gracious; but loathsome and vnfightly, when he beholdes an
other preferred before him, and he repulsed at the very first onset, then he
lays all blame he can devise on him self, alleging these persuasions, that
if he were of any desert, or any matter worth affecting were in him, his
mistress would have given him better entertainment, or else (at the least)
would have made some account of him.

And so much the more, as nature has given us a care, to prochase to our
selves all advantages and benefits, to the end, that what she has brought
forth, might increase, and be increased in the first intirnesse: even so is
grefe the more hurtful, when a man cannot reach to the degree of others
affability, and attain those good parts necessary to make himself affeced,
so that a man holding nothing dearer, then emiche himself with such graces, as
are generally beloved and desired, feels an exceeding dislike, when he
perceiues himself faulty, and some noted defect, makes him repulsed and not
esteemed.

And it is very true, that we never know our own imperfections, till we grow
to desire and aduancemente of our selves: for when we perceive our crossing and
constrayning, then we do find more acknowledgment of our selves.

When a man keeps a piece of gold in his pursse or chest, he knows not then
the estemation of it, he sees it has the couller, looks very fair, and has
the stamp impressed on it: but when he bringes it abroad, would deliver it in
payment, and sees it brought to poysing, to endure the touch or sounding, and
then it proves counterfeict by public oppinion, why then he finds himself
nothing enriched by the piece, but a matter which is utterly vnaduantageable.

The trial of a man, is when he makes offer of him self, and stands taxed to
abide good lyking or disgrace. If then he be refused, first of all he finds
fault with his want of desert, because (indeed) we naturally hold it as a
singular commendation, to be perfect in all parts, and being desirous of
honor, we covet to be so esteemed by others.

It follows then that a man in this case nothing accounted of, greeues because
he cannot compass his inent, and sees no other help, yet well understanding,
that as he looues his mistress for a certain occasion, to wit, because she is
fair, gracious, gentle and honest: so should he (on his part) have somewhat
whereby to gain her love, for love grounds his foundation upon some especial
cause.

Then when he sees he has nothing good in himself, whereby to attract move,
and procure her affection toward him: then he grows out of all hope of
compassing his purpose, then he becomes sad, melancholique, solitary, shunning
the light and society of men.

Neuer-the-lesse, as we can very quickly make our selves believe, that there is
some matter of worth remaining in us, then hope yeeldes some mittigation: but
coming then presently again to perceive, that we are not of any reckoning,
either because the opinion of people is diverse, and oftentimes a woman sets
her lyking on a man of least descart: alas, it is impossible to conceive, how
much the poor mind is then tormented, with continual cursings and exclaiming
on the hour of our birth. But what would such a man man do, if he had a judge
there present to censure on his cause in love? Doubtless hewould conceive some
hope, that the good, nesse of his plea should be to his advantage, and so to
compass that by justice, which otherwise by favor is utterly denied him.

But the estate of a man dependes on the inclynation of his mistress, she is
of this humor here, then she takes pleasure annon to be there, and will not
resolutely determine on any thing, but still is chaunable in her oppinions.

What remedy can the poor man apply to these moodes? he now intreates to
proceed by her grace, and not in the justice of his cause; his mistress is
the judge, and himself stands for his trial: he begins his plea, but she
is become so humorous, as the more she is followed, desired and entreated, the
further of flies she, closing her eyes, cares and heart altogether, far
dissenting from them of best crudition, who hate to be touchte with any act of
ungentleness.

There are two ways to win a woman by, to wit, delectation, which makes her
beauty esteemed, and so to be desirous of iouissaunce: of which kind there be
many, which seem cold enough outwardly, either by course of nature in
themselves, or deeming that they are fair enough for them. The other is, when
they are desirous of the beauty of the mind for then they make reconing of
any good done them, or of such as entertaynes them with civil demeanor. But
the mischief is, that the most part are so curious of their bodies, bestowing
so much time time in decking themselves like puppets: that they never think at
all on the dignity of the mind, and when they are with such, as would give
them some contentment in their thoughts, either because they are not capable of
any good thing, or not willing to be therewith acquainted; they turn their
heads aside, contenting themselves with their delicate decking, to show a good
countenance, use many circumstances, as also to be generally gazed on and
pursued by many, that if now and then they vouchsafe so much favor, as to
listen the speeches of an honest gentle mind, they do it but to be looked at
by others, and to carry the report, that they are beloved and soughtafter,
not minding at all what else is then said to them.

But as forthem that are agreeable to their disposition, entertayning them with
sportes and recreations: it falls out oftentimes, that they are the veriest
sottes, and most unfurnished by nature, but in respect they be brave and
gallant, they are the best welcome, and cheifest favored.

Nor let us marvel overmuch heereat, because like must still agree with
like, and the one should not mock the other: therefore he that yeeldes them
any courtesy, especially in public, he must be very brave, for the goodlier
man he is, and costlier apparelled, the more do they imagine themselves to be
honored, when they are followed and favored of any such.

Now they that carry another respect, then to be Lackyed by hueries, or held
with friuolou discoursings, or in themselus to declare any other behavior,
then may beseem their modesty and discretion: it is hell to them to be
otherwise solicited, for if they desire entertaynemeut by any, they must then
be such as themselves are, respective of a maidens good fame and reputation:
for when any other language is used to them, then agrees with their liking and
understanding, they quicklye find means to leave such company.

But if we come a little nearer, to consider the behavior of these nice ones,
and what picked ceremonies they use in their courtinges, we shall behold the
only follies in the world: one will stand a whole day upon his protestings:
another shows his ringes, plays with his mistresses glooue, or praises her
apparel, and proves himself a very sotte when all is done: but if they
attain to more private skirmishing, that I meddle not withal, let them there
do their deuoire as they may, and let their mistresses then censure of their
deserving.

As for their discoursing together, it is to detract one here, and praise
another there, to commend one maidens perfections, and condemn the demeanor
of another: so that were their amorous orations well listened unto, we would
greatly lament their wonderful indiscretion.

I have been in place among wise and reverend persons where I have noted good
discourse has been broken off, by such as entercoursed in this idle manner,
mocking and scorning, when better behavior should be used.

One begins, and takes his mistress by the hand, to count how many ringes
she has on her fingers, talking of some place where he saw her in former
time, requesting renewing of old acquaintance: others, of other matters, such
as best is fitting their humors: then begins the confusion of civility,
the thawe of modesty, and such things conferd on, that might better beseem
silence. Ye shall have another, who feign would entertayne the time with some
honorable discourse, such as deserves to be heedefully regarded: and he is
hindered by another vain dalliaunce, that never is satisfied in his fond
behaniour, making no spare of place or company, but every where discovering
his folly and simpleness. Another comes in have, and he has some secret to
disclose, which makes the women flock about him immediately: and what is this
secret? but that is admitted into such a Ladies favor, and has received such
and such instaunces of her kindness toward him.

Some of these coy wantons, have their only delight in walking abroad with a
stately pace, lending their eyes about on every side, to mark who notes them:
and I know no other reason they have for this behavior, but that their fine
feet might be gazed at, their gay looks commended, and their brave apparel
praised.

If they standat home in their doers and have any of like disposition to
acompany them: they will seem as if they talked on some very weighty matter:
when either it is of their pride, or quipping and girding such as pass by
them, and no man or woman can go along the street, but they are still
prepared for their gecks and tauntings.

Others there be of a different nature, that pretending love to men, yet cool
when they should kindle them: and kindle when they should cool them: one while
they give them so good looks, as no one can desire better, then (in mere
despite) they will stare so straungely, as if they had never seen them
before, counterfciting their devises so cunningly, one while so loathe, then
again so forward: as if they were to treat on a peace between two nations,
as heretofore our ancient women of the Gauls did, who eemed not so slack in
a case of importance, as our women (at this present) in things of no value at
all.

And one story of their valor I am contnet to allege, to stir up and
encite our dames at this day to immitate them, and contrariewise, to shun and
fly all wordly vanities, and here will I setit down breefly in writing, as I
have heertofore read it in the Roman histories.

Before the Gauls passed the mountains of the Alps continuing in those
parts of Italy where they had long remained, there happened such a great and
violent sedition among them: that at length it extended to civil war.

But what then did these generous women of Gaul? even as the two armies were
meeting together, they stepped in between them, and taking their cause of
difference in hand, they censured thereon with so great equity, and so well to
the liking of either side: that it procured love and good will naturally
between City and City, house and house, as since then, they have held an
especial authority, not only well thought on by their husbands, but
likewise allowed in the judgment of strangers.

I could easily recite many other examples, concerning the continency and
modesty of the ancient dames of Gaul, and other strangers: were it not I
stand in fear, that diverse now living would be displeased therewith, because
(to their shame) they went so far beyond them in all the parts of virtue, as
in modesty, shamefastnes and chastity, yea, they have been exceded by very
pagan women, who had no knowledge at all of the truth. For I know very well,
that the most of our women of these times, covet nothing more then to be
flattered: so that to use speech agreeable with their lyking, it must bein
comparing them to Courtiers and their betters, numbering their virtues, though
they have just none at all, or despising others in regard of their
singularity. And if question be made of entrance into their discoursings, why
then it is a demanding of some news: such a one is to be married: such a one
has given chains and iewelles to his mistress: She is very gallant: she has
such a new fashioned garment, with other such like peevish prattling, which yet
they account as excellent, and meet to be compared with Appollos Oracles,
because therme consters their only pleasure

But when any Lady or Gentlewoman happens to be thus solicited, let me advise
them, as I would do all other, by the courageous and virtuous answer of
Gorgia daughter to Cleomenes King of Sparta, who when a strange courtier,
tripping before her softly and delicately, came and offered to embrace her: she
rudely thrust him away saying: Back bold sir, know thou not the worth of a
woman's credit? this example is sufficient for virtuous women, to repulse the
effeminate follies of men.

But men of good minds despise to confer so over familiarly with any,
respecting as well their quallitie, as their honor and modesty: remembering
withal, that bashfullnesse forbids answers to unseemly questions, and
commonly, the inward disposition is witnessed by our words.

Yet will I not deny, but there may pass speeches both merrily and modestly,
such as a chaste care may hear, and answer without offense.

Which if men on their behalf would be more familiare withal: they should
find women not so curious and strange, when they break the ye to them of
their amorous purposes.

FINIS.

