COMFORT TO THE AFFLICTED. DELIVERED IN A SERMON preached at PAVLS-Crosse the
xxi. day of May, M.DC.XXVI. Being the last Sunday in Easter Term. By ANTONY
FAWKENER, Mast. of Arts, of Jesus College in OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed for ROBERT MILBOVRNE. 1626.

printer's device of Robert Milbourne, framed device of an open book surrounded
by beams of light; below the initials of Peter Short, whose device this
previously was (McKerrow 278) ET VSQUE AD NVBES VERITAS TVA
P. S.



To the right Worshipful, Master EVERARD FAWKENER, my beneficent good Uncle;
Grace, mercy and peace in Christ JESUS.
SIR,
IT is the providence of Nature, to necessitate a retribution of her gifts unto
her self. Her matter she lends, never fayles her; it may indeed be in some
sort corrupted, but no way annihilated. Though man be corrupted, nature loses
no substance; but what was lately hers in a humane body, will still be hers
though but in dust and ashes. If nature can be so frugall to save her own, it is
pity that piety should be a looser. The rivers restore unto the Ocean what they
have received from her, themselves: And by an imitating gratitude, we are
bound to devote our selves to the sources of our fortunes. As of the passed,
you are (next God) the patron of my succeeding happiness: Wherefore in stead
of my self, I am bold to present unto you this offspring, and indeed (in
respect of so general an audience) my first borne: which according to the Law,
I have already dedicated unto the Lord. A work of purpose proportioned to the
hearers benefit, not a Critics censure. So plain, that the simple may
understand; and yet (I hope) not altogether so unpolished, that the friendly
and iudiciously curious may scorn it. Briefly, what I have consecrated to God,
I may boldly present to man. Therefore in confidence of your imitation of him
in accepting a good will, I rest

Your Nephew, in all Christian duty to be commanded, ANTONY FAWKENER.

A SERMON PREACHED AT Pauls-Crosse.
JOB 19.21. Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, (O ye my friends) for the
hand of God has touched me.


AS the great Universe, so the small World, Man is composed of, and divided
into two parts; Spirit and Body. The soul expresses creatures immateriall;
Angels: The body is the character of things material and corporal. The world
was pure till man fell: the sin of the little world cursed the great one. No
sooner was Adam found guilty, but the earth was cursed, and that received
punishment before the delinquent: yet not for its own, but his sake. Man
sinned, not the earth; the earth was cursed, not for its own, but man's
punishment: The ground must be cursed ere man can be punished: the earth must
be barren, ere Adam can sweat. As of sin, so is man the chief subject of
calamity; each creature else for his sake, he for his own. Their punishment
is not theirs, but his; and their unhappiness only in order to his misery.
The earth indeed was cursed, man more; barrenness seized on it, death on him.

Raro antecedentem scelestum
Deseruit pede poena claude.
Punishment is light-footed, and will as soon revenge God, as man can iniure
him. Transgression is sometimes punished with the object it desires. Adam
indeed by eating the forbidden fruit, knew good and evil; but 'twas a
lamentable knowledge. He knew evil, but first in himself: the first science
he had, was of his own infirmity; for, He saw that he was naked. Genesis 3.7.
Sometimes it is punished by the contrary: Adam would no sooner have been as
God, but he was as man; ambitious to be equal with the Almighty, he became
inferior to himself. By his own power he would have lived for ever, and
therefore died presently; for, By sin death entered into the world. Lo then!
he was no sooner sinful, than miserable; no sooner the subject of
transgression, than of affliction. As then we derive sin from our parents, so
it is punishment, and misery is as much ex traduce as guilt. What man then lives
and oft-times sins not? what man oft-times sins, and is not sometimes
scourged? As then our affliction may be common, so our compunction should be
mutual. Our brother is corrected to day, to morrow may be our course: Job was
afflicted in this Chapter, he knew his friends might be ere long (as indeed
they were in the last Chapter, where he was feign to sacrifice for them:) and
therefore exhorts them to bestow that upon him in his calamity, which they
would be glad to beg of him in theirs; at least, that weak mercy of
commiseration, and that small solace, Pity.

Have pity upon me, have pity upon me etc. Man and wife are one by a
matrimonial union; Body and Soul make one by a natural constitution. Each
man has in himself a state Oeconomicall; Eve was married to Adam, the Body to
the Soul. Adam then is both Adam and Eve, Soul and Body. The Serpent first
beguiled Eve, then she Adam: Vanity first cheats sense, then she deceiues the
soul. As both have sinned, so both are punished in the same order: First Eve
was chidden, then Adam. First the body is punished in this world, then the
soul in the life to come. The whole world of man transgressed in its parts;
Adam and Eve, who were it: and, by a law of paritie, each of them is punished
in their parts; soul and body, which make up them. The whole man then is
afflicted in his parts: look but upon this verse, and behold this afflicted
man. My Text is the Emblem of a wretched wight, where by a method
Syntheticall, the sacred limmer proceeds from the parts to the whole. First,
there are two petitions correspondent to two parts: Have pity upon me: and
again, Have pity upon me. Pity my body, pity my soul: Both grounded upon
four implicit reasons; two taken a Posse; for you may do it, because it is
Easy and Lawful: and two a Debito; for you most do it, because it is
commanded by Nature and by God. Secondly, the parties petitioned, O ye my
friends. Thirdly, the reasons expressed on the petitioners part, moving and
persuading to the grant of his request; which in general are three: 1. taken
from the causes of his affliction, which here are two; Isntrumental, s. The
hand: prime Efficient, s. Of God. 2. taken from the action concrete, with its
manner, s. Has touched. 3. from the patient; the whole man, and but a frail
man, s. Me.

First then of the double petition: Have pity upon me, have pity upon me.
Such was the love of God to us, that he would not make us according to any
image, but his own: he would have had us no sooner men than sons; and the
Creator vouchsafed to be the prototype of his creature. Yet the madness of our
ambition fluttered to soar above the wisdom of his mercy: Coelum ipsum
petimus stultitia. To be dust and ashes, was as much as by our own nature we
could be; yet to be but a little inferior to God, was to be less than we
would be. How feign we would have been as God himself! and nothing could
satisfy the stupide pride of our finite nature, save to be absolutely equal
with an insinite essence. So foolish was our first rebellion, that nothing
could be the object of its aim, save the vanity of a contradiction. Thus in
defacing his image, we uncreated his work, and by the defect of a new
creation, made our selves what he made us not. Now, if he that is not with him,
be against him; he that is not like him, is so dislike him, that he is
contrary. As then we walked stubbornely against him, so has he walked
stubbornely against us, revenging our dislike of his likeness, and by his
justice punishing the contempt of his mercy. So that now our misery is squared
to our happiness, and our sense as naturally admits the object that it hates,
as that it likes. The eye can as easily see a ghastly pale, as a pleasing
white; our flesh may be as soon scorched with heat, as recreated by a
refreshing lukewarmth. The ear can as properly hear the Toade as the
Nighingale, and all our senses receive as naturally their punishments as their
blessings. Nor is the soul exempted from this affliction, but must have as
great a share with the body in misery as it had in sin; which though it have
not sense, it may have a compassion and a fellow-feeling by the virtue of its
union. It wills the welfare of its nearest neighbor, the body; which being
tortured its desire is crossed, and the contradiction of the will is the
tartest punishment of the soul. Aquin. de anima. q. vlt.
My Text is compassed with the complaint of this double affliction, as the man
of the Text (Job) is with the misery it self; He cries out in the 20. verse,
My bone cleaves to my skin, and I have escaped with the skin of my teeth. Lo
the distress of his body. Again he expostulates in the 22. verse, Why do
you persecute me as God, and are not satisfied with my flesh? Lo here the
anguish of his soul. This double affliction then may well require a twofold
petition for a twofold commiseration; Have pity upon me, have etc. Thus far
the petition has respected the twofold subject of calamity. Now, because
that request is never peremptory, which intercedes by the mediation of reason,
it is best we should awhile have respect unto the four implicit reasons; two
taken a Posse, for it is easy and lawful; and two a Debito, for it is commanded
by Nature and God. And first of the first, Easy.
It Is easy. To be bad when there is a possibility for us to be good, argues a
neglect; to be bad when it is easy to be good, inferres a voluntary
rebellion. It would be an unnatural contumacie to struggle against an offered
virtue, and a studdied sin to be vicious with difficulty. Tears are as easy
as affection, and compassion as common as love. If our friend be well, we must
needs joy, and if he be ill, by the same necessity we must weep: (...).
Xenoph: hist. graec. lib. 7.
If we can joy, we can grieve; tears are common to both, and each of them
equally challenge a compassion. As easily as we can embrace, we can pity; and
be with as little difficulty compassionate, as passionate. It is a trouble to
be hard hearted, and it was more pain for Joseph to refrain himself than to
weep, Genesis 45.1. It Is no labor to be pitiful; for they that are weakest, are
mostinclined to it; Women. Pharaoh, that could ride in a Chariot, was hard
hearted; but his daughter, a Virgin, not capable of labor, had compassion upon
Moses. Exodus: 2.6.
The men were dogged that could strive against commiseration, and those
children of Israel which wept at Christ's death, S. Luke 23.28.
were the Daughters of Jerusalem. So easy it is for that sex to pity,
Athanas. q. act Antioch. 88.
which by its nature is not of force to rebel against its nature. Pity then
is our own, for it is ingraffed; it is harder to be stony than relenting, and a
prodigy to be cruel, none to be merciful. (...). Athanasius tells us that
signs and miracles are the only effects of Gods power, but love and
compassion are the natural fruits of man's will. So that we need not take
pains to entertain lenity, since it is in our own power to be merciful. Thus
condolencie is so properly, so genuinely ours, that we can hardly be
unmerciful; and therefore in the fable of Lycaon, the Poet iudiciously makes
it the miraculous work of a strange metamorphosis, for a man to become a
Wolf. We are so our selves when we are compassionate, that when we are
unmerciful we are not our selves. Athanas. ad Antioe. q. 118.
(...). Hardness of heart is not the work of the creation, but of the Devil;
and cruelty always follows either a base or a domineering distemperature.
Aqui. 22 ae. q. 30. Art. 2.
The proud cannot brook pity, supposing all, save themselves (who are worst)
worthy of punishment. He that is injured is an enemy to it, for he imagines
revenge; and he that is injurious, for he is only intent on malice. Briefly, it
is a stranger to the fearlesse, desperate and the cowardly fearful: the one
is so careless of himself, that he forgets to pity another; the other is so
careful of himself, that he has no leisure to pity another. Lo here the
quintaine, the troop of the Devil; Pride, Revenge, Malice, Despair, and
Fear; the lame and crooked nurses of unmercifulness. The defects of nature
are the sources of cruelty, and the distemperatures of the soul, the sole
enemies of compassion. Yet (good God) how well we could be ought but what we
are! we could perform any thing save our task, and be easily compassionate if
it were not easy. Thus do we war against piety; choosing rather to be
vicious with difficulty, than virtuous with ease. Rather than we will be good,
we will sweat to be bad; and by a mis-guided election, rather seek a Viper
which we know will sting us, than receive any refection which we know will
nourish us. Thus when God offers us bread, we choose a stone; he gives us a
fish, and we ask a serpent. But stay: our nature is so bad, that it will be
good, though but by its own justification. Rather than our judgments shall
fail, our inventions shall preuadicate. Malignant minds must be constant,
though against reason; and will strive to prove that bad, which they cannot
endure should be styled good. It Is no argument (they will say) to prove compassion
good, because it is easy; for so most sins should be justified. The answer to
which, draws us to the consideration of the second reason; for it is not barely
easy, but withal justifiable: it is Lawful.

(...). Lawful. Zenoph. memor. lib. 4.
It Is Xenophons judgment: what is just, is lawful; and what is reasonable, is
just. Virtue is measured by reason, and has principally its nature from
election. Reason is a divine gift, though it be natural, and can as well make a
virtue, as sense a vice. The flesh is weak; I but the spirit is willing: an
intemperate body may desire badly: but a well guided soul makes the action
virtuous. Mercy, Aqui. 22 ae. q. 30. Art 3.
as a sensitive passion, may be mere triuiall and idle: Mercy, as a motion of
the mind, guided by reason, is a beautiful virtue. Now because virtue has
its extremes, and the Devil can turn himself from black to white; from the
extreme to appear the mean; from the Prince of darkness to se^me an Angel
of light: we must seek how to find the mean, and refuse the extremes; to
entertain the Angel, and cast out the Devil. To the performance of which, we
must first define Pity, showing what it is; then, manifest the persons whom it
respects. But before we proceed to define, let Logic moderate us; for
because of the ambiguous term Misericordia, Mercy, it is best to divide. It Is
taken then two ways, as only intimating commiseration, or withal implying
succor. In 4. Psalm. poenitent.
S. Gregory makes the division, and proportions fit terms to the dividing
members. Per misericordiam miserentis affectum intelligimus, per miserationem
vero misericordiae exhibitionem signamus. The word is either taken for a naked
pity, only commiserating misfortunes, without giving relief: or for a
compassion attended with a beneficence, which implies an actual exhibition of
succor. The first is most properly meant in my Text, the second is a natural
consequent: both may be handled; but to avoid confusion and tediousness, the
first only in the doctrine.

Pity then is defined to be Alienae miseriae in cord nostro compassio, S.
Aug. de ciu. dei, lib. 9. cap. 5.
a deep and hearty fellow-feeling of another misery. From which observe
these four Canons. First, there must be a feeling or sorrow. Thus in the
extremity of commiseration the Prophet cries, My bowels shall sound like an
Harp for Moab, and mine inward parts for Kirharesh; Isay. 16.11. Secondly,
there must be a fellow-feeling; compassion as well as passion: for we must
slere cum flentibus; weep with those that weep, Romans 12.15. Thirdly, we must
have a respect to Misery; Misericordiae propriasedes miseria est, says S.
Bernard: De conuers. ad Cler. ser. cap. 10.
Felicity requires no pity, but misery is the only seat of mercy. Lastly,
it must be Alienae miscria, of another unhappiness. Our pity has respect to
others, not our selves; and if we are sad for our own misery, it is Dolor, not
Compassio; Anguish, not Pity. Sothen, if we have not feeling, we are not
passionate; if we have not fellow-feeling, we are (...) co^passionate. The
definition then includes a re^^on, and that respect brings us to the persons.
The consideration of whom swayes the balance, and makes our pity either
frivolous or discreet. Now the persons to be itied, are to be considered in
respect of their conjunction to the parties pitying: The conjunction may be
threefold, 1. Natural, as of a Kinsman to a Kinsman; Aqui. 22. ae. q. 31.
Art. 4.
Civil, as of a Countriman to a Countriman; 3. Spiritual, as of a Christian
to a Christian. We ought indeed to pity all, but these per prius. Charity
begins at home: we owe it to each man, but first to the nearest. Virtue and
Grace ('it is Aquin as his simile) imitate Nature; the fire first warmes what is
like it, and next it. The air can sooner participate of the fires heat, than
the water; and the flame soonest heats that which naturally is most propense
and inclining to warmth. So though our Compassion extends to all, it first
respects the nearest. Religion and policy prescribe an order to our love, and
naturally our affection is as near as nature. In Cant. Tom. 3.
Puto quidem esse vim charitatis vnam, multas tamen habere causas and multos
ordines diligendi, says S. Origin. We may love, and consequently pity, all;
yet some first and most, and one commiseration may have diverse degrees. The
beautiful and deformed may be both beloved, yet the fairest best: I may
commiserate a friends case, yea and an enemies too, yet my friends first.
Joseph fed all Egypt, but he placed his father and his brethren in the best of
the land, Genesis 47.11. He sold food to the Egyptians, verse 14. but he
nourished them; verse. 12. S. Paul suffered persecution for the Gentiles, but he
could wish himself separated from Christ for his brethren his kinsmen
according to the flesh, Romans 9.3. Israel was commanded to entertain strangers
gently, Leuit. 19.33. but they wept bittery for the destruction of their
countrymen the Beniamites; 2. Sam. 21.3.
Judge. 21.2. David indeed pitied and revenged the soiourning Iebusites: But
Jeremy compiled a whole book of Lamentations for his native City Jerusalem.
Genesis 19.4.6.
Briefly, Abraham may be kind to Hagar, but he must love Sarah. It was
grievous in his sight to part with Ishmael, yet he must not be heir with his
son Isaac: Genesis 21.10.11.
For we must do good to all men, but specially to those that are of the
household of faith, Gal. 6.10. These three things then, Religion, Kindred, and
Country, claim the first title in our affection, and consequently in our
compassion; and that commiseration which orderly respects them, is natural,
lawful, and sanctified. These indeed infer a priority in mercy, but
insinuate not so clearly the legitimacy of Pity it self. Now this lawfulness
we may collect from the motives to commiseration, and the causes of affliction.
The motives are of two sorts, 1. A part miserentis, 2. a part eius cuius
miseremur: the one is grounded in the party pitying, the other proceeds from
the person pitied. The causes of compassion, in respect of the person pitying,
are three: 1. Dilectio. 2. Coniunctio. 3. Assimilatio: Love, Kindred and
equality, or likeness. The first is Love: There is a body as well by love as
by nature; the difference is, that two natural bodies make but one by
friendship. As one natural body has only its own sense, so two bodies, made
one by friendship, has but one feeling. So that pity is as natural as sense,
and compassion as proper to friends as passion to men. All things are common
amongst friends; then so is misery: for affliction is as selfe-communicatiue
as happiness. My friend is as mine own soul, Deuteronomy. 13.6. Thus if I love my
friend, I am but pene alter, scarce another; so that I account his pain my
grief, and what he undergoes properly, I must suffer, at least by reputation.
The second motive is Conjunction and nearenesse; which we have before touched.
The third is Assimilation or likeness. If the wind can scatter dust, then a
simili, why cannot the breath of Gods nostrills scatter us which are but dust?
If one man be in misery, we are men too, and but men, and may be just so
afflicted. Aetas parentum peior auis -- we are all no better than our brethren;
not so good as our fathers. If they be punished, so may we; if bad be scourged,
why should worse look for happiness? If Job be punished, why may not his
friends be tormented? Saul persecutes David; and what Supersedeas has he, but
that for all that the Philistims may scorn him? Jacob was as wise, as aged,
and pitied the Shechemites his neighbors, knowing that the rest of his
neighbors might ere long have had cause to pity him: If the inhabitants of
the land should have gathered themselves together against him being few in
number, and so he and his house should have been destroyed, Genesis 34.30. If
then we pity others, we put our compassion to use; we lend our mercy to our
own profit, and only store it to receive it at need. Thus our mercy
reflects upon us, and our compassion to others includes as much respect to our
selves as them. Now if we should only pity them for our own sakes, it would
be Philautie, not Charity; a selfe-affection, not a brotherly compassion.
There must be then causa (...), as well as (...); The object must impell to, as
much as we in our selves can be moved to grant. So that we must weigh the
motives, as well in respect of the party pitied, as the party pitying. Now
that motive is only one, Misery; which in respect of the person, its subject,
is twofold. Involuntary; which befalls us against our will: and voluntary,
which in some manner takes ground from our own consent. Involuntarie
unhappiness is of two sorts; Either Natural, when any defect is in and by
Nature: as blindness, lamenesse, and such like imperfections unavoidable: Or
casual, as when from any thing we expect good, Job 1. 2. Sam. 4.4.
and it happens evil. So Jobs children met to be familiar and merry together,
and the house fell upon them. So Mephibosheth in have to be saved, was lamed.
These two sorts of unhappiness, may justly challenge pity. Wherefore Christ had
compassion upon the blind man, John 9.6. and David upon lame Mephibosheth, 2.
Sam. 9.10. Now our calamity may be termed voluntary two ways; Ratione non
euitationis, Aqui. 22ae. q. 30. Art. 1.
and ratione electionis in causa. Either in not avoiding it when we may; as
when either by contempt or neglect we run headlong into any imminent danger:
Or in willing unhappiness in its cause; which is, when we will the cause of
misery; for so consequently we will misery it self. He that eats known
poison, does in some manner desire sickness. He that wills the transgression
of the law, wills consequently the punishment. He that must needs sin, must
needs die; and he that wills the one, desires the other. Israel will die if
they will sin: wherefore God (as it were wondering at their unnatural desire)
asks them not why they will sin, but why they will die, Ezskiel 33.11. So
these two sorts are so far from moving to pity, that they excite to
punishment. So then, all poor are not alike to be pitied. Cain was a wanderer,
so was Jacob: but Cain a Vagabond, Jacob a Pilgrim; the one to be punished, the
other to be relieved. He that will not avoid an apparent affliction, is worthy
to receive it. 1. King. 2.37.46.
And if Shimei will not keep his bounds, but rashly go over the river Kidron,
good reason he should be smitten that he die. Bona est misericordia, S. Aug.
sup-Exod. lib. 2.
sed non debet esse contra iudicium, says S. Augustine. Mercy is good, but
then inordinate, when against justice. We know by the immutable decree of God,
that blood is to be shed for blood: If then the murderer will needs be glutted
with blood, let him buy it with the payment of his own; and receive what
consequently he wills, the punishment. Deuteronomy. 19.21.
His blood shall be upon him, and our eye must not pity him. Notwithstanding,
voluntary affliction does not always exclude commiseration, but only, or at
least chiefly when it is offensive to Justice. Misereremei, non quia dignus,
sed quia inops and pauper sum ego. Iustitia meritum quaerit, misericordia
miseriam intuetur. Ver a misericordia non iudicat, sed afficit. Thus S. Bernard
teaches how to ask mercy by his own petition. Have compassion (says he)
upon me, not because I deserve it, but because I want it. Justice looks for
merit; Mercy takes notice of misery; and true commiseration argues not by
reason, but affects with passion. Samuel mourned for disobedient Saul,
respecting his distress not his sin. And David sorrowed for that traiterous
parricide, Absalom: his tears indeed were in vain, yet they were pious
because pitiful. We may bestow pity upon an offendour that is dying; not to
save him, but to comfort him: we may pity an offendour that is living, Aqui
22. ae q. 31. Art. 2.
Ad sustentationem naturae, non ad fomentum culpae. We may have compassion upon
his nature in which he is like us, and not cherish his vice, in which we should
be dislike him. From these it is evident, how far compassion is lawful, and
how inordinate. But because the word Lawful may only insinuate a tolerancie
(for things indifferent, and not in themselves absolutely good, may be
permitted, and according to that acceptance lawful) the next reason
challenges place; which is grounded upon command: and first of Nature.

(...), Nature. Arban. q. 118.
says Athanasius. God has so guided Nature, that she makes her best works,
as like as she can to God. Man was created according to his own image, and is
naturally in nothing more like him than in mercy. In each creature there is
vestigium creatoris, the foot-steppe of the creator; in man his image. The most
savage cruelty has its limits: Bears agree amongst themselves; and the
Canibals that devour their enemies, nourish their neighbors. As bodies are
naturally contiguous, so are our affections: We are as near by love as they
by touch. A man had as good be a stock, as a man without a neighbor. We are
better than beasts only in discourse; so that our perfection depends upon a
fellow. The cause why this fellowship is so necessary, is the necessity of a
mutual relief; which is as well afforded by compassion, as in a gift. My
mind may be as liberal as my hand; and if poverty curb my bounty, yet
maugre misfortune I can bestow the natural benevolence of pity: Which is to
be accepted, since it was the commendations of Agesilaus, that (...). Xenoph
orat. de Agesilao.
He respected those friends that would do him a courtesy, more than those
that could do it; preferring the benevolence of mind, to the possible
beneficence of fortune. If I cannot grieve, yet I can love; if by misfortune I
cannot succor, yet by nature I can pity. By commiseration though I cannot free
my friend, yet I can ease him, Nor is it my sorrow that so helps him, Aqui.
12ae. q. 8. Art. 2.3.
but its cause, Affection: for it adds joy to the afflicted, that he is
beloved even to compassion. As we are men, we must be sociable; if we be
sociable, when occasion serves we must pity. That love is counterfeit which
cannot grieve, and society is nothing worth without symphathie. So rarely
inbred is this passion, that there is scarce any thing attained so easily,
Epist. 7^.
and good so naturally. Misericordia pias mentes ad compassionem dolentium
necessario cogit affectu, says S. Bernard. Mercy is so natural to good
minds, that it does not persuade to compassion, but compel. So that though
they would not pity, yet they must; it being to them so natural that it is
unavoidable. Now as nature rules the creatures, so the Creator rules nature; so
that her prescript is but subordinate to his law, and she only proclaims
what God first decrees. Thus we may infer that it is Gods commandment,
because hers; but by reason that we may see the Almighties will in the bright
mirror the Scripture clearer than in that dim one of Nature, it is safest to
have recourse to it, where we shall find that also: It is commanded by God.

Estote misericordes, sicut and pater vester est misericors, says Christ, S.
Luke 6.36. Be ye merciful as your Father is merciful. Actum est. A further
proof might savor of incredulity. Lo here the command both of God and
Nature; it is the Decree of Jesus Christ, God and Man. In which is a precept and
an exhortation. He commands by his power, Be ye merciful; and persuades by an
example; Sicut pater etc. As your Father is merciful. That statute must needs
be good, which God enacts, and that action must needs therefore be just, of
which he is the example. Our first parents desired to be as God, and their
ambition was rebellion. Yet lo we must labor to be as God, and our desire
shall be religion. To aspire to be equal with God, is treason against his
Majesty: to endeavor to be like him, is obedience to his precept. The pride
of their ambition attempted an equality; but the love of our obedience aims
at a likeness. His mercy is above all his works, wherefore if you will be
most like him, Estote misericordes; Be you merciful; so you shall be as near
him by assimilation, as your first parents were distant by their ambition.
Their vainly intended equality was punished with judgment, and your likeness
in mercy shall be rewarded with mercy. Aqui. 22ae. q. 30. Art. 2. ad 1.
Deus non miseretur nisi propter amorem in quantum nos amat vt aliquid sui,
says Aquinas. God therefore pities us, because he loves us, and only loves us
because we are like him. He will pity the merciful, because he loves them,
and he will love them because they are so like him. Wherefore he will be
merciful unto the merciful; and therefore Blessed are the merciful, for they
shall obtain mercy, S. Mat. 5.7. Hark beloved; Blessed are the merciful,
not barely happy; honored with riches of god, not with the slender opulency
of fortune. Are there any then amongst you (my brethren) which have clothed
Christ when he was naked, fed him when he was hungry, and given him drink
when he was thirsty? if there be any, Come ye blessed of the Lord, S. Math.
25.24.25.26.
and inherit the kingdom, prepared for you from the foundations of the world.
Inherit that in this world by the stable possession of a certain hope, which
you shall inherit in the life to come, in the fullness of joy for evermore. Be
not slow to pity, for it is easy; be not doubtfully curious to receive it,
for it is lawful: Refuse it not stubbornly, since it is natural; at least
condemn it not rebelliously: for it is the command of God. Pity thy kinsmen
with Joseph, for they are thy flesh. Have compassion upon thy countrymen with
Jeremy, for they are thy brethren: Be merciful to those of thy religion, for
ye are one in Christ Jesus; ye are of one household of faith. Pity thy
brother for his own sake; for so thou may comfort him: have compassion upon
him for thine own sake; for so thou may expect a retributio^ in thy misery.
Give unto the poor, and so lend unto the Lord, and he will pay thee: or give
unto the poor, and so pay unto the Lord what he has lent thee. Quid habes
quod non accepisti? What have thou, which thou have not received? and what
can thou bestow, but what thou have borrowed? If thou give to the poor,
thou give to Christ; if thou give to Christ, thou give to God: Nor is it
so much a gift as a debt; S. Aug: in. Psalm. 147.
Deillius das qui iubet vt des. May not God do what he will with his own? If his
eye be good, let not yours be therefore evil. For what you bestow is none of
yours, but his only that commands you to give it. If then God forgive thee thy
debt, take not thy brother by the throat for his. Does the poor owe thee any
thing? remit it: for in having more than is necessary for thee, thou owe as
much to him. If thou have more than thou need, thou have more than thine
own. Superflua diuitum necessaria sunt pauperum. Idem. ibid.
The overplus of the rich are the necessaries of the poor. A niggardly hand
may oppress as much as a violent. Idem. ibid.
Res alienae possidentur, cum superflua possidentur. When you whoord up that
which you do not want, you spoil the poor of that which they want. Anobis
extrahitur crudeliter quod consumitur inaniter. That is cruelly extorted from
the needy, which is lauishly spent upon thy lust. Since then God has given to
thee, imitate him in being bountiful to thy brother. Let Gods alms be thy
alms, and what his mercy has bestowed upon thee, let thy pity divide unto
thy neighbor. Briefly, though the Shabeans rob Job, yet let Eliphaz pity
him: though the Lord by affliction try him yet let Bildad and Zophar have
compassion upon him; and though he be persecuted by Satan his enemy, yet at
least, Have pity upon him (O ye his friends). Friends! yea, but very small
ones; In my Text they are put in a parenthesis, and are no nearer than almost
quite out. Prosperity may have choice of acquaintance; but only misery is
the touchstone of a friend. It Is true indeed, the Man of the East had diverse
friends, but now they abhor, and are turned against the poor man, Job, Job.
19.19. So fickle is the amity of parasiticall friends, that the inconstancy of
time and fortune can stern its Nature. Now if we will love constantly, we must
love well; and if we will love well, we must love virtuously. So that our
friendship must principally respect goodness, both in our selves and friends.
He that cannot affect himself, cannot affect another; and he that loves
iniquity, cannot love himself: For he hates his own soul, Psalm. 11.15. Cum
ergo edissem animam meam, S. Aug. ad Mart epist. 155. de vera amicitia.
verum amicum quomodo habere poteram, ea mihi optantem in quibus ipse meipsum
patiebar inimicum? says S. Augustine. If in loving sin I hate my soul, how
can my vicious friend be my true friend, which only can wish that content unto
me, the desire of which makes me an enemy to my self? If then our selves be
bad, we cannot love our friends well: and again, if our friends be bad they
cannot love us well. The wicked is always conscious of his own
unfaithfulness, and jealous of his fellows constancy by his guiltiness of
his own inconstancy; he loves without trust, as if he would one day hate, and
his friendship is always startled with suspicion. The vicious then cannot
love, for they dare not trust; though they be confederate and joined by
company, they are divided in heart: so that religion only and goodness can
unite the souls. A virtuous friend-ship corrects Nature, and what she has
divided in bodies, it makes one in affection. Wherefore the Poet lively
insinuates the nearenesse of friends by dividing their soul: as though there
were not two souls, Hor. Od. lib. 1. Od. 3.
but one parted; so that himself had but -- Animae dimidium -- half a soul;
his friend had the other part, Confess. cap. 6.
and they two had but one life. S. Augustine commends this most significant and
expressiue description of true friendship by sharing of spirits, and the
Scripture properly exemplifies in two religious friends; for the soul of
Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, 1. Sam. 18.1. So almost were they
one, that they could not be absolutely two; and the only difference between
them was, that each might be but half the other. This amity is as constant as
near, and cannot be dissolved, unless the friend should be unjointed from
himself. If Jobs friends had been such, his petition would have been granted
before framed; and as soon as he had felt affliction, he might have demanded
pity by the title of a Symphathie. But they are not so affectionate as to
condole, nor so near as to have a fellow-feeling. Wherefore if he will require
compassion, he must plead for it; which he does in the next place, by showing
the causes of his affliction. and first the isntrumental: For the hand of God
has touched me. The hand. De sermon. Dom. in mont. lib. 1.


Quemadmodum in oculo contemplatio, sic in manu actio intelligitur, says S.
Augustine. The eye and the hand are the principal instruments of sense. The
one of seeing, the nobler sense of discipline: The other of feeling, the most
necessary to the simple being. So that as we understand contemplation by the
Eye, In lib. Reg. cap. 1. Hom. 2.
so we intimate power and action by the hand. Per manus intelliguntur opera,
says S. Origin. The hand is the most operative instrument of the will; and
what we do by it commonly, we express by it. So that nature has established
it a custom: and in most commonwealths at any public election, Hist. lib. 4.
the motion of the hand declares the assent of the will. Vultu manuque
assentiebantur, says Tacitus. Isidorus lib. 1.
In the Roman Senate they manifested fested their consent by holding up their
hands; and in their Armies too, to avoid the confusion of vocal suffrages, it
was a military custom to signify their minds by their hands: withal
intimating by that instrument of vigor and force, not only their approbation,
but also their constancy and readiness to the maintaining their resolution so
expressed. The Scriptures are as copious of testimonies, as their authors of
customs. We will urge a few. First, God himself in a solemn Protestation is
said to lift up his Hand, Number. 14.30. insinuating the maintenance of his decree
by his power. The light of his countenance can bless his people; but when he
miraculously delivers them and plagues his enemies, it is with a mighty Hand.
Psalm. 136.12. The sign of strength is in a stretched out arm; and if Israel
will conquer Amaleck, Aaron and Hur must stay up Moses Hands, Exodus 17 12. Alas
weak Job! If the Hand of God be his power, and that wholly upon thee, thy
friends had need pity thee. The hand that can span the Heavens, must needs
squieze a worm. The Finger of God was enough to plague a whole great nation,
Egypt, Exodus 8.19. Was it then possible that one miserable man should sustain
the weight of his whole hand? Qui dat pati dat posse pati. He that sends
affliction will send patience. God is merciful as well as just, and it was the
Hand of God.

Yet that might be a question, God.
if it were not an axiom, and be disputed as but probable, if the Holy Ghost
did not warrant the necessity: God approved of Job, whom the Devil slandered:
Satan smote him with boiles, Job. 2.7. Then, was that the Hand of God? Malignus
spiritus mala voluntate nocere appetit; tamen nocendi potestatem non accipit,
Ad Simpl. l. 2. q. 1.
nisi ab illo sub quo sunt omnia certis and justice meritorum gradibus ordinata.
Thus S. Augustine answers; The Devil would hurt, but he wants the power: God
must give him leave, else he cannot execute his will. Satan has the will in
himself, but he cannot perform it, unless God lend him power. The cause is
Gods, and Satan cannot persecute till he will prosecute. God of himself is
just, and Satan malicious; and unless God will execute his justice, Satan
cannot actuate his malice. So that Gods permission is his action and the power
that he lends, is styled his Hand. God is Judge, Satan the executioner; it is
the Devils will, but Gods power. Now the Lamb is merciful, but the Dragon is
cruel; and though Satan's malice would crush us, yet the hand of God will but
Touch us.

Has touched. Touched.
And it is enough; for at the touch of the Lord, the mountains smoke: and are
the wicked any thing save an heap of transgression? is the world of man ought
else save a mountain of sin? We are nothing save a lump of disorder, a
Babel of contumacie, built so high that our rebellion may reach to Gods cares,
and need not with the blood of Abel, cry, but whisper for a vengeance: a
frail mass of confusion, on which if he does but blow, he puffes us into a
nothing; and if he will but touch this Babylon, our smoke must ascend for
evermore. Yet is he not more justice than mercy, and can express himself to
be both at once. So that the Scripture attributes to him a threefold touch, s.
Tactum iusticiae, tactum misericordiae, and tactum medium, or tentationis. He
confounds by the touch of justice, when he will revenge; So the Lord of hosts
shall touch the land, and it shall melt away, Amos. 9.5. He comfort by the
touch of his mercy, when he will forgive; for so Jesus touched the Leper, and
he was healed, S. Math. 8.3. He touches by the touch of his mercy and justice
together, when he will try; and so the hand of God has touched Job. In whose
trial, respect the affliction, and view Gods Justice; look upon the end, and
behold his mercy. He was sinful, therefore might lawfully be punished, yet
God afflicts him more to prove him, than to punish him. The Lord will rebuke
him, yet not in his anger; he will chastise him, but not in his wrath. Because
he has sinned he may, I and shall be afflicted, and yet by that scourge not so
much punished as proved. Thus all things prove to the good of the elect. If
they sin, they shall be punished; yet their punishment shall be the witness
of their trial, and that he pathway to their glory. God will not cocker his
children, but correct them; and strike hardest where he loves most. The man
after his own heart shall roar for pain: and just Job complains, The hand
of God has touched Me.

Vox clamantis in deserto; Me.
The voice of one crying in the Wilderness: That was S. John Baptist: Here is
another vox clamantis, the voice of a crier; it is in the wilderness too. His
soul was desolate, and affected uncouth places as much as David, who was like
a Pelican of the wilderness, and like an Owl of the Deserts. He was the
Baptist too, Psalm. 102.6.
but merely passive, Baptismosanguinis; he was baptized with the baptism of
affliction: and that he is a Crier as well as S. John, is intimated by his
name; Job, which signifies a fearful howling. We know the story of him, and
the scope of it. s. the manifestation of Gods trial of man's patience in
misery. Each one knows the afflictions of the man of the East, Job: but who
takes notice of the woman of the North, our Metropolis? Here is a third vox
clamantis, the voice of one crying, I and in the Desert. For lo Satan the
Dragon has persecuted her as the woman in the wilderness. Nay her whole self
not long agone was but a wilderness, if you will take a Desert for a place
desolate. Rev. 12.14.
S. Gregory's complaint was renewed, and the ruins by him deplored truly
patterned in that example. Habitatores non exparte subtrahuntur, sed pariter
corruunt. Domus vacuae relinquuntur. Filiorum funera pare^tes aspiciunt, et sui
eos adinteritum haeredes praecedunt. The stately towers of Sion were become the
habitation of Satyrs, her people not by degrees plucked up, but mowed down
together in full swathes. Lo, a lamentable spectacle! The Grand-sire, by a
preposterous privilege of suruiuing, heir to his intestate Nephew. You might
have beheld youth the first borne of death, and the gray hairs descending
latest to the grave. The great Temple of Jerusalem, that living house of God,
the company of Christians was so vnioyted, that there was scarce a stone left
upon a stone; a man to converse in safety with his neighbor. A pestilent
disease disordered nature. The grave snatched what nature denied, the
strongest. Net hoc parents heu sibi superstites effugerit spectaculum. Parents
were mourners for their children, and closed those eyes which should have wept
at their funerals. The graves were as full of carcasses as the houses of
inhabitants; and the poor remnant that were left and reserved from this fatal
captivity, were not so much the parts as the ruins of a City. Troynouant was
indeed new Troy, the wretched daughter of an unhappy mother. Beth-rapha was
turned into Bochim; The house of health, not to an edifice but a bare place of
weeping. You should not have mis-called a matron Naomie, but called her Mara;
not a beautiful spouse but a distressed widow. Lo, gasping Rachel would have
the name; for in those fearful plagues the fathers son of his right hand, his
darling babe was but Ben-oni, the son of sorrow. God Almighty had withdrawn
the light of his countenance from us; The Arc of our salvation was wel-neare
taken, and the lamenting mothers, bowing themselves for travel, have brought
forth their firstborn abortiues; an untimely fruit of a name, distractedly
inquisitiue, Ichabod; where is the glory? Quam pene furnaeregna Proserpinae,
and indicantem vidimus Aeacum! one foot was in the grave, and (O Lord) how
almost did our souls go down into the pit? There was no Isaiah to save the
living from death; no Elias to raise the dead to life. The wise perished as the
foolish, the Priests as the peasants, both promiscuously interred together; so
that each sepulcher was a charnel-house, each grave a Golgotha. Belshazzar
trembled for a light threat: The hand of God appeared to us, not writing on a
wall, but a whole Kingdom, grauing the name of desolation in the black
characters of the pestilence, and each doors fatal and common motto, Lord have
mercy upon us. Graves were scarcer than houses, and the earth more straightened
to receive the dead, than the habitations the living. So that necessity made
one pit a common sepulcher, and the whole City Ezekiels field. Yet lo, Mal.
3.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
those afflictions which should have corrected, have hardened us. Will a man
spoil his gods? says the Lord: yet ye have spoiled me: but ye say, Wherein
have we spoiled thee? In tithes and offerings. The Priesthood is become a
derision, the Ministry a contempt, and the Church robbed by contentious
flocks and sacrilegious Patrons. Wherefore ye are cursed with a curse; for ye
have spoiled me (says the Lord) even this whole nation. But bring ye all the
tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove
me now herewith (says the Lord) If I will not open the windows of heaven unto
you, and power you out a blessing without measure. And I will rebuke the
deuourer for your sakes --. And all nations shall call you blessed; for ye
shall be a pleasant land, says the Lord of hosts. Pride, fullness of bread and
deceit in the city; Oppression and barbarous malice in the country: these are
the weapons which we have whetted against our own souls, and the broken
reeds that pierced the hands of those that leaned on them. How many towns may
we see turned into open fields, religion decayed with nature, the Church with
the parishioners; landlords metamorphosed to wolves, servants into dogs.
villages into sheep-coates, and families into shepherds Curres! Because the
blessing of God was troublesome, and the multitude of men seemed a burden unto
us, lo, the just Lord has eased us in his indignation, and in a moment
sweptaway (by war and pestilence) above an hundred thousand. He has
recompensed our ingratitude with vengeance, and which of us all have not lost a
kinsman? O then, Have pity upon us, have pity upon us, (O ye our friends)
for the hand of God has touched us. Yet the Lord is merciful and gracious,
and in the midst of judgment has remembered mercy. Our great City Nineueh,
and her King has repented in sackcloth and ashes, sorrow and humility: and
behold the Lord has been more merciful than man. Though Jonah has
prophesied judgments, he has turned them into consolations. Behold, Syon is
again inhabited, and who can number her towers? The voice of gladness is
heard in her Palaces, and songs of thanksgiving in stead of the mourning of
Hadad-rimmon: Moses is heard, and the request of pious governors now fully
granted. The Lord is returned unto the many thousands of Israel. Rejoice
therefore O my soul, again I say rejoice. O let us remove the Leprosy of
sin from our souls, as God has removed the black spots of the Pestilence
from our bodies. O be joyful in the Lord all ye lands, all sorts, all persons,
young men and maidens, old men and children, praise ye the Lord. So shall God
render unto Job seven fold; the wombes of our young women shall be fruitful,
and your children shall play by thousands in the streets; the strength of our
young men shall break a bow of steel, and the gray hayres of our ancients
shall descend with joy and reverence into the grave. O then beloved quickly, to
day if you will hear, cast off the menstruous clothes of Hypocrisy and
wickedness, and present your souls, your naked souls as a sacrifice without
blemish unto the God of your salvation. Come taste and see how good and
gracious the Lord is. Take the Cup of salvation, and sing with Angels and
Archangels, Glory to God on high, in earth peace, and good will toward men.
We praise thee, we bless thee, we glorify thee, etc.

FINIS.

