COUNSEL TO THE HUSBAND: TO THE WIFE Instruction.

A SHORT AND PITHY TREATISE OF Several and joint duties, belonging unto man
and wife, as counsels to the one, and instructions to the other; for their more
perfect happiness in this present life, and their eternal glory in the life
to come.

AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Richard Boil. 1608.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL AND my very Christian friends, Master THOMAS GERVOYSE,
and his virtuous wife Mistress LVCY GERVOYSE, true happiness in this life, and
eternal glory in the life to come, be from God the Father through Jesus
Christ.
MY Worshipful dear friends, in the Christian duty which I owe unto your
worshipful Parents, who have a long time deserved much at mine hands (and much
more then I can repay) as also in the love J bear to your own and your
beloved yok^fellow, bethinking with my self wherein to show some token of this
love, (as it well becomes and concerns a thankful heart) and weighing the
estate, whereunto God has called you, of the marriage band, J did light upon
this argument, thinking it the fittest for your use, and the easiest for my
study to labor in, by reason of mine experience of the evils thereof: which,
as a token of my love, to prevent the evil, and to instruct unto the godly
duties and fruits of that Christian and honorable estate, J do humbly
present, and prefer unto you: not doubting but you will both accept and apply
it, as shall be most expedient in every respect. And so to a slender work, a
short and brief Dedication may well suffice, that the porch of the house be
not bigger then the whole building. And so I commend it to Gods glory, and my
self to your service in the Lord Jesus.

Yours in all Christian duty and service, Ste. B.

Counsel to the Husband: To the wife instruction.
THE whole estate of man's happiness, may easily be disposed, into the
consideration of two times; The state of this life present: and the glory of
the life to come. This life being the first, is both the Image to resemble, and
the foundation, wherein to lay (or work) that eternal happiness. Neither is
there any estate, wherein we may more lively behold, or sensibly taste and
feel, any sparckle or jot of the Lord our God, his eternal love to us, then
in that united estate of man and wife; wherein two persons become but one,
Ephesians. 5.13.
which still are two; and mutually owe to other several duty. A double union.
The union whereof, as it is unspeakable (where there is (indeed) an holy
union) so has it pleased the Lord, not seldom, but often in his word, (and
especially in that Song of songs, called Salomons Canticles) under the title of
an husband, rejoicing with his wife, to set forth his love unto us, what it is
in Christ Jesus. Whose mutual kindness, expressed (in that song I mean) in
terms, in duties, in wanting each other, in seeking, in sorrowing, in finding,
in inioying, in solacing and embracing, in unwillingness to leave and depart
each from other, may well show the conjunction to be unspeakable, between man
and wife, (rightly conjoined, and yoked equally) and be a lively pattern of
more heavenly things. Howbeit (I say) it is not in all conjunctions, that this
Image of spiritual happiness does appear; All marriages do not resemble
heavenly happiness.
for in some, it bears rather a type of hellish sorrows, wherein (our
Savior says) shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 25.30.
when the judgment shall be pronounced upon the reprobate [Goe away ye
cursed ones into everlasting fire.] Verse 41.
Even so, where the match is unmeet, the conjunction unequal, the united in
body, disunited in spirit, of contrary affections, hearts and religions,
duties unperformed, each crossing other, or any of the twain unwise that will
not be admonished; what are the fruits there? but wrath, bitterness,
contention, controlling, contradiction, taking all things in the evil part,
jealousy, vpbraiding, coffeehouse, false dealing, secret iuggling,
conspiring, wants, without pitying each other, toil without helping each
other; seeking each one his credit with discredit unto both, with many other as
grievous to be spoken of as any past. All which (no doubt) made Solomon so to
speak, Prou. 21.9.19.
as his Proverbs do bear witness, namely, that it were better to dwell in the
corner of an house top, yea in the wilderness, most desolate and solitary:
and as another says, with dragons and bears, or other cruel beasts, then
with the contentious and froward wife. So that (as I said) this Image of Gods
love, and of our eternal and most happy conjunction with Christ, (he the
head, and we the members; he the husband, and we the wife; he, our well-beloved
one, and we his as well beloved) is not to be found in every conjunction (as
woeful experience gives cause of complaint to many) but only in the godly
united match; in the well ordered, and governed match. A necessary caveat.
So that, how necessarily does it behooue them, that would live perfectly
happy, (by inioying the one, and avoiding the other) to be instructed in the
means which lead hereunto? that is, seeing this happiness is in the right
ordering of man and wife themselves, each toward other, and then both in the
joint governing of their family, to know (therefore) both their several
works, and conjoined duties. And whereas I called this estate before, a
foundation, wherein to lay the work of eternal happiness, I spoke not without
aduisement; for that, The Church is the school of Gods Kingdom.
as the Church (generally) is the school of Gods kingdom, a place to make men
fit, before they can enjoy his kingdom (understanding me of such as come to
the state of discretion and judgment) as also the word of God, is called the
Gospel of this kingdom, because that in this life, it fitteth men thereunto;
so is every man's house, (rightly ordered and governed by the rules of
godliness) not unjustly, or without cause (by the holy Ghost) called a Church,
Romans 16.5. Reu. 1.6.
the Governors, Kings, Priests, and Prophets unto God. Kings to rule, Priests
to offer sacrifice; and Prophets, to instruct, or see instructed. The husband
first and principally, as the head and high Priest; the wife in his absence,
or, as upon just cause, he shall require her: She opens her mouth (says
Solomon) with wisdom, Prou. 30.26.
and the Law of grace is in her tongue. So likewise did Bathsheba teach her
son Solomon: Prou. 30. See the title thereof.
Lest, whereas the Apostle says, The wife shall learn at home of her husband,
1. Cor. 14.34. 1. Tim. ^.12.
she should think her self absolutely excused, or freed of this duty. No, by
no means may she think it, Virtuous women must teach in the family.
as not being the meanest property of the virtuous wife.

In all which government, howsoever ye Church oftentimes does want the parts
and members of her government, by reason whereof, God is not so honored, as he
should or might; Godly householders may have perfect government.
yet is it free to godly householders, to enjoy this government: for, how should
God want his orderly worship, morning and evening, week-daies. Lords days,
blessi^g and praising him, with joy and comelines in a private family, and in
the time of the Gospel? or how should there want laws, ordinances, Every
godly family, and well ordered, should have penal laws for sin. Genesis 21.9.
Genesis 37.41.
and statutes, against profaning ye Lords day, swearing, drunkenness, lying,
evil speaking, quarrelling, standring, unchaste speaking, either for Ishmaels
scoffing, or Esaus threatening, where the Governors have the authority to hold
the stern, and command for God? except they want care and zeal, for Gods
causes, The chief cause why families do abound in sin.
or hatred against sin, and regard only to be served themselves, and not how
God is served, worshipped or obeyed. In all which consideration, what a
foundation of eternal happiness is there laid, where there is such an holy and
religious care to plant virtue, and supplant vice? to know the Lord, and to
have him served aright? 1. Cor. 7.22.
whose service is freedom, and whatsoever freedom besides, is but bondage
unto Satan.

Note this.
Verily it is a great burden, which governors of families do bear, and their
account is great; their families should be churches, wherein God should be
hallowed, served, and daily honored: yea, they should take care, that not only
they themselves fear God, (which yet is the least care of too many) but their
servants also; that not only they themselves be not swearers, or excessive
persons, but not any of their servants be known to be such. A worthy
president whereof is to be found in David's rule, Psalm. 101.
Psalm. 101. which for his household government he proposed unto himself,
vowing unto God, not only himself to walk in the midst of his house (that
is) before all his family) with an upright heart, but that, slanderers, liars,
A singular president for householders.
scorners and such deceitful persons, should not dwell in his house; yea, he
would purge his house betimes (as one of the first works that he would take in
hand) to thrust out all the workers of iniquity from the city of the Lord.
And then, whom would he plant about him? even such as were nere Cornelius, Act.
10.7. Psalm. 101.6.
such as feared God, even (as David calls them) the faithful of the land,
they should dwell with him, who so walked in a perfect way he should serve
him. A worthy commendation it was unto that Roman Captain that he feared God
with all his household, that is, he kept none that outwardly submitted not
himself unto the comely order of his family; none that was to be attainted
with open crimes, such as the most men's servants are, and especially Gentlemen
and great personages, In greatest houses most disorder.
as i^ they had bidden battle and defiance unto religion and religious order,
retaining (in stead thereof) and maintaining withal, all ruffian and
swaggering persons, wanton, and beastly swine, such as may loathe an honest
mind to come in company withal; such families are not Churches but styes for
swine; not congregations of Saints, but kennels for snarling dogs; yea, even
very helhounds, for any manner nourture or true godliness, that is to be found
amongst them. What will these do when they shall come to account unto God for
their families? Account for families, which we think not of.
or do they not believe that they shall account for them? They, that know any
thing, as they should know, by the rule of Gods word, do account it a great
burden to take charge of a flock, and to be Pastor of a Church; and is not a
family then a great charge that is called a Church? We will say in an English
proverb, A proverb.
that there belongs more to a marriage then two pair of bare legs; so we
say further, that there belongs more to a family then Governors, servants,
household stuff, and provision: there must be laws and discipline, order and
instruction, a watchman and overseers, that all may walk upright; that God
being served, he may serve us, and his name being daily blessed, he may bless
us again, and power a blessing upon our labors, which we take in hand.

Herehence then (my worthy, and worshipful friends) let me deduce, for your
use, and remembrance these few, and joint duties to you and your blessed
yokefellow, to practice toward the Lord. Remember the words of David before
rehearsed; how timely he would take in hand the religious ordering and
planting of his house. Forget not the words of our Savior Christ, who
counsels you (and all that regard him for their Lord and Savior) first,
Matthew. 6.33.
to seek the kingdom of heaven and the righteousness thereof, and then (as it
were without your care) all other things should be ministered unto you. Let
your government and house, first entertain Christ Jesus (who never comes
empty handed, Christ never comes empty handed. Prou. 8.18.
but furnished with all grace and riches; even durable riches (as Solomon
calls it) that is, the knowledge, the service and the true care of religious
duties. Let God be above all things honored in and of your selves, for example
sake, yea, for conscience sake, then of al, and every servant, men and maids,
the chiefest, the basest, see yt they be not profane persons as Esau was, Heb.
12.16.
who for a mess of pottage sold his birthright, that is, such as more esteem
a mess of pottage, or a vain toy, then the fear of the Lord, or to be taught
any goodness, or reproved to leave any evil. Keep not that servant who being
attainted with any the aforesaid crimes, of swearing, uncleanness, Mat. 18.15.16.
drunkenness or riot, and shall be admonished and convicted thereof, according
unto due order of reproouing, which leaves not his sin, and fears not to
sin, through contempt of order. That God, who commanded Abraham to cast out
Ismael for his scoffing at Isaac, Genesis 21.
commands you (and all Masters) to cast out the brood of Ismael, (that is)
all contemners, and resisters of religion. 1. Cor. 5.6.7.
They are the leaven, yea the very bane and poison, (let me speak yet a little
further,) a most grievous plague and leaprosie, unto any godly and honest
family. Evil servants are ever more offensive unto the godly.
Such do not only vex the godly, if any be in it, but keep away the godly,
that would come unto it. Let not therefore your family want necessary Laws
and penalties for offenders, whereby you may repress sin, and be the means,
if not of saving such, as otherwise would perish in sin, and ignorance of
God, yet, at the least, of lessening their torments in hell, by restraining the
measure of their sin, according to which shall every soul be tormented.

For want of godly discipline, how do serants, even in the families of
religious Governors, offend, (may I not say abound?) in swearing scorning, and
most vile behavior? I would I knew it not to be too true, in too many places
of very religious account. Whose is the fault? verily ye Governors: and they
shall bear the sin of such offenders. You will say, they command against
swearing, and forbid their servants; and they are taught the contrary, neither
take they their example from the Governors. All this is well; but all this is
not large enough for excuse. I would to God al families had this to glory of,
the easier would be the reformation of the residue.

All this while there is no mention of penal statutes, domestical mulctes or
punishments, corporal or pecuniarie, with chosen and appointed watchmen and
overseers, for the oversight of the family, and to wait upon the behavior,
and observe the conversation of the servants; sober, wise, and trusty
servants, to whom authority, credit, and countenance may be given to
discharge this duty thorowout the families. You will say, this were enough for
a whole congregation. I answer, very true. And why not for every honorable,
worshipful, and populous family which the Scriptures do account, Romans 16.5.
and call a Church? If it be a Church, why should it not have the laws and
discipline of a Church? Indeed if it were so, sin must needs be
constrained to flee to the land of Shinar, Babylon, or confusion, and would be
ashamed to show her head. A reason why private families do want good laws.
Why then you will say, is it not so? Oh, we are ashamed of the Gospel: we
fear to be evil spoken of, or that we shall not get servants to do our work
and business. Such pretenses are coined in the world, and we think them very
reasonable: but alas they are too narrow a covering to cloak or hide our false
hearted love to Christ, our coldness in religion, and our distrust in God.
Surely I think it would thrust out Hagar and Ishmael with bottell and bag,
(the bondwoman and her son) swaggerers, roysters, and ruffian like servants,
with such lewd and profane blasphemers, Act. 1.25.
as are more fit for hell (their own inheritance, without repentance) then for
godly families, which have the name for religion. And as for the service of
such men, I cannot see how it should be blessed, but accursed rather; nor how
we should doubt the having of religious servants, if we our selves (the
governors) do truly love religion, and would indeed have such, or none at
all. But whiles we have such linsie-wolsie mixtures, Deuteronomy. 22.10.
an Ox and an Ass to draw together, one good and five evil, one that
abhors an oath, and half a dosen for one that shall make no bones of an
oath, nay shall (it may be) swear in contempt of such a one, is it any
marvel, though we cannot find good servants? if our houses were reformed (as
they ought to be) like Gods house, and that Christ his government did bear
sway therein, we should not need lay wait for such servants, they would
enquire for us, and sue to be received as into the Ark of Noah? All this may be
performed where there is not a Pastor or teacher resident in the famile; but if
there be no Pastor in the public congregation, you can by no means (well)
want one in your family. You will say, that is a great charge. I answer:
nothing to the danger of the want of one. You know it is Gods ordinance to have
his word preached, and your family instructed, as has bin said, and none so
fit and meet as by a godly Teacher. If you stick at the charge, then withal
consider whether you bestow not as much, (if not oftentimes more) upon more
unnecessary expenses; as upon vain apparel, upon hawks hounds, superfluous
or sumptuous building, great housekeeping, and such like. I speak not of
playing or wicked gaming (because I exhort a Christian Gentleman:) if you do
any of the former and want a Teacher, you set the carte before the horse, and
take the wrong course to thrive. If you reply, and say, those aforesaid
expenses must needs be; I demand, before the means of salvation? What?
Hawks, or Hounds, or dostly apparel, or dainty fare, before the preaching
of Gods word, his worship and service? Is it time (says Haggaie) for your
selves to dwell in seeled houses, Hag. 1.4. Job. 31.11.12.
and this House lie waste? As Job says; this were a wickedness and iniquity to
be condemned: yea, (says he) this would be a fire that should devour to
destruction, and root out all his increase. For which, how Gods wrath came
upon that people; is in that chapter at large declared: the judgments of God
fell on them, in their eating and drinking, and clothing, and earnings, Verse.
6.9.10.
[they put their wages into a broken bagge]. If yet you say, many neglecting
this religious care you speak of, do yet thrive and prosper; I answer, and
many do not: which doubtless is Gods curse upon them. But, be they religious
persons or governors, I say, the greater is Gods mercy, so to spare them in
so manifest an offense against so holy a duty: if they be others, (void of
religion) it is not to be respected; whose thriuing is not a token of Gods
love unto them, when they want grace to serve him rightly; and the more they
thrive, and yet rightly serve him not, the greater will be their judgment, and
condemnation. Let that be no president to you, against the plain evidence of
the word of God, against which if a miracle, Deuteronomy. 13.1.2.3.4.5.
sign, or wonder may not prevail, (which sometimes to prove men, God has
permitted and suffered) much less may the thriuing of wicked men prevail in
such a case, upon whom (if we will read the Scriptures) we shall see, God
powers his benefits, and fills their bellies (as David says) with his hid
treasures, Psalm. 17.14.
much more then on the Godly, yea they have no changes in their prosperous
estate, Psalm. 55.19.
when the godly are afflicted and chastned every morning, in body, goods, and
good name. Therefore this is a slender stumbling block, and not worthy to be
stuck at. The charge of a Teacher counteruailed.
The charge therefore of a reverend and painful Teacher (if any way your
state will bear it) does bring his burden of blessings other ways (if God be
not unrighteous) and till that charge be defraied, certainly all our
pleasures, profits, and delights in whatsoever before named or may be added
unto it, are accursed in the use thereof, except we be under the public
ministry (as I said before): for as in those indifferent blessings (for so I
may lawfully call them in a sober use of the^,) there is some honest delight
for gentle and noble minds, so (yet) till the worship of God be provided for,
they are utterly unlawful.

If that be therefore granted, that to have a Teacher be needful, the
expense no heavy burden, but unwillingly endured; then, as my next counsel,
see that your Teacher have his due regard in his place and calling; Teachers
must have their due regard in the family.
that is, see that he have meet reverence with authority, both from your
selves and all others in the family. For if he be not regarded, how shall his
word, his exhortation, or reproof take place unto Gods glory? The Lord
requires for his works sake, 1. These. 5.12.13. 1. Tim. 5.17. Heb. 13.17.
that such be had in singular reverence, in double honor, obeyed and
submitted unto. All which is not as to his person, but to his office and
function: not to him, but to Christ, whose word, person, and authority he
sustaineth. The contempt of whom is likewise, not to him but to the Lord your
Redeemer. When therefore in your family, every base person shall set him at
naught, or being reproved by him for any evil, shall scornfullie resist, or
reject his counsel, what can this grow unto, but an hardening of them in their
evils, and a discomfort unto the Teacher to do his duty? Rightly to esteem
Gods servant, as the honor of his place and calling does require, must come
from singular grace and knowledge of Gods ordinance, and is not the weakest
testimony of a religious heart. Thus whiles you provide for the true honor of
your God ( Matthew. 6.33.
as they that first seek for the kingdom of GOD and his righteousness) you
sow unto your own honor, for that they which honor God shall be honored of
God, 1. Sam. 2.30.
his own mouth has witnessed it. Yea, in sowing thus to godliness, Gal. 6.7.8.
what fruit in your season may you look to reap, but that which is promised
unto godliness? which is, not only the immortality of the life to come (which
is of faith) but also Gods blessings in this present life, which is in sight.
Come children (says ye Prophet) hearken unto me, Psalm. 34.11.
and I will teach you the fear of the Lord. What man is he that desires life
and would feign see good? Keep thy tongue from evil and thy lips that they
speak no guile, ^s^hew evil and do good, seek peace and follow after it:
Verse. 17.
For (says he) the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are
open unto their cry. Whereas on the contrary side, what a foundation o^ an
unhappy life, is in the contemners and neglecters of religion? may they think
to prosper? the Prophet says the contrary, Verse. 16.
that the countenance of the Lord is against such as fear not God, to root
out their memorial from off the earth. The prosperity of the wicked is
accursed.
Or admit they were outwardly blessed, what is their prosperity, but accursed
unto them, their table made a snare, and the things that should be for their
advantage, an occasion of falling? This shall suffice for the first point to
direct you unto religion and religious government; and as the first step and
beginning of assured happiness; Religion the salt of true happiness. Tit. 1.15.
which (also) seasoneth (as with salt) all other circumstances of this life's
happiness; for, if only to the pure all things are pure, and only they that so
religiously live and govern (according to Gods word) are of God accounted
pure, Matthew. 5.8.
and the pure only blessed (as the mouth of all truth has pronounced it:) and
that on the contrary, to them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing
pure, but even their minds and consciences are defiled, then must it needs
follow, that only the religious enjoy the blessings of God aright, The
unregenerate are but usurpers upon the gifts of God.
both of pleasure and necessity, all others being but usurpers upon the gifts
of God.

And admit, that for all this religious care, you shall suffer some reproach,
Reproach for Religion.
(as very assuredly it will follow from Satan and his impes:) what of this? Yet
is this direction Gods simple truth, and the high way unto happiness. Yea, it is
therefore the more undoubted truth, for that ye way of truth must be evil
spoken of, 2. Pet. 2.2. 2. Tim. 2.12. The Cross the shadow of the truth.
neither can ye cross be avoided, as the shadow of the truth. For which, if
you shall be discouraged, you will prove unworthy of Christ's glory, neither
can you reign as a partaker in happiness, Romans 3.17.
except you suffer in this life, as a man most unhappy. If you deny God; Genesis
17.1.
he will deny you; if you walk with him, and be upright, he will be to you
God alsufficient: If you rule for God, and according to his word, then shall
you rule with God, and sit upon his throne of eternal glo^i^. Now what is the
rule, that you must rule by? Is it the example of men, mighty, or multitude?
No, by no means; for that is the certain rule to err by. I thank thee (O
Father) says our Savior Christ, Matthew. 11.
Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things from the prudent and
wise, and have revealed them to babes and sucklings. And S. Paul says, 1. Cor.
1.26.27.
that the calling and state of true Christianity, is not composed of ye Noble,
learned, rich, or mighty of the world, but Gods choice is quite against the
reason of man, as to take foolish things to confound wise (which through God it
shall do easily) and weak things to confound mighty, and vile things of the
world, and things that are despised, and things which are not, to bring to
naught, Gods manner of working.
things that are. This is Gods kind of working; and except you consider it both
well and easily, you shall stumble at it and be offended.

The rule that you must leuel by (both concerning your self and others that
shall be your charge) is the most blessed word of God; a young ma^s rule; Psalm.
119.
an old man's rule; every man's rule: The Prince must rule by it, ye subject obey
by it: the husband must govern his wife by it; the wife must yield her
subjection thereby as it prescribes. In it there is for every condition, state
and degree, most perfect instruction, to be taught and learned: then must you
be diligent, herein: Psalm. 1.2. and 119.55.62.148.
day and night did David study therein, whence his wisdom came. If you take
little pains in it, you must look but for little wisdom by it; We must
believe Gods promises for encouragement unto our duties.
you must not look to reap that you do not sow; nor think to sow in vain,
where God says you shall reap. If you spend more time in pleasure and vanity,
you must look for your great fruit and gain in vanity. If you love and
delight more in worldly things then in spiritual, you must count upon the
reward accordingly. It is not possible to be attained, the pleasure and glory
of this life, and the kingdom of heaven: Luke 16.19.
The story of Dives and Lazarus will teach you that most plainly: Dives had
here his pleasure, and Lazarus his pain; but Dives for his pleasure exchanged
torments, and Lazarus his afflictions were turned into heavens joys. The state
of godliness is to suffer: Gal. 6.14.
the state of Christianity, is to be crucified with Christ, Matthew. 16.24
the members must be like their head; and he that will be Christ's disciple
must forsake himself, take up the cross and follow Christ.

And albeit I said before, that the wise, noble, rich, and mighty, were not to
be your rule, (because Gods word does only challenge that peculiar honor)
yet said I not, that amongst these degrees, you should find no examples to
behold and imitate. 1. Cor. 1.
When Saint Paul therefore said, Not many noble, not many wise, etc. he did not
say none of these degrees, as none of the Nobles, wise and learned of the
world, are called and stand for Christ; but not many of these. Some therefore
both have been, and in all ages shall be called, that for nobility shall
equal any; and for riches any; and for learning join with any, and yet truly
profess Christ Jesus. Some about Herod* Luk 8.3. Phli. 4.22. Act. 17.11.
as his stewards wife: some in Neros family; some Nobles of Berea; some
Pharisees, some Counselors, Matthew. 27.57.
Joseph of Arimathea, a good man and a just, with Nicodemus and others; but all
these did submit their wisedoms, nobility, and learning unto the scepter of
Jesus Christ, and were content to be taught by him, what true wisdom is;
Phil. 3.8.
and Paul desired to know nothing but Christ crucified, Gal. 6.14.
wishing God to forbid that he should rejoice in any thing but in Christ Jesus
crucified, by whom the world decayed to him, and he unto the world. What shall
I say unto that cloud of witnesses, Ab^^ham, Isaac, Heb. 11.
Jacob, Moses and the rest, that are mustered in that chapter? Chap. 12.2.
all which endured with Christ the cross and despised the worlds shame, for
their religious, upright, and most holy life, Chap. 11.38.
being persecuted and hated, of whom (yet) the world was not worthy; and whom
(though we now honor) yet did the men of their time most grieuouslie hate and
disdain, as they do any of the godly in this present age. Insomuch, that
though many who now speak evil of the way of truth and the sincere profession
of the Gospel, would say with the Pharisees, Matthew. 23.30.
that if they had lived in their days they would not have been partners with
them in their blood, nor joined with their persecutors in their reproachful
doings: yet, if the case were so, and that they might now live again amongst
them to reprove their wicked ways, and do contrary to their doings; they
would no more spare them, then the godly present. Else, why do they so ill
entreat them, that follow their blessed steps? Or for what is it, that they
that live godly, are so reproched, but for their precise care unto the duties
of godliness? Demand what is the cause they are reproched, and branded with
terms of (suppposed) disgrace? why? forsooth there is nothing (says the
profane scoffer) but preaching and praying and godliness that they account of.
If you come in their company, beware how you swear an oath: for if you do,
you shall be sure to hear of it, before your word be cold. They forsooth will
neither sit down to meat, nor rise from table, but they must have grace, or
it is worth nothing. And they will allow nothing to be done upon the Sunday,
(which they call the Lords day, and they say, it is the Scripture name,) but
what must be for necessity, nor that neither if they could choose. They live
not like other Gentlemen, which yet keep as good houses, as they do; yea,
with good sport at Christmas, with piping and dancing, and carding, The worlds
mirth.
and other Christmas gambols, that men may be merry when they come: with them
there is no such good fellowship nor merriments, but all sadness, and
scripture-talke, singing of Psalms, and reading of chapters, out of S. Paul
and S. Peter, and I know not whence, nor what to make of such a life, which was
not seen in our forefathers days till they came up; enough to make one both
weary and mad (I think) that is not used unto it.

Lo here this is the reproach of religion, and the cause thereof. That if you
wilt not run with the world into the madness, 1. Pet. 4.4.
and profane course thereof, neither be carnally minded with them, nor follow,
nor fashion your self in all vanity like unto them, you are straightway mad
and melancholy; and (as Peter says) therefore speak they evil, yea (as our
Savior says) all manner of evil fals^ly and unjustly; and that for the
things which God highly commands us, Disgrace for the things God most
commands.
men shall be in most disgrace with worldly men. But as S. Peter further
says, they shall give their acccounts for such ungodly speaking, to him that
is ready to judge both the quick and dead at his next appearing. This
therefore must in no wise discourage you, or either of you, out as you have
those worthy lights, of both Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostels, yea, of
Christ Jesus himself, the chief corner stone, with all his godly train the
hundred forty four thousand that stand with him upon Mount Sion, Revel. 14.1.
Psalm. 123.3.
who have suffered (as David says) too much contempt, (as before was said:) So
might I (with ye Apostle) 2. Tim. 1.5.
refer you to the example of your most worthy and worshipful Parents (as S.
Paul quickneth Timothy, with Lois and Eunice, his mother and grandemother)
who, in these very same reproaches, have honored and served the Lord before
you. If therefore the actions of our Ancestors do so much delight us, and are
such a spur to incite and quicken us in common virtues, how much more to
embrace godliness and holy government? And if the parents of our earthly
bodies shall prevail so with us, how much rather the Parents of our eternal
happiness, even the father of Spirits ( Heb. 12.9.
as the Apostle says) should he prevail in his example of holiness, 1. Pet. 1.
Matthew. 5.48.
who thus says, Be ye holy, as I am holy: Be ye perfect, as your heavenly
father is perfect? And if (says Peter) ye call him father, 1. Pet. 1.17.
who without respect of persons judges according to every man's works, pass
the time of your dwelling here in fear. All which, I have the more specially
observed and touched, A stumbling block removed.
that I might remove a stumbling block out of your way. For that many, who
do approve the best things, have yet no courage at all to practice them,
because of the cross; professing (in a sort) they know the truth, but do
(indeed) deny the power thereof. Tit. 1.16. The power of profession is in
practice.
Which power stands not in knowledge alone, but in special and daily
practice, with obedience to the truth. And much more easy will it be for such
as do not know the will of God, and therefore do not obey his will, then for
such as know, and do it not; many stripes belong unto them, as our Savior
says. Whereunto I mean not, but to point with my finger (as it were) that you
may be armed to resist such spiritual cowardlines in the profession of Jesus
Christ his truth, if for your godly life, Spiritual cowardlines.
and religious government, you shall bear reproach: rejoice and be glad
thereof, and lay it upon your shoulder (as Job did, Matthew. 5.11.12. Job.
31.35.36.
or would have done his adversaries book) and it shall become your crown of
glory in the day of your account.

To proceed therefore (and yet briefly withal to go through the sum of this
my slender purpose) this is (but yet) the foundation of present and future
happiness. There must be f^rther building in the work and government of a
family. Simile.
For as the sweetness of music consists in the orderly concent and tuning
of the strings, without which be he never so skillful that plaieth, the
instrument never so good, the strings never so true, there will be no sound of
music: even so, if the stringes and members of a family be set in tune,
every string in his due and proper place, every string in his place keeping his
note and height, Psalm. 133.
then (as David says) is there yt comelines, goodness, and well agreement,
which he resembled to Hermons pleasant and precious dewes, Verse. 2.3.
with that most sweet and sacred savor, which from the Priestly anointing of
Aaron did arise and smell. To this (naturally) we are not (by birth) apt; no
more then the strings of an instrument will of their own nature without art or
skill, fall into tune. Nay, by nature, we are peruer^ers of all good order,
and mean^^ of good concent. Would subjects be under one head or government, if
fear or grace did not compel them? has not nature showed her rebellion in
children against their parents? Let only Absolons story be remembered. 2.
Sam. 15.
Has not families bin subverted, troubled and disordered by husbands ruling
wickedlie, or the wives rebelling disobedientlie? Genesis 4.23.
Let Lamech be an instance for the husbands fault, Genesis 3.
and Euah for the wife. Whereupon most justly they were put under tribute, and
must not be permitted to usurp authority. 1. Tim. 2 22.
I need insiste in no other degrees and societies (as I might, between the
Pastor and his flock, (between whom and them whiles the people are as they
that reform the Priest (as Hoseas says) Hos. 4.4.
and will not follow him, instructing and ruling them from the Lord, how can
there be harmony without confusion to the people to be lulled in their
sins?) It is sufficient that we have examples for my present purpose. If
therefore it be not from nature but from grace, and (as before was declared)
Gods word do contain instruction for all degrees and societies of men, who can
be exempted, or dispensed with to neglect that rule that desires a quiet and
godly life, or would be held guiltless of contrary cause?

A family like to a commonwealth.
A family may be compared unto a commonwealth: wherein, there are diverse
societies and degrees, reciprocally relating, and mutually depending one upon
another. The highest degree or society is between the husband and the wife;
Simile.
and this is as the first wheel of a clock, that turns about all the rest
in order. The next society, is between the Parents and the children. The
third between the servants one with another, and toward all other superiors
in the family. Three societies of a family.
Into these three societies may a family be disposed. As touching the first
and principal society (wherein also principally I purpose to insiste) which
is between your self and your loving Hind or Roe, whom many a time I have
blessed and shall bless (by Gods grace) unto your use and comfort) give me
leave, (as one that can speak by the surest learning) to power forth my mind
mutually to you both; who can tell you, that the Canker unto happiness, and
danger of confusion to a family, is the contention and disagreement of man and
wife.

You will say, The means to avoid contention in a family easy.
how may this be avoided? I answer, very easily, if in time true regard be
had unto mutual duty, without which there can be no comfort, nor that blessing
of happiness which before we spoke of. Nay, (which is more,) to have ye blessing
of God, which is the foundation and cause of all happiness. Gods ordinance must
be preferred before unmeet conditions of peace.
It stands not in what man and wife shall conclude upon, that there may be
peace and quietness, but what order God has prescribed them, to be obeyed in
their places: so that they must look unto Gods wisdom, order, and polity for
oeconomical government, and not what may seem right and good in their own
eyes. And that, Deuteronomy. 22.5.
if the man may not wear woman's apparel, nor the woman man's, how much less
may the one usurp the others dignity, or the other (to wit the husband)
resign or give over his sovereignty unto his wife? but each must keep their
place, their order, and heavenly polity, whereto God has called them. The
husband is made the head, The husband the head, the wife the body. 1. Cor.
11.3.
and the wife resembled to the body: May the head of a body (natural) be
turned downward? can the whole person so continue, and live well in that
state? how unseemly is it? no more can the body politic be in peaceable
or blessed condition, if order be inuerted. A most monstrous thing it was that
the Prophet Esaias complained of when he said, Isay 3.12.
Children are extortioners of my people, and women rule over them. You will say
the Prophet speaks of another case: I know it well: yet does it (and very
well may it) serve, Which is, when men being effeminate, are led (as was
Ahab, and such like) to provoke the Lord.
in any case that is contrary to Gods word to show deformity; but in his
right case most notoriously.

You will say, shall the wife have no government? shall she do nothing but be
idle in the family? I answer, my words yet tend unto no such thing. Then,
why was she taken for a yokefellow? why is her help required, Genesis 2.18.
and she called an helper? Nay, I will say more, a glorious spectacle it may
be, where the wife has the whole government. But with these cautions: that is,
where the wife manageth household affairs, prouidently foreseeing, carefully
disposing, and religiously governing to the honor of her husband. Prou. 31.31.
Else would not Solomon have said (in the description of a virtuous wife) Give
her the fruit of her hands, and let her own works praise her in the gates.
Having before so notably set forth the qualities of a virtuous wife: First of
her grace and obedient faithfulness, she will do him good (says Solomon)
though I know the words of his mother Bathsheba) and not evil all the days
of her life; Verse. 12.
no marvel though he said, Verse. 10.
her price was above the pearls: (mark ye wives the pattern of a wife; and
ye husbands (that are to choose) learn ye to choose a wife:) she will do
him good; [good] shall be the object and subject of her labor; so (you will
say) will many; A perfect good.
but (says he) she will do him good, and not evil, that is, good without
intermixing it with evil, good wholly; good absolutely, good and no evil
with it, to distaine or corrupt it. Michol did some good when she conuaied
away David, 1. Sam. 19.12.
when the house was beset, and his life in hazard; 2. Sam. 6.20.
but how ill beseeming was her evil scoffing at him, when his zeal in Gods
cause did abound and show it self? Many there are that will do good unto
their husbands, Many causes why women may do good unto their husbands, and yet
miss the right cause.
for diverse causes, nature will enforce, self unity and joint partaking in
condition, constrain; desert procure and euince; and many others. But to do
such good, so soundely, so carefully, and that all the life long, as shall be
void of evil, how rare is such a wife? Surely, in comparison of the multitude
of contraries, (whereof some will do but little good for much evil; and some
all evil and no good, such as Solomon describes in his Proverbs, Prou. 12.4.
which by dishonouring of her husband becomes corruption to his bones) I say
in comparison of the multitude of such ungodly and foolish wives which neither
do good to their husbands nor to themselves, such virtuous ones may be said to
be rare and scarce: yet otherwise I could point unto some virtuous paternes (by
conjunction near unto you; and the taste whereof, if nature diuerte not, or
grace (rather) fail not, you may find in due time,) in whom shall shine a
gracious measure of this heavenly virtue. But if by description of quality you
would have me rather speak, and for modesty to insist, asking me where she
is, or who may be found to be such a wife: I will make this answer, she that
indeuoureth (as in that aforesaid description Solomon purtayeth it) she that
labors in her place for her husbands quiet, for his health, for his credit,
for his wealth, for his happiness in his estate more then for her self, and
counts his in all those respects her own: this is she, that does her
husband good, The wives will and desire to do her husband good and not evil,
is her perfection.
and not evil; if withal she abide herein all the days of her life. It is
indeed the will, endeavor, and faithful practice, that is this perfection,
(for other, in any of our duties either toward God, or man, cannot be attained
unto) which here is spoken of: whereunto whosoever she be that indeauoureth,
is that virtuous wife.

Which point (to return again) being positiuely (as a foundation) set down by
Solomon, he forms the rest, her labor how painful, her skill how
excellent, her wisdom how incomparable, her religion how sincere; She opens
her mouth with wisdom, Verse. 26.
and the Law of grace is in her tongue; She ouerseeth the way of her household,
(Lo her government.) and eats not the bread of Idleness: her children rise
up, Verse. 28. Verse. 29.
and call her blessed; her husband also shall praise her, saying, many
daughters have done virtuouslie, but thou surmountest them all, etc. So that it
was not for naught, that before I said it might be a glorious spectacle, to see
the wife sustain the househould government and to manage the affairs
pertaining thereunto. Where I meant not every wife, the foolish and
unprofitable wife, the corruption of her husbands bones and dishonor of his
life, Judge. 14.18.
which becomes an heifer for his adversaries and the vile to plough withal;
but (as I said) with respect of these cautions: 1. That the wife be fit for the
government she undertakes. 2. Being never so fit, with the consent and
refere^ce of her husbands will, taking all her light (as the Moon is said from
the Sun, so she) from her husband, for government and authority, The wife
the husbands lieutenant.
as his Lieutenant under him; and so wisely disposing all to his honor
accordingly. In such a case, The wife governing well becomes an honor unto
the husband.
how great an honor is the wives godly government unto the husband? whiles he
as king to command, yet with love as an husband, shall go in and out, in the
midst of his family? not fearing spoil, whether he be at home or abroad;
nor needing unlawful spoils to maintain his state. As also, how honorable a
service is it in the wife, to depend upon his beck? to advise with her head?
to lean upon his breast? and yet to have the authority to do what she will?
that is, whilst her will is honest, lawful, and to her husbands good, as has
been spoken of.

Can this be counted slavery, or seruill subjection? must there not be in some
subjection? Can al (in a nation be kings? Can all in a family be fathers? can
all be wives? can all be every thing? If the whole body (says the Apostle)
were an ^ie, 1. Cor. 12.17.
where were the hearing? or if all were the ear, where were the smelling? If
therefore in a kingdom, or family, there must of necessity be these degrees,
and that we see men so subject to Princes, that they contentedly delight
therein, and neither count it slauishnes, nor affect above their state (though
some wicked do otherwise) should not the wife look unto the hand of God, The
wife must consider that it is God, who has assigned her unto her subjection.
which made her the wife, and not the husband, the weaker vessel, and not the
stronger? the body, and not the head? to obey, and not to rule? that is, not
to rule without obedience. To grudge hereat, is not against the husband, but
against God withal: to govern otherwise, is not to rule, but to usurp.
Therefore, the Apostle said not, the wife shall not rule, but he said: 1. Tim.
2.12.
I permit not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man. That is
(as under correction I take it) without the husbands consent, will, and
approbation; neither constrained by her shrewdnes, but referred for cause
(voluntarily) to exercise the rule and government of the family. And this is
that I said, or meant before, which communicablie the husband may not dispose
to the wife, though he translate the government of things; namely, the honor of
Headship, to alter, order and direct, as in wisdom he sees cause: which
glory must still shine in his face, as he lives in his family, and not in
hers in his presence; he must still be seen to be the head and husband, and
she may not bear it; which were most uncomely, yea, her very shame and
dishonor, if she weigh it rightly.

Now contrary to all this, one evil sickness I have observed in the experience
of my days, An evil observed amongst men and their wives.
(to speak according to the phrase of Solomon) which I find not the offenders
therein carefully to prevent, though it be the confusion of marriage happiness:
namely, where the husband and the wife are at odds, which of them shall first
begin to perform their duty, that is, A law point between man and wife.
whether the husbands love be the foundation of the wives obedience; or the
wives obedience of the husbands love. The wife will say, Let mine husband love
me as he should, and I will obey him as I ought. The busband he says, Let her
do her duty, and I will love and maintain her. Thus they stand at staves
end, both of them agreeing in general, that joint duty is to be performed of
both, but neither at agreement which shall begin.

Surely, as in all duties, the Apostles counsel is, Romans 12.10.
that in giving honor one should go before another, that is, every member
should strive to give each other the chiefest honor (a note of true love, and
singular humility:) so could I wish that it might never grow to question of
law between man and wife whose is the duty (for foundation) to begin the
work of household government, but for them rather to strive, What should be,
not what is.
who should be most careful of each others good. The husband (in needful
service) should not need to say, Good wife help me herein (I mean in things
evident unto her) but the wife should prevent him with, Good husband let me do
it for you. Neither the wife to say (in like case) I pray husband do this for
me; but he rather to take care to prevent her desire. 1. Cor. 7.23.24
Else what means the Apostle by those words, which of this estate he
utters; The wife cares for the things of the world, how she may please her
husband? And again: The husband cares for the things of this world, how he
may please his wife. Thus they should not strive, unless it were to give
honor (as was said) and to do service, and by love to prevent each other, in
that which love should further one another in, to the benefit of the whole, and
honor of the Lord. And surely where true love reigns indeed, and not a
counterfeit show of love; or where (in faithful love,) either of them are
truly careful of each others good, they shall not need to sue each other at
the law for their right, or complain they have wrong; but as Abraham said to
Lot: Genesis 13.8.9.
Let there be no strife (I pray thee) between thee and me, etc. But if thou will take the left hand, then I will go to the right; or if thou will go to
the right, I will take the left: so quietly would they compound, nay make no
question thereof.

But if there be such, The remedy of the foresaid evil sickness.
as cannot end this controversy without the Law, (as no question there be of
both, unreasonable men and women) men that will rule (like Lamech)
tyrannouslie, and women that will live contentiouslie, to whom the wives will
say: If my husband will love me I will obey him; and such men say, If my wife
will serve me, I will be beneuolent: then this I must say, A doom against the
wife that contendeth.
The wrong and burden will light upon the woman's back. By wrong I mean not
injustice, but as we say in our proverb, the wrong end of the staff will be
her part; that is, it is in vain (in this case) for the wife to strive with
the husband, which is, the weaker with the stronger; the horse (pardon me good
wives to use so base a similitude) the horse (I say) with him that has the
bridle and is able to sit fast.

Concerning which point, if women will bring their case to the Law of Gods word
(which either must rule them here, or else will rule and judge them, most
fearfully elsewhere) they shall find, Reasons why the husband ought to be
superior, and the wife to obey first. 1. Tim. 2.13.
first the man to have the prerogative by these circumstances: 1. By being
called the head, she the body. 2. The man to be first created, and so perfect
(touching creation) without her; though in regard of fellowship, and
procreation (as the Apostle says) Neither is the man without the woman, nor
the woman without the man in the Lord: and therefore he says, that the man
was not made for the woman, but the woman for the man. The punishment of Adam
and Eve for sin.
3. As the woman, (being the weaker vessel) was deceived by the devil, and so
deceived man; so God (calling them both before his judgment seat) arraigned,
Genesis 3.
accused, and condemned both of them, for their fault and sin: Verse. 17.
The man (for his loosenes of government in obeying his wife) was condemned
(not to lose his government, but) to labor and pain, to travail with pain
for food and maintenance: The woman, besides her peculiar pains joined with
his general, 1. Tim. 2.15.
(wherein yet, being patient, she serves God, as an excellent instrument and
handmaide, to store and fulfill his kingdom) I say, besides these joint or
peculiar pains (as to the principal isntrumental cause of Adams misery, for
that she did that, which Satan otherwise could not have done without her) the
Lord over and above condemns her (for tribute) of all obedience to her
husband, The vviues tribute to the husband. Verse. 16.
saying: Thy desire shall be subject to thine husband, and he shall rule over
thee: which words, being so plain and evident, need no exposition in the
world, neither need I to confirm it with many testimonies, which abound in
the Scriptures to this effect and purpose. The sentence must needs be just and
good when God is the Judge.
So that the Lord (not man) decideth this controversy, and subiecteth the
wife, both in desire and will unto her husband, telling them, who shall begin,
who shall lay the foundation, and how the work and building shall arise
thereon. Thus, and thus (says God) it shall be; both desire [to haue] even
desire of good things, and of all things; and will, [or power] to do or
undertake ought, both these (says God) shall be subject to thine husband, and
he shall rule over thee.

Hearken now (my dear friend) here, unto the judgment of the Lord, though I
trust I shall have little cause to speak peculiarly unto you; yea, (to avoid
offense) hearken all ye wives, (or maidens that may be wives) especially you
that fear the Lord, and do take his word to be your guide, Necessary things
to be known for the quiet of married persons.
if you do desire the happy life of Matrimony, behold your condition, know
your place and station, and who has subjected you. If will and desire be taken
from you (touching rule and government) what is left you to use of your own
authority? If therefore you will contend at law about superiority, you are
bid lay down your interest, for God has disposed it unto your husbands, not so
much as to desire any thing or do any thing (as of your selves) but is made
tributarie unto your husbands. The shrewde wife says this is hard.
And from hence (I take it) it came, Prou. 19.13. Contention properly ascribed
to the wife by Solomon.
that Solomon spoke so much, and that so bitterly about the contentions of the
wife, calling them (as by a proper name) the Contentions of the wife; and her
the contentious person, if there be any strife, between her and her husband.
Who, although he spoke of diverse wicked men, and of diverse imperfections of
men; yet never (speaking of the husband) does he call it, the husbands
contention, but the contention of the wife, Prou. 27.15.
comparing her and her contentions to the dropping of an house or gutter:
noting thereby the poor husbands misery that is so matched with a contentious
wife, The poor husbands misery.
as if he stood continually under the dropping of an house: as also noting her
dishonor thereby, where he says, that He which hides her (or would seem to
cover such infirmities) hides the wind: Verse. 16.
that is, is like him that would go about that, that were impossible; and she
is (says he) as the oil in his right hand that utters it self: Verse. 16.
which cannot be concealed, though he would never so feign. Hear ye very
text; Pro. 27.15.16.
A continual dropping in the day of rain, and a contentious woman are alike.
He that hides her, hides the wind, and she is as the oil in his right hand,
that utters it self. In another place thus he has it; A foolish son,
Prou. 19.13.
is the calamity of the father: and the contentions of the wife, are like a
continual dropping, etc.

To this you will object and The wife may not contend by any means. What
contending is.
she must not contend, no not for good things, that is, understanding by
contending that brawling, bickering, and vexing disposition, whereby, as it
were, she will seem to wrestell and wage war, for that which is wanting,
through which, either she constrains his patience, offends his love,
breaks quiet peace, or resists his authority.

Admit (you will say) it be for most necessary duties, as for good government
in the family, for prayer to be performed, for restraint of evil exercises,
or entertainment of godly friends, may she not strive for these things? I
answer, The wife may use persuasion, but not contention.
for these she may entreat; for these she may wisely speak and counsel; for
the reformation of these amiss, she may move friends to persuade: but to fall
out, to braule, to lower, to be sullen and fret, or, (which is a degree worse
(as it is a note above Ela) to scold and speak presumptuouslie, A note above
Ela.
this is beyond her place, it is intolerable contention. The contrary to
which, is contained under those words of the virtuous wives expressed duty:
Prou. 31.26.
She opens her mouth with wisdom, and the Law of grace, is in her tongue.
To open her mouth with wisdom, is not to braule, but to entreat her husband
for things amiss to be redressed: and how contrary is scolding and
contentious words to ye Law of grace?

But you will say, what if all Eccles. 8.3.
(says Solomon) For he will do even what he list. I know the conditions are
very diverse, and unequal in their different degrees; yet this may be drawn
out of the comparison, that as there is no striving with a Prince, because of
his power; so there is (or should be) no contending with the husband (for
whatsoever cause) because of that absolute sovereignty which is in his hand,
he will do whatsoever he list (lawful, honest and indifferent) and she
cannot hinder him. So that look how vain a thing it is, for one to strive
with another, that is bound hand and foot, and cannot wagge a finger; so vain
a thing it is for the wife (who for every thing must depend upon her husbands
will) to strive and wrestle with him. If therefore the things which are to be
obtained or redressed, be to be done by him, and cannot be done by her, The
wife discharged by informing, rather then by reforming.
the burden being his and not hers (she having done her duty by entreaty)
she is discharged, and he stands guilty: he being King, Priest, and Prophet
in his house, he shall answer for it.

2. Quest.
The other question, viz. [whether the wife may do nothing, but the husband may
deny her] must be thus considered. If they be partly of the aforesaid nature,
things indifferent, he may forbid her; or things good and lawful, being
extraordinary and not common duties of religion and Gods service, he may
restrain her; but he does evil (it may be) in it, which is not the question.
My reason of which restraint (or authority) is this, Numb. 30.9.
where Moses says, that if a woman shall vow a vow unto God, if her husband
disallow her the same, in the day that he hears it, he shall make her vow
that she has pronounced with her lips, of no effect. As touching common and
ordinary duties and parts of Gods holy service, as the hearing of his Word,
Prayer, Sacraments, and such like, or shall command her things unlawful or
uncomely, she is not bound to obey herein, neither can he restrain her; or if
he shall do it by violence, she is excused, as one violently hindered from her
duty, and he shall bear the sin: neither may the hazard of his displeasure,
wrath, or offense, The wife must do some duties with hazard of her husbands
displeasure.
be any just excuse, if violently she be not hindered, touching the duties of
Gods service, which with patience she is to bear, and submit her self unto.
But in any case she must not contend, for any cause or matter, The
inconvenience of the wives contending.
which is no way to win, nor means to obtain, but to break peace and unity,
to dissolve love, and make way to al disorder and discontented estate. This is
the best fruit that can come of contention, with either wise or foolish man.
If he be wise, he will not bear it, that is, not bear the losing of his
authority: If he be foolish, he will be more intemperate and not endure it.
Wisely therefore did Abigail in the case of her husbands danger; Abigails
wisdom.
who (not consulting with him, because he was not in case) ventred rather in a
good action to bear some blame, then to omit a needful thing. Surely, if he
had known it, it is probable he would not have consented; which thing,
because she feared and knew he might restrain her will, she did it privily.
So such wives, (as whose husbands are Nabals) have only liberty to do good
without consent, and to hazard blame. But that the husband may restrain if he
be acquainted with their purpose, and they must obey, there is no question.

Let the wife therefore by all means shun the obloquie of a contentious wife,
wherein is so much dishonor, as almost nothing more. For what a shame is it to
a wife, to be compared to a dropping house? or to have a corner in a house top
(for a man to live alone in) yea, or the very wilderness to be preferred before
her? therefore in the Proverbs he says, Pro. 21.9.19.
that It is better to dwell in the corner of the house top, then with a
contentious woman in a wide house: And again; Verse. 19.
It is better to dwell in the wilderness, then with a contentious and angry
woman. A woman's disgrace.
Oh how ill beseeming is it, the chaste, sober, modest, and amiable face of a
loving and virtuous wife, to fret, lower, skowle, scold, braule, or be unquiet
toward her husband? if such saw their faces then in a glass, it would make
them love the practice of such behavior the worse for ever.

On the contrary side, if they did but know what fetters, bonds, and
persuasions, their kind and dutiful behavior were unto very foolish (much
more to wise and godly) husbands, for obtaining of their wills, in things
lawful and necessary, they would never fall into a contentious humor, but by
kindness overcome. A similitude of the vvinde and the Sun.
The wind and the Sun may be similitudes, in this case to set forth the
effect hereof. It is said, they once contended, who should have the victory to
make a Traveler cast off his cloak: the wind began (after his ruffling
manner) to blow with strength: then more strongly: after that with violence,
as though he would carry away man and all: but the more he threatened, the
faster the said traveler held his cloak about him, neither could the wind by
his ruffling get victory. The Sun by warmth and fair demeanes, sets upon
his task; who, not at first prevailing, increased his warmth, till at length,
not only it caused him to cast off his cloak, but his coat and doublet too.
So verily, if wives did know how unsavory their ruffling courses of
contentions are unto husbands hearts, Though kind and dutiful persvvasion
will not prevail, yet must contention needs be the vvorst, though by it she
should prevail, because it is no honest mean appointed of God. Mark 6.21.
Hest. 5.
and how much their amiable, loving, and patient persuasions, are more likely
(if ought at al) to take place with the^, not only to get victory of the
cloak, but of coat and al, and wisely watching their times and seasons (as
Herodias did, though in a bad cause) but indeed as Queen Hester did in a
better and good cause) they would surely abhor and abandon their windy
course, and wholly cleave unto the way of wisdom. They are therefore more
then foolish (for even that name the Scripture gives unto indiscreet both
women and men) I say they are more then foolish women, Job. 2.10. Prou. 14.1.
that cannot say with themselves, if I cannot obtain by gentle and moderate
means, I shall never prevail by unlawful means: for verily contending is
merely unlawful; not only (as I have said) an unlikely, but an unlawful
course.

Thus you see (I trust) this point most evident, that by no means the wife may
contend, no not for things lawful. A wise man's saying, if wives would believe
it.
Well (as one says) the cause of contention may be in the husband, but the
fault of contending, is surely in the wife. The husband may be foolish and
wicked (as Nabal was;) and therein give occasion (or cause) to a contentious
nature, but the wife must avoid it, as Abigail did, who wisely prevented the
evil, but brawled not for his folly. Let this rule be observed, and there
shall be no contention.

But when this advice in the wife is no more regarded, (then in many it is) and
that the order of Gods decree is so violated, Genesis 3.16.
is it any marvel, if there be contention between man and wife? Nay rather
it were a wonder, if there should be peace: for whereas the Lord has invested
the husband with the authority and headship, will any lose this authority, and
resign it preposterouslie? will he lose his liberty, and cast his scepter to
the ground? The wife in usurping authority crucifieth her husband, as it is
said of S. Peter, with his heels vpvvard.
will he be nailed to ye cross, with his heels upward? I deny not (much
less justify) the husband to be in cause oftentimes, of disunitie and
contention, when he shall be careless of necessary and godly duties,
improuident, unthrifty, froward, rigorous, and worse then all this, yet still
(as has been proved) the contentions are the wives, and the fault of
contending will light on her vnanswerablie, because she is subjected unto a
tributary estate, being made for the man, and he made her head. She being the
cause of all his misery, When husbands are froward, vviues must remember
that they were the original cause thereof in them.
if she bear any misery by means of his indiscretion, she must look unto
the original thereof, which first sprang in her self; whereas for a man to
transgress that has the prerogative, and is, as it were, the king and chief
governor of the family, for him to say with Lamech (though I say not
justifiable) I would slay a man in my wound, and a young man in mine hurt; Genesis
4.23.
yet is it not so monstrous or intolerable, or to be wondered at: though the
duty and benevolence, thus (with Lamech) to terrify, and fear the wife, be
thereby wounded and discouraged; yet is not the order of Gods ordinance so
inuerted and overthrown as in the former disobedience and contention of the
wife.

Al which, I speak not to oppress the wife, as shall appear (my dear
friend) in the matter subsequent, and therefore do I crave your patience unto
the very end) but to enforce the evil of contention, by discovering the cause
and fault thereof; that by wisdom it may be prevented, or with speed removed:
which being absolutely (I mean the fault of contending) in the wife, she must
of necessity take care to remove it, or bear the blame thereof.

Neither yet is it a vile estate, whereunto the wife is thus subjected (as
partly has bin showed) (though her will and desire be both captiued) neither
yet the ^ight way for her to relieve her self, if the burden be too heavy to
contend for ease: For, as the husband may lawfully (if he will) impart his
authority with his wife, (which who so does not is not wise, if his wife be
virtuous and fit to use it) so yet it behooves her to take the best course to
obtain and win it. Now contending (as has been proved) is absolutely denied
her: what then may compass it? Surely her subjection shall get her government,
True subjection the right way to rule.
and her obedience rule; the more subject, the greater power shall she
obtain; and the more humble in her obedience, the more liberty shall she win.
If therefore there were not an evil spirit, and a corrupt nature to blind the
wife, rather with the wind to contend by force for her will, then patiently
with the sun to gain it by virtue and diligence, they might much more
prevail for rule and government then by the war of contention, Contention
consumes love.
which consumes love. I will give that by entreaty, which by constraint I
will not; and remit a debt, Matthew. 18.26.
if the debtor crave patience, whereas if he be insolent, he may rot in prison
for it: why then do not wives consider this, that virtue, rather then violence,
submission then contention, refusing then usurping, patience then stubbornnes,
will more prevail for peace in their fellowship, and liberty to their will,
then al their crossing inventions can euince and conquer? But what if no grace
or virtue will prevail? to whom then are they subject, if the husband be
unreasonable? is it unto man, or unto God? I say unto God, The threefold
pledge: 1. To love, 2. To cherish, 3. To obey.

and unto his ordinance, to whom she swears obedience in the marriage knot.

Now out of all this (dear friend) I shall need no great exhortation unto
you, to embrace this wisdom, seeing the course I prescribe, is not only the
evidence of the word of God, but in all sense and reason both the easiest the
faithfullest, and most honorable for the wife; yea, of both good and bad it is
most commendable, except some rare woman for wickedness that excels other.
For, was there ever commendation given to Sarah, above her obedience? of whom
the holy Ghost says, 1. Pet. 3.6.
That she obeyed her husband, and called him Lord: whose meek and quiet
spirit (opposed to the contentious spirit) the Apostle says, Verse. 4.
is a thing much set by of God; Whose daughters (says he again) ye are
whiles ye do well, Verse. 6.
not being afraid with any terror. Or is there a more odious reproach unto a
wife (whoredom set aside, which dissolues the knot; how much more then when
whoredom and contention are met in one?) I say, is there a more shameful
reproach unto the wife, then to be Salomons contentious woman, of whom we
spoke before? Prou. 6.33.
there can be no greater (that everlasting blot excepted), for that it
overthrows the virtue of the wife; proves her to have neither meek nor
quiet spirit, but froward, insolent and contentious. Which meeknes and
quietness, if it be as the Apostle avouched, a thing of God so much set by, then
needs must frowardnes and contention be unto him most detestable; and so
consequently, that which is so odious to God, and so offensive to man (as to
stand under the dropping of a gutter), must needs be a devilish nature and a
reproachful quality. Prou. 12.4.
But (says Solomon) the virtuous wife is a crown to her husband, she will
do him good and not evil, Prou. 31.12.
and that not a day, or twain, but, in an unwearied course, all the days of
her life: give her therefore the fruit of her hands, and let her own works
praise her in the gates.

Now in all the subjection that I have spoken of in the wife, I have meant no
seruil subjection or duty, but duty with a kind of equality, and equality
with reverence. For the duty, Obedience according to degree.
or word of obedience is very large and general, and must be considered
according to his degree. There is the servants duty; the sons duty, and the
wives duty. The sons differs from the servants duty, because the servant
abides not in the house for ever, whereas the son (being heir) shall
inherit and abide. His obedience is with love, the servants with fear. The
wives duty (or obedience) also differs from the sons, and is by degree
more excellent, in yt it is graced and seasoned with a kind of equality, being
fellow heirs (as Peter says) or heirs together of ye grace of God; 1. Pet.
3.7.
to who^ the holy Ghost there commands honor, (as to the weaker vessel)
that is, by honor he means tender regard, as not to provoke, or discourage,
but as a vessel (so profitable for use) and as the weaker vessel, so with
wisdom to be governed. And this puts a difference also, and exceeds the
sons obedience, in boldness, in kindness and in equality. 1. Cor. 7.4.
The husband (says the Apostle) has not power over himself, but the wife: so
then the wise has that interest, in, and over the husband, (the faithful and
dutiful wife I mean) which neither the servant nor son can require, nor the
husband impart with any other.

Hitherto (you will say) I have wholly, as it were, entreated of ye duty of
the wife. And you will further say, I have laid load upon their shoulders, who
are the weaker vessels, longing, it may be, to hear the duty of the husband
in like sort set forth, to see what bonds he is to be tied withal in his
conversation to his wife. It is true, that the further our duties are
discovered unto us, the more grievous and tedious it does seem unto us; each
delighting to hear rather the others duty, then their own and proper duty;
the husband is pleased when ye wives duty is extended to the uttermost, and
the wife likewise, when the husbands is enlarged; It is a good token of a good
spirit to delight in the ^earing of our own duties especially.
but this is no good sign either of a good husband, or a virtuous wife. The
better husband, the more he delights to see and understand, both the
properties of the good husband, that he may the better follow them, and the
qualities of the bad husband, that he may avoid them: The good wife likewise
has her eyes bent to the things that may be excellent, that her obedience may
be perfect, caring altogether what is her own duty, and not what is her
husbands. For whiles men and women are thus intent, and do cast their eyes on
others, rather then upon themselves, it is not possible they should be so
careful of their own duties as they ought to be. Let the wife therefore
desire nothing of the knowledge of her husbands, but of her own, nor the
husband of his wives duty, but of his own; nor any man of his neighbors
duty, but of his own. That is, not simply, but in comparison.
Think it too long that thou hear another man's duty described, and thine
own deferred, and delight in the enlarging of thine own, and with the sight
of thy defects, that thou may abound in the knowledge of thine own
obedience, and leave other men's burdens to their own shoulders. Oh, say some,
Vain men's profiting.
(when they have heard a sermon), such a note touched such a man to the quick,
he was not better met withal a good while. But not a word touched himself,
for that he let slip and flee over his head, as an arrow shot beyond him. This
is not well, that we cast the wallet of our own sins behind us, and hang other
men's sins before; look unto other men's duties, and neglect our own.

But that I have somewhat tarried upon this point, of the cause of contention
between man and wife, or laid forth the wives duty of subjection and
obedience somewhat largely, has not been to oppress the wife, or to put a
sword into the hand of the husband to vpbraid his wife with her duty; but
partly to inform all godly and virtuous wives, All good wives desire to know
their duties to the uttermost.
what is honorable or dishonorable in them, which none that are virtuous, but
do desire to see; and principally to lay a sound foundation for the husband to
build upon. Which being thus laid, you shall now see what the building will
arise to be.

Certainly, it cannot but be a most strong attractiue, and effectual mean, to
draw from the husband, 1. Cor. 7.3.
that due beneuole^ce which Gods word enioyneth him, were he a very Nabal, 1.
Sam. 1.
much more (an Elkanah) an husband of wisdom and understanding. We read of
no contention between Nabal and Abigail; though he were said (and doubtless
not without cause both by his servants and his wife (she being especially
constrained by his own safety to say it) being said (I say) to be so churlish
and wicked, 1. Sam. 25.17.
that one could not speak unto him: the cause, or reason whereof, is not to be
doubted, to be in the virtue and wisdom of his wife: who observing his
nature, and waighing her own place, took always opportunity of time to
contriue her affairs. When she had met David, and pacified his wrath, did she
presently run with hue and cry unto her husband? did she charge him with
his folly, and churlish nature? you know she did not, but waited till he were
fit to be informed thereof. 1. Sam. 25.36.
The very text says, that when she came to the feast, and found him so well
tipled and merry, she told him nothing, more or less, not one word or
inkeling (as we say) until the morning. And what then? only she related the
danger, without note of any reproof or contention, only to make him (as I
conceive) the wiser against another time. A note to be remembered.
And surely it were a very gracious and godly care both in wives toward
their husbands, and likewise again in husbands toward their wives, to observe
and weigh the natures each of other; and to take opportunity and fitnes of
time to speak each to other of such things, as each would obtain at others
hands. If the husband be of an angry or choleric nature, is it any more for
the wife, then to bear, as it were, a flash of heat? which, when the husband
observes (as verily he is a fool that could or would not note such a virtue
in his wife) it would not only be a mean the more speedily to quench ye
heat, but to make double satisfaction afterward with love and kindness. But if
in the heat and flame she shall power in her oil of frowardness and
contention, in stead of the water of patience and pacification, is it any
marvel or wonder, if the house be set on fire?

The husband also must not disdain to be counseled by his wife, to hear her
reasons, and to weigh her words. Eccles. 4.9.
For she is given for an helper, two are better then one; and God (many times)
reueales that to the wife, that he does not to the husband. Genesis 21.12.
Abraham hearkened to Sarah in ye matter of Hagar and Ismael; he was bid of the
Lord to give ear unto her. And did not Manoahs wife strengthen him, after the
sight of the Angel and the sacrifice which he had offered, who feared that
they should die because they had seen the Lord? which fear she put away with
a most wise reason, saying: If the Lord would kill us, Judge. 13.23.
he would not have received a burnt offering, and a meat offering at our
hands; neither would he have showed us all these things, nor would have told
us any such, etc. And what is that honor that S. 1. Pet. 3.7.
Peter speaks of, which the husband (being a man of understanding) should
give unto his wife, but (amongst other things) regard unto her advice? always
provided that she counsel not as did Iobes wife, Job. 2.9.
to bless God and die: nor with Michol disdain at his zeal, and godliness;
but counselling wisely, she is as a counselor to be heard and honored. Neither
comes Salomons counsel short of this, when he bids the husband to give
his virtuous wife the fruit of her hands, that is, being wise, virtuous and
provident, let her be commended and trusted for such a wife. And put case
there be not to be found all those absolute qualities of that virtuous wife,
in her whom thou have chosen to be thy wife, but some infirmities, A rule for
the husband to bear with the wives infirmities.
(yea many infirmities,) to bear with hers (as it becomes the wise husband
to do) consider thine own that she must, and does bear with in thee: if
thine be more then hers, thou can not be grieved to bear hers; if hers be
more then thine, she is said to be the weaker vessel, and thou the stronger,
that the bigger horse might bear the heavier load. Bear with the homelines
of the similitude.
Why has God made thee the stronger but to bear the frailties and infirmities
of thy wife? for a man the wives, or a wife the husbands, for either (I mean)
to discover others infirmities (by way of reproach) is the greatest reproach that
can fall to either. Except it be in such a case, as wherein Solomon says her
corruptions cannot be hid: Prou. 27.16.
but He that would hide them, hides the wind, and she is as oil in his right
hand that utters it self. The husband must dwell with his wife as a man of
understanding, 1. Pet. 3.7.
that is, as one that has understanding so to govern, that he give not
occasion by foolishnes to be despised, nor by overmuch severity to be hated or
feared.

That care, which before I observed, that the husband and wife should duly
mark each others disposition and nature, ought especially to begin betimes in
the^. For (if for want thereof) they fall once unto contention, and each by
contention, to take dislike of other, it will grow (without great grace) in
either, or both, unto hardness of heart; and then another kind of marking each
others nature will ensue: Namely, not to prevent evil or contention, but to
devise evil and contention; and so this counsel and remedy come to late.
Prou. 17.14.
Therefore does Solomon give this counsel, where he compares the beginning of
strife to be like one that opens the waters, that is, makes a breach into a
bank or bay of waters; therefore says he, Or ever contention be meddled with,
leave off. Verse. 14.
If this do hold in common contentions and of any nature, much more in this
civil and household strife. It is wisdom sometimes to seem guilty in some
cause, Great wisdom to seem guilty sometimes for a season, where one is
guiltles.
either the wife toward the husband, or the husband toward the wife, during
the time of wrath, if it be once kindled or inflamed, and to pacify rather by
entreating then excusing or clearing: for which, opportunity of time cannot
but afterward be found to clear, and which cannot but be perceived to be done
by great wisdom.

A special duty in the husband.
It is certainly a great encouraging of the wife, where the husband makes his
love to appear by sound effects: showing that he regards her duty,
observes her labor, pitieth her pains, considers her weakness, and would
lighten her yoke and burden, by any means he could; that he trusts her, and
is not lightly or unjustly jealous of her: not exacting too narrow an account
of her domestical affairs, but as if she were himself, who is indeed become
one with himself, his half self or other self; eue^ so to be persuaded of her
truth and faithfulness. Prou. 31.29.
Many daughters have done virtuouslie, but thou (says Solomon) surmountest
them all: There the husband observes the labors, trauails, night-watchings,
and early risings of his wife, which were spoken of before) and lastly does
crown, and commend them in her. The contrary neglecting of all the poor
wives travail, takes away her heart, breeds coffeehouse, and makes
weak her hands: and for either the wife over the husband, or ye husband over
the wife, to be attainted with yt filthy sin of jealousy, Beware of causeless
jealousy.
is ye next way to cause either to fall into the sin.

It is an hard task, to meet with all the inconveniences of the marriage
state, or to apply preuentions to all the evils that may be feared therein,
which S. Paul's words imported, when (having said, [such shall have tribulation
in the flesh] he added withal, but I spare you. 1. Cor. 7.28.
I spare to relate all the dangers that I could. But surely ^he most principal
mean to pre^ent them, is the observing of the ^rdinance of God: and the
gene^all cause of evil unto man and wife, is, (as has bin said) the inuerting
of the same. If the husband rule with love, and the wise obey with
cheerefulnes, and either of them be contented with their lot and portion in
each other, then must the yoke needs go easy. But if the wife will usurp, and
not acknowledge her head and king, or will not use the fittest means for her
rule and liberty; or having what she would, cannot (or will not) use it to
her husbands honor, and thus lay a foundation of contention and strife, Gods
wisdom is despised, it cannot be well.

Whereupon I do exhort you both (as my most dear friends, whom as I daily
pray for, so would I be glad to see the fruits of my prayers in the happiness
of your estate) I say, I do exhort you unto those mutual duties which concern
you both. You (Mistress Lucie) to wise subjection, to loving, and Christian
reverence, to faithful and dutiful obedience: which shall not only be your
crown of glory amongst the godly wise, as it was Sarahs commendation by the
holy Ghost to be obedient to her husband; but if you desire to rule and to be
trusted with all your husband has, this is the way, and there is no other. If
you thus say, give me the sword, you shall have both it, and all assistance to
use it; but if you will strive to wrest it out of your husbands hand, you will
not only miss your desire, but take hurt by striving. Thus your godly
subjection shall gain you more liberty, ease, honor, and lawful government,
then all the contention in the world can bring to pass: and hate both the name
and nature of a contentious wife; remember she is, as an incureable dropping,
and intolerable. Besides, to rule a family with the husbands assignement, is
a great honor to the wife: but to bear sway against his will and favor, no
greater shame. Such wives are scoffed at, as their husbands masters, and such
husbands esteemed but unwise and foolish.

And you (Master Geruoyse) as my dear friend, I counsel unto the
understanding of a man of wisdom. 1. Pet. 3.7.
Know your wife to be a vessel, therefore necessary; I will not say (as one
says) a necessary evil, for I trust she shall be that virtuous wife, that
shall do her husband good and not evil, all the days of her life; but I doubt
not to say, a necessary vessel for fruit unto Gods glory; a vessel, when
you are full of sorrows, to help bear them, and ease you. A vessel, to
contain your counsels, and instructions, Judge. 14.18.
and not to be ploughed with, by any adversary, but as a faithful bulwark
against all adversaries. Yet being withal the weaker vessel, she must be
tendered accordingly. Our most precious vessels, (whether glass or gold) are
commonly the weakest, by reason, either of nature, or workmanship, and those
we most precisely order, not roughly, or carelessely. To a virtuous woman,
there is no vessel, no jewel comparable; count her therefore the cheifest
vessel in your house that must contain your self and all your treasures. Her
price, Prou. 31.10.
says Solomon, is above the pearls; show not your rough and manlike courage
(like Lamech) to your wife, but to your enemy. You are both but one, therefore
be both but as one. Look not so much what is required of her, as what is due
to her from your self. Genesis 20.16.
You are the covering of her eyes, which must defend her, not oppress her. She
is of godly, wise, and worshipful stock and parentage; her years have been
seasoned hitherto with the salt of godly education; and therefore the fitter
for your wisdom to work upon; make you the work perfect, and you shall have
both the honor and the comfort of the work. To be brief, what is wanting in
her, (years being considered) that may derogate from the title of a virtuous
wife? this I speak to you, not to her, ^ishing my words to be esteemed as
far from flattery, as mine heart is from hypocrisy in that I speak. You are
both in the fittest time to begin an happy estate; lay therefore the
foundation according to Gods holy word, and the building shall be glorious.
Let that be the rule of both your duties, and know that God is most wise in
directing both your states.

Thus whiles you both regard the duties of your several places, jointly
toward ye Lord first, then mutually toward one another, how easy will the
burden of your family and callings be unto you? the equal draught, makes y^
bur^hen light. What an example will (...) be to servants, to children, to
^eighbours, to friends, yea to all ^en, to be followed and commen^ed? So that,
Matthew. 6.33.
you first seek the ^ingdom of heaven and the righ^eousnes thereof, the glory
of your God, in a religious profession of ^is name, all other things, (as
wis^ome, understanding, riches, and ^rue pleasures) shall be cast upon ^ou.
You shall be most happy first (...) this present life, and more happy ^boue
happiness in ye life to come. Which is the scope of this my ^ender labor and
duty unto you ^oth: slender I call it, for so it is: and my duty I do
acknowledge (...), for diverse causes which I will ^mi^. I profess ever
plainenes and truth, not eloquence or deep know^d^ge in any of my writings. And
^o I commend you both to the be^efit of all instruction, and al unto Gods glory
in Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.

