HEAVENLY Meditations UPON THE PVBlicans Prayer:

Luke. 18. 13. O God, be merciful to me a Sinner. AT LONDON, Printed by I. R.
for John Flasket. 1606.

blazon or coat of arms of Henry Wallop and Elizabeth, daughter of Richard
Corbet of Morton-Corbet
To the right Worshipful, my worthy and honored Patron, Sir Henry Wallop,
Knight, high Sherieffe of Shropshiere, and to the virtuous Lady Elizabeth his
wife.
AS Christian modesty, (right Worshipful) moved a Divine (I make no
question) the Author hereof, not only to conceal his Name, but also to cease
from setting forth any thing in the praise of that, which of right deserves
to be commended: So Christian justice and equity, which wills us to give to
every thing his due, would not suffer me to let that pass without some
commendation, whereunto I am not able sufficiently to give any. But
considering, that slightly to commend a thing, were the next way to dispraise
it, except withal it were shrouded under the patronage of some worthy person:
and thinking it unmeet to let that go like an Orphant abroad, which had a
Father at home, I presumed to commit unto your Worships patronages, not a bare
Laurel, which of it self for the greenenesse (when other be withered) may
seem to be accepted, but the same decked and adorned with most Heavenly
Meditations: So that as I think, if your Worships were presented with a
material Laurel, (wherein besides natural greenness, were but this necessary
use, that it could defend you in your Garden from the heat of the Sun) you
would accept, if not of the gift, yet the good will of the giver: So relying my
self upon your accustomed favor and clemency, I hope you will afford some
favorable acceptance hereof: for herein is not that greenenes, which
consisting of natural qualities, must then wither when all things have their
ending, according to their nature, but the flourishing green promises of the
covenant of God, which (as GOD himself) last always immutable, and
unchangeable. Here are not the beautiful leaves of a material tree, which
delight only the outward sight, but a most familiar view of GOD himself in
Christ, even to the delight of the soul, and the inward comfort of the spirit,
which take pleasure only in heavenly things. To conclude, here you are not
shrouded from the heat of the Sun, but shall find most cool shade from the
parching heat of sin: from which, as in duty I am bound, I will pray that
God in this life shield and defend you both, and in the life to come, grant
you everlasting rest.

Your Worships most bounden and dutiful Orator. T. F.

HEAVENLY Meditations.
O God be merciful to me a Sinner. CHrist our precursor into Heaven, even to
his last breath not unmindful of his little-little flock, did as Abraham Gene,
25, 1, Reg, 2,
unto Isaac, as David unto Solomon, as Tobias unto Tob, 4.
his son, bequeath unto them, a few small hours before his glorification,
his best and principal legacy, Eternal life; confirming it unto them in his
last and latest prayer, made for his Apostles; This is life eternal, that they
know John, 17,
thee to be the only very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. That we
know Rom, 11,
him, quis et qualis est, who he is, and what he is? who he is, a quo, in quo,
per quem sunt omnia. The principal and singular essence, from whom, by whom,
and in whom all things were created, all things are preserved, all things
shall be resolved; what he is, to wit, Zanch. li. 3. de Not. Dei. que. stio. 3.
Sapientissimus, qui sciat; Potentissimus, qui possit; amantissimus, qui velit
suos seruare. Great in wisdom, and therefore knows, powerful in strength,
and therefore can, plentiful in love, and therefore will crown those with
eternity, which he knows; know those everlastingly, which he loves; love
those most tenderly, which know and acknowledge him. By his knowledge he will
rule, by his strength defend, by his love, love all, that know and acknowledge
him; that know him after a long and earnest seeking him, and acknowledge him,
by a most gracious and happy finding him; seeking him among their miseries,
finding him in his mercies; seeking him in the crowde and press of their
sins, finding him in the top of his Cross, in the large promises of
salvation; Seeking him in finding themselves, finding him in seeking themselves.

For as we desire to find God, so we must endeavor to seek our selves; so
true it is there must be cognitio nostri, before there can be agnitio Dei; a
quest, and inquisition made about our selves, before we can reach the
knowledge of him that made us; for God being as he is summum genus, not used to
definition, not subject to description, must be shadowed per posteriora,
because he has not priora, he being primum principium, the primarie cause,
and principal ground of every principle, yea that principiu^ principorum, that
illimmited, wonderful, and unsearchable Alpha, must be Apoc, 1.
comprehended and known to his effects, principiorum non est querenda Ratio,
It is mere dotage in Philosophy to search out causes of principles when as
they are principles. They have not precedent causes, and therefore Boethius
gives this cannon, Sires a prioribus per causas demonstrari non possunt, a
posteribus per effect a explicari debent, those things that borrow not their
proof and demonstration, from forerunning causes, their bearing and luster,
must be derived from their effects.

Since then God in regard of beginning is incomprehensible, and void of all
demonstration a priore, to declare his quid est, man's frailty must labor to
know him a posteriorae, Romans 1.
by his effects and works. For invisibilia Dei per ea quae fact a sunt
conspiciuntur, the invisible wisdom and power of God, is seen by the
creation of the world, and if any creature, the perfect art of Gods
omnipotency, may be comprehended, yet in nothing more then in man, upon who^
he set the stamp of his own Image. Man therefore must know him a posteriore,
that is, first he must know himself, for man is his workmanship; then know
God as he is his Maker; first know himself, with the eye of Experience, and
then know God with the eye of Co^templation. First know himself, poor in
misery, and then know God, rich in mercy; first know himself sub iugo Mundi,
groaning and backbroken under the yoke of sin; and then know God, sub iugo
Christi, easing and refreshing the heavy laden sin; First know himself,
Mancipium mortis, Deaths freehold and possession, and then know God, Victoriam
mortis, the bruser and breaker of the Serpents head; Gene, 3,
first know himself, lucerna aduentum, the weak subject of all mortality,
and then know God in the donation of his Spirit, the earnest penny of man's
immortality. 2, Cor, 1,
He must know Quid est, that he is a too-soone borne, and no long living
creature, cum quibus est, that he is coupled with famine, with thirst, with
heat, with cold, with infirmity, with death; cui similis est, that he is
like to snow, quick come, and quickly gone; like to a Rose, at morning fair,
at evening withered. He must know, Vnde venit, from whence he is, vbi est,
where he is, quo vadit, whether he will; whence he is, and then blush for
shame; where he is, and then lament with groans; whether he will, and then
tremble with fear: blush for shame at his naked nativity; lament with groans
at his worldly entertainment; tremble with fear at his doutfull end; blush for
shame that he is become flesh, and therefore far from God; lament with
groans that he is in the world, and therefore wide of heaven; tremble with
fear, that he must die, and therefore obuious to the jaws of hell: to be
brief, he must know himself, intra et extra, a tergo et front, a dextris,
a sinistris, vndique, within and without, behind and before, on this side, on
that side, on every side; before him his perverse and overthwart will, to that
which is good; behind, his sweet and pleasing remembrance, to that which is
bad; on this side lack of patience in adversity, on that side, too much pride
and haughtines in prosperity; on every side, vulnera a peccato inflicta,
wounds, and nothing but wounds, imprinted and stamped into his soul and flesh
by the custom of sin. And then he shall find, God above him powerful,
beneath him plentiful, before him watchful, behind him wonderful, on this
side bountiful, on that side careful, on every side merciful. Merciful in
forgetting, merciful in forgiving sins. That Manuscript in the Temple of
Delphos, Gnothi Plut. in Coloten. Tom: 3.
seamton, was so powerful among the heathens, that the deep learned Doctors
deemed Seipsos noscere, the only pathway to perfection: And therefore
Heraclitus for superstition a Heathen, for profession a philosopher, on a time
triumphing (as it were) with himself, how he had spent the day, cried out,
Quaesiui meipsum, Plu. ibid.
the honor of the vvellspent day is this, I have sought my self. And Socrates
was such a pugill in the Castle of knowledge, such a labourer in the art of
Seeking, that Colotes the Epicure called himself fool, because he spent so
much time in this one study, but non fuit Socrates siultus, Plut. ibid.
seipsum querens. Socrates says Plutarch, did not deserve the name of fool in
this inquiry, and privy search of his own infirmity, cum sit hoc cognitu^
necessarium inventus difficilimu^, seeing of all knowledge, this only is most
necessary, and of learning the most difficult. Difficile est, etc. It is an
hard thing, says Chilo, to be tongue tide in secrecy, to dispose the time
rightly, to suffer Diog. la: in vit. eius
injuries patiently: and difficile, it is a hard thing, says Pittacus, Id: in
vit. eore.
to be a good man: and as Bias, Difficile est, it is a hard thing to tolerate
adversity with quietness.

But if Thales Difficile may go current, Difficile est homini seipsum noscere,
I may add, difficilimum est, The hardest lesson that a man can learn, is to
know himself, Quid enim Stella de cont: mu^di: lib. 3. cap: 14.
prodest scire arts liberales, sic licet Doctor in omnibus nisi cognoscas
teipsum, what is the style of maistership in Arts? what is the height of
doctorship in faculties? Yet thy knowledge wants of her perfection, if thou
want perfectly to know thy self. Scientiainflat, knowledge puffs up, but
self knowledge pulls down. 1, Cor, 8,
Knowledge is so far wide of true knowledge, that in ignorance of GOD it
cries with Pharaoh, Exodus 5,
Quis est Deus vester? but self knowledge, plunged in the depth of his own
knowledge, aspireth to know the true knowledge of God, and Exodus, 18
with Iethro, confesses Dominus mayor Dijs omnibus: the Lord is greater then
all Gods: knowledge mounteth upon the wings of pride, boasts Esaias.
with Lucifer, ascendam in Coelum, I will make the stars my foote-stoole, but
self knowledge covered with the veil of humility, falls down Job, 1, 20
with Job, and worshippeth. Knowledge hippocriticallie devoted, runs a pace
to the Temple, and as the Pharisie, fills the Temple with a Non Luke, 18,
sunt sicut alij, but self knowledge, not hasty in pace, not multiloquious in
words, keeping time in going, observing a mean in speaking, at one stroke
with the Publican, breaks up the Chest of his heart, and Sub forma pauperis,
sub forma peccatoris, in the habit of a sinner, craves; O God be merciful to
me a sinner.

All men, says Aristotle, by Metaph. Lib. 1.
nature covet knowledge, and that itching desire of Eve, as soon as she was
out of the shell, testifies no less, when for the hope of Sciens bonum et
malu^, for the hope of much knowledge, she lost herself in ignorance,
swallowing as she thought, the bait of knowledge, which turned in the end,
the baine of ignorance. Yet if knowledge suffer a difference, and men bear
more then an indifferent mind unto it, there is none more pleasing, none more
profitable, the^ this self knowledge; pleasing in respect of GOD, profitable
in respect of man. It is that Astronomical Ladder of Jacob, Gene, 28,
that reaches from earth to heaven; from man's earth-buried heart, to the
contemplation of heavenly motions: that Geometrical squire, that squareth
Psalm, 39
out man at a span length, and then measures God, the Alpha and Omega, which
fills heaven and earth; that Arithmeticall kallender of man's age, that first
declares his time to be threescore years and ten, and then with Moises
ascends the mount, to take a suruay of Gods Eternity.

Quo magis noueris teipsum, Stella de con: mu^di: lib. 3, cap. 13.
eo perfectius cognoscere Deum, the deeper thou wadest into this self
knowledge, the nearer thou shall ariue to GOD himself. It shall be more then
Thomas his Credo, to conceive Ioh, 20,
God inwardly, then to thrust thy finger into his side. It shall be more then
the Centurions Math, 27,
testimony, Vera filius Dei erat hic, to acknowledge him in thy heart, then
before the multitude to confess him with thy lips. It shall be more then
Simeons Nunc dimittis, to Luke, 2,
take hold of him in troubled spirit, then to embrace his infancy in the
flesh. It shall be more then Phillips Sufficit, to Ioh, 14,
view him in thy self, then to behold him in the heavens.

Nec te quesiueris extra, look not on the superficies and outside of thy
self, says the Poet, Persius. Satyr. 1.
but rather let thy conscience be thy looking glass, whereby thou may dress
and attire thy self fit for heaven; that will tell thee how to get vestem
nuptialem, the wedding robe, by innocence of life: that will teach thee how to
put it on by a lively says; that will tell thee what thy progenitors have
been; that will teach thee what thy state is now; that vvil tell thee histories
of Adam; that will tell thee lessons of thy self; that will tell thee Adam
brought sin into the world; that will teach thee sin brought thee into the
world; that will tell thee therefore thou must study law; that will teach
thee therefore how thou may study the law.

First thou must study, because Per legem cognitio peccati, Rom, 3,
It is a Schoole-maister to bring us unto Christ; and there like a true
naturalist shall thou find, the causes of thy sin, hanging upon Records, and
like a true historian, there read what others have done before thee. Secondly,
how thou may study Law, to wit, by reading it with the gloss of the
Gospel, because Per Euangelium cognitio gratiae, the gospel is a true
Interpreter of Salvation. Briefly, that will tell thee, how thou wast borne
under those incestuous Planets, Mars and Venus; that will teach thee how thou
must be borne again under that Prince of Planets, the Son of righteousness.

Descend therefore with Nichodemus, from teaching the John, 3.
Law, to teach the true and perfect knowledge of God; strive with Marie, to
be bathed in the remission of sins, rather then to be drenched with Judas in
the Sea of desperation; betake thy self unto God, that he may take thee unto
him.

Thou art but man, therefore call upon him thy God, thou art a sinful man,
therefore pray unto him thy merciful God: It is no shame to be sorrowful, cry o
God; It is no reproach to beg mercies, pray him to be merciful; It is no
discredit to confess thy fault, tell him thou art a sinner, and therefore
emboldened to say, O God be merciful to me a Sinner.

It is the means which the sinne-drowned Publican used in his extremity of
thirst, to obtain a refreshing cup, with a beaten breast and broaken heart, to
cry, O God be merciful to me a sinner. If lamentable pictures, and woeful
tales carry that force, to enforce tears from the hearers and beholders eyes,
then cannot we but turn prodigal in tears, when we behold this lively
counterfeit of sorrow, where every cullor has a speaking grief, every grief
a mourning tongue, to extort and wring tears from the beholders eyes. Jacob
did Gene, 27
never rent his garment in so many pieces for the loss of Joseph, as the
Publican does his soul for the burden of his sin, laying it upon the rack
of repentance, and stretching it from earth to heaven; from himself to God,
till perforce he force it cry, O God.

Agar being turned out of Gene, 22
her Mistress house, made her eyes the plaintifes of her solitary wandering; but
the Publican, turning himself out of his Masters favor, makes his hand,
heart, eyes, tongue and all, labor to chasten his disease with true remorse;
His hands like the bellows, blows the fire of Contrition to his heart, his
heart like a limbecke distills the sovereign water of repentance into his eyes,
like full cesterns, not being able to look upward, return their streams
back unto the heart, that ouer-charged, drives the floode of his affection to
his tongue; His tongue like Aarons Censor, conuaies the sweet perfume of this
precious distillation, into the presence of God himself. And as the angels
celebrated the birth of Christ with a joyful himne, Gloria in excelsis Deo; so
he Luke, 2,
welcoms his second birth with this sad lamentation, O God be merciful unto
me a Sinner. Much like to Peter, when denying Math, 26
his Masters coat, fleuit amare, he made lachrimae the birth of his
lamentation. Indeed sick men cannot away with melody, as Saules frenzy
could not endure David's 1, Reg. 4,
Harp; Salomons thousand songs, cannot mittigate the smart of the Publicans
disease, that runs altogether upon the hart-string, not the harp string;
observing those Diasemata acutu^ medeum, grave, the spaces, falls, and rises of
a melancholy dittie. The first note being raisde high to him that is above
all note, O God. The second with a temperate stop, moved to a mean, be
merciful. The third with a heavy touch, fitted to the base, to me a Sinner.
Heavy, o heavy is the note of man, and therefore it calls for moderation of
God; Heavy, o too heavy is the note of sin, and therefore it craves the voice
of mercy, O God be merciful, peccanti, to a sinner, confitenti, to me a
Sinner; penitenti: O GOD be merciful to me a Sinner.

Here I might justly observe in the Publican, first his invocation, O God,
secondly, his petition, be merciful, thirdly, his condition, to me a Sinner.
Yet suffer me right worshipful, leaving that doctrine to a second suruay, at
this time only to propose unto you, the publican himself in his meditation, by
virtue whereof he attaineth to know himself a Sinner, and God his Redeemer.
David being in the depth of meditation, concaluit cor, Psalm, 39
his heart was hot, et exardescit ignis, the fire of his zeal was kinled, and
he spoke, Lord teach me; In the same precincts and streites of meditation is
the publican, concalet cor, his arms, like the Phaenix wings, has set his
heart on fire, et exardescit ignis, by that his zeal is inflamed; by his zeal
his tongue is enlarged, and he speaks; O God be merciful. He speaks as
David, in meditation: that is, as Cassiodore observes, in consilio, et
Cassiod. in eund. Psalm. Bias in Diog: La.
deliberatione, with judgment and discretion; he speaks non cito, for that is
insaniae iudiciu^, either a point of madness, or a fault of rashness; he
speaks not cum loquacitate, for that is difficilimum, simul et multa, et
oportune dicere, but he speaks meditatio et oratione, his meditation teaching
him what he wants, his prayer directing to obtain his wants. Lastly, he
speaks, and he speaks authorized, by Platoes License, with Plat. in Diog: La:
a prouiso and respect, first, ad quem loquitur, to whom he speaks; secondly,
quid loquitur, what it is he speaks; thirdly, qua multa loquitur, how much he
speaks; fourthly, quando loquitur, at what time he speaks. His first regard,
regards the reverence of the person, to who^ he speaks, O God; his second
consists of a two-folde propriety, one drawn from himself, a Sinner, the
other by a necessity from God, be merciful; his third is couched, not so much
in quantity of words, as in quality of affection: For as Bucer notes, Com: in
18. cap: Luc.
orauit paucis, sed affectu multo, his prayer is short, but very sweet; short
in respect of words, sweet in regard of zeal. His fourth and last regard
aims at the time, for sin, like Noah's flood, every day getting strength, was
almost come to the top of Ararat, Gene, 7, 17.
and had almost ouerspred the whole earth of man, so that it was high time to
stay the swelling rage and fury of it; and therefore he strives to bring it
back to a low ebb, with a smooth calm of an humble petition; and thus he
speaks in scrious meditation, O God be merciful to me a sinner. Helpless
man cannot help, therefore, O God, with whom is all comfort, be merciful,
which quicknest the humble spirit, thersore to me, drawing breath from Adam,
and therefore a sinner: and therefore, O God be merciful unto me a sinner.

I run not unto the wise men Exodus, 7.
with Pharaoh, I call not upon any Idol with the priests 1, Reg, 18
of Baall, but with sorrowful Sara in the gall of bitterness, Tob, 3.
with wrincle faced Job, smitten on the cheeks with a reproach, Job, 16
I begin my confession, O God; I pray not for the strength of body with
Sampson; Judge, 16.
with Elisha for my enemies blindness; with worldly 2, Pet. 2.
Balaam for earthly treasure; but with the faithful Cananitish Math, 15
woman, once and again rejected, I beg for the crumbs of thy mercy, O God be
merciful: I, even I, the son of sorrow, present my self unto thee, and as
the Leaper entreated for his own cleansing, even Math, 8,
so I pray, O God be merciful unto me: I, even I, weaned a long time from the
teates of thy love, and nourished with the corrupt milk of sin, I, even I,
that have refused thy heavenly Manna, and delighted my self with the leaven of
Egypt, now at the length, struck with the-whip of Repentance, retire, and for
the easing of my grief, presume to solicit thee in this manner, O God be
merciful unto me a sinner.

I, am not of Simon Peter's mind, that said, Lord go from Luke, 5,
me, for I am a sinful man, but rather, Lord come to me, because I am a
sinful man; neither do I cry out with the possessed; Jesus thou son of
Math, 8,
God, what have I to do with thee? but rather, Jesus thou son of God, I have
to do with thee. O let me have some interest in thy love, which like a veil
covers the multitude of sins, and unites the peecerent heart of the
sorrow-beaten sinner, O God be merciful to me a sinner.

It is not with me, as it was Gene, 4,
with Caine, to say my sin is greater then can be pardoned, neither am I as
yet clasped in that desperation and distrust, as to equalize and compare thy
mercy to my sins: I know thy piety to exceed man's impiety, and thy mercy
to be greater then man's misery: Sins as they cannot choke thy love, so they
cannot stand in any degree of comparison with the infinitum of thy mercy? For
how much thy greatness ouer-spreads man's weakness, so much the goodness of thy
goodness, exceedes the evil of his evil; and therefore, it were first high
treason to thy Omnipotency and power, to say my sin is greater then thou
can pardon, when as thy mercy is like thy self, great without all
quantity, good without all quality.

Secondly, it were a wrong unpardonable to thy will, a trespass dangerous to
thy truth, an injury too desperate and despayring of thy promises, to say thou will not do what thou can, when with thee to do, is as easy as to will,
and to will is ready every hour; wherefore, O God, be merciful to me a sinner.

It is worse then the stain Viex. in instit ad peniten.
of hippocrisie, to say I am no sinner; for none can challenge to himself that
privilege, In mundo esse, non potest sine culpa, qui in mundum venit cum
culpa; sin was my Mother, which brought me into the world, and sin is the
daughter of my affection in the world.

Mundus non Mundus, quia
Mundus polluit ergo,
Qui manet in Mundo,
quomodo Mundus erit.
Tho: Aqui: ca. 1. Epist. Iacobi.
The world is become a loathsome cage of unclean birds, a troubled sea divided
into many puddles, a dangerous desert, nursing strange and venomous creatures,
where is Serpens flatu, adurens Scorpio, Cauda pungens, Dipsas latenter
interficiens, where covetousness like a burning Serpent, breathes out the fire
of unhallowed desires; where lust like the Scorpion, venomes the soul, and
prouokes it to black atte^pts, where pride lies close at the heart, like a snake
lurking in the grass; where, nay where else, should sin be, when as Mundus
is termed cubile omnium peccatorum, the den and covert of all evil: where
every sin, great and little, though every little sin be too great, reigns
and keeps his Court, Mundus non Mundus, the trim fashion of the world, is
out of fashion, because it is sick of every fashion, it being composed
mirabile opus: the wonderful check and countermaund of all art, is now become
miserabile chaos, the ruinous and disordered heap of all disorder, mundus non
mundus, it is the stage and Theater of hypocrisy, fair and beautiful
without, but full of foul sin within; like straitgrowing reeds, satisfying the
eyes with a green and pleasing outside, but within nothing more vain,
nothing more light, nothing more empty. Like Nabuchadnezars Idol, glittering
with a golden face yet standing upon feet of Clay. Mundus, non Mundus, by
striving to excel in beauty, it has washed away all beauty, and there is no
sure hold for the fowls anchor in so slipperie a station: Mundus non mundus,
the effects prove it so; for Mundus polluit, it is become Murders
slaughterhouse, Thefts refuge, Whoredoms stew, Oppressions safety, and for all
sins a sinful Sanctuary.

Ergo,
Qui manet in Mundo,
quomodo mundus erit.
Who then can swallow Circes cup and not be transformed? who can taste deadly
poison and escape infection? who can live in Sodom and not be wicked? who can
breathe in the world and be no sinner? Why? the Infant-blush at my nativity,
was it not the Tell-tale of my original sin, how I had tasted of that sour
fruit, which all my ancestors, a minore vsque Iere, 6,
ad Maiorem, a propheta vsque ad Sacerdotem, from the first to the last had
eaten: and from the time of my nativity, how I have since, hewn of my age by
sin, filling, and fulfilling, as Christ says, the measure of my Fathers, my
sinne-prest conscience secretly does tell me; wherefore, O God be merciful
to me a sinner. There is no way to hide and smother what I am, for if disguised
Adam, in his fig-leau'd coat, close and secure as he thought, among the
bushes could not shelter him from Gods presence, how can I promise to my self
security? well may the blindfold world, being as deeply covered in sin as I,
either for weakness not see, or for the thick skin of his own sin,
still be dazelleyed, and not behold the heaps and drifts of iniquity; but God
Qui vidit omnia generaliter, Nicho: Denij se:
sine exceptione, euidenter sine dubitatione, imutabiliter sine obliuione,
which has intelligence of my secret thoughts, an ear to hear my private
words, an eye to see my light and dark actions, God I say, which is a
Scrutator of my heart and raines, he enters the privy chamber of my heart, and
is an eye witness of my sin, before it be hatched, he knew all things before
they were begun, and therefore he must needs know them when they are done;
Vidit te fornicationem cogitantem, antequam vidit fornicantem, he saw thee
and David intending adultery, before thou and David committed adultery. If
then no running away will serve the turn, no place close enough to smother
sin, when every thing is naked, and open to his view,

Cum quid turpe facis,
cur me spectante rubescis,
Curspect ante Deo,
non magis ipse rubes.
Into what hard and obdurate metal is man cast, how is his face made stiff,
with the oily colors of shameless impudency, that will fear the presence of
the creature, and no way stand in awe or reverence, of the All-presence of the
Creator? Is there a secret room where no man comes? a secret stage to act sin
where no man sees; and is it possible to keep God out? is it possible to
blind his eyes? Non te Domino abscondis, sed Dominum abscondis tibi: Viex in
instit: ad poenit.
poor runne-away, thou hidest not thy self from God, but rather hidest GOD
from thee. Eu videre ne quis, what though the eyes of thy understanding being
darkened, thou can not see him, tamen subtilliter vidit omnia que agis, yet
has he made a casement to thy conscience, and beholds thee within and
without, in the cogitation, in the action: wherefore, if running from God, be
but a step to greater sin, then will I run from sin to God, and till I
recover strength in him, will I not cease to say, O God be merciful to me a
Sinner.

In sin, as there is no security to hide it, so there is no remedy to
excuse it, or to post it of with a Mulier que dedisti, Gene: 3.
the woman which thou gave me did cause me to sin, as Adam did; or as Eve,
to clear herself with a Serpens decipit me, the Serpent beguiled me; this is
rather an increase then a decrease of sin, for culpa fit grauiora discussa,
Viex institu:
quam perpetrata, that offense was heavier in Examination, then it had been
before in Commission; for Peccatum committunt, co^missum abscondunt, negando
absconditum, defendendo adaugent: Here the blind lead the blind, and the
farther they go, the greater is their danger; First they sin, and then they
fly: secondly, they are taken, but they deny the Accusation: thirdly, that
being proved, they stand out in their own defense, and dispute the case with
the Judge, Adam excusing himself by the woman; the woman laying the fault on
the Serpent; both of them privily taxing GOD, for placing such and such with
them in Paradise. But (alas) it is a naked shift, and to no purpose, to bandy
words with God, neither did he call them for any such discourse: For as the
above noted Author notes, Deus de peccato requisiuit, GOD as it Viex. instit.
were lamenting the first fruits of his labor, should utterly perrish,
therefore questioned with our first Parents, Vt quod transgrediendo
commiserant, confitendo delerent: that the fire of their confession might burn
down the wall, which the rancor of sin had builded between them and God. As
then hopeful Israel found means to supplant the usurping Canauites, by
electing Judge, 1.
Judah their guide and Captain, so may I put to flight that great daring
Cananite, that musters up whole legions of temptations against me, when as
Judah (which interpreted) signifies Confession, does not only conduct and
guide my forces, but also blunts the edge of my enemies sword, returning his
intended poison to his own confusion. Sermon. 30, ad frat. in eremo.


Obstruit os inferni Portas, aperit Paradizi; The confession of thy sin,
says Augustine, bars up the mouth of hell, which stands gaping to devour
thee, and opens the gates of heaven, that willingly would receive thee. And
again says the same Father, Appareat in confessione tua, macula cord is Sermon:
49 in Ioh. Euang.
tui et pertinebis ad graege^ Christi. Launch the festered soar with the knife
of confession, complain to him that is the great Shepherd of souls, and as
he is a Physician, he will cure thee, and as he is a Shepherd number thee with
his flock; Ingenue confessio meretur veniam: Viex: in institu.
Sins saluing plaster, is to reveal it: for, Confiteri possum celare non
vossum, well may I confess it, hide it I cannot; for so the devil is
prevented of his severe accusation, which his ancient malice would commence
against us: Si nostri accusatores sumus, Att^n: de Rampela. tract: de con.
proficit nobis ad salutem: to anatomise and exenterate sin, to pour it
forth upon the Altar of repentance before God, will not only take away occaon
of Plea from the Accuser, but also reconcile the whole favor of that high
Commission, Niniuitae refitentur et vivunt, Sodomitae obdurantur et pereunt:
Believing Niniuie, wrapped and confounded in sorrow, is turned from out her
mourning gown of Sackecloth and ashes, and girded about with a fair Syndon of
Gods eternal favor; but hard hearted Sodom, swelling in the pride of her
strength, is stripped of all her beautiful attire, and nakedly left in the base
ashes of her own destruction. Therefore, confitebor aduersum Psalm. 31.
me, iniusticiam meam Domino, I will confess with David against my self, my
wickedness, unto the Lord, and say, O God be merciful to me a Sinner.

It is no usurpation to turn Judge, to call an assise, to examine my own
soul, to produce my thoughts as accusers, my conscience as a thousand
witnesses, to auerre and confound the guilt of sin. Why, this shall prevent
that latter and fearful examination how I have spent my time; how I have
employed my wealth; how I have ruled my appetites; how I have mortified my
desires; how I have used and bestowed all good gifts, and graces of the holy
Spirit: Nay, I shall never have cause to fear that doleful Memento which
Abraham cast in Dives Luke, 16
teeth, Fili recordare, son remember, how thou in thy life time receiuedst
pleasure, disporting thy time in wanton dalliance, solacing thy self in
pleasing pastimes, brave in apparel, glittering in gold, high in honor,
delicate in fare, defending pride to be but a point of Gentry; gluttony a part
of good fellowship; wantonness a trick of youth; Nune ergo tu cruciaris,
because thou have enclosed, and taken in all pleasure to thy self upon Earth,
thou shall now take up thy rents, and reap a plentiful harvest in hell; Ante
vltimum iudicium August. 46. de tempore.
Dei, tui compone causam: Meet with the day of judgment, says Austine,
before it come; look about before hand; thy self enter an action against thy
self; For, non est vnde praesumas, cum ille venerit, no presumption will serve
the turn: When he comes, it will be too late to plead ignorance; no boot to
produce false witness; no help to use colloured speeches, Ipse erit Iudi^
causae tuae, August. ead: Ser:
qui modo est testis vestis tuae, he shall then lawfully condemn thee, that
in the act of sin did only apprehend thee, wherefore, to anoyde the danger of
that dreadful day, to shun the fear of that cry at midnight, to prevent
that sentence, Go ye cursed, to obtain that favor, Come ye blessed, I here
accuse my self of sin, and with hope to find acceptance in the sight of God,
to him I resort without delay, saying; O God be merciful to me a sinner.

For indeed, delay as it is dangerous in it self, so it is mother to greater
mischiefs; though it seem to old Isaac, to our blind soul to have the voice
of Jacob, yet it is not destitute of Rebeccaes deceit; by giving too much
audience to its sugared speeches, it steals away our birthright, and throws us
quite out of the heritage of our Fathers; it gives sin the greater strength;
strength of sin draws on custom; custom runs into habit, and habit
takes such deep root, that it cannot, or will be very hardly removed. He
that lets his house run to ruin, and will not at the first or second breach
seek to reparrations, strives to make rubbish of a good building. He that
trauells in a leaking ship, and will not in the beginning look to empty it,
sails for naught, but to drown himself. To morrow, to morrow, is the voice
of presumption, for who can tell whether he can live till to morrow? Promisit
August: Sermon: 30 ad fra: in eremo.
Deus veniam penitenti, sed non promisit vsque in Crastinum differenti, God
says Augustine, has sealed a pardon to him that repents, but none to him that
deferres, and says he will repent. And again, he that is not fit for his
conversion to day, will be less ready to morrow, for

Qui non est hodie,
cras minus aptus erit.
Ovid ^n re A^o.
At the morrow he will be the same man again, and sing the same song again,
languishing still in delay, trifling out the time, till GOD (in whose hands
only are the moments of times) shut and bar him out from all time, and leave
him to pains without time, for so abusing the precious date of time. To
morrow, to morrow, is an uncertain time, and though the times be certain in
themselves, yet are they most uncertain unto man, who as he knew not his
beginning, so he is ignorant of his ending. Much like to little birds, that in
their perch look about to fly this way, or that way, yet before they take
their flight, they are prevented by the shaft. Death is a common state-searcher
both of old and young, striking as well David's young son before it 2, Sam, 22
be seven days old, as that ancient of days of Methushelem, that lived
nine hundred sixty nine years. Least therefore the kingdom of satan should
be established in me, by frequentation of sin, I will break off delay,
putting no trust in old age, but as S. Paul says, Dum cognominatur hodie,
Heb, 3,
even in this very instant, while it is named to day, will I repentantly cry,
O GOD be merciful to me a sinner.

Moriantur ante te vitia, Seneca Epist. 12 ad Liuium.
give thy sin (says Seneca) leave to die before thee: it is a good riddance
of a painful pardon, for it is little better then desperation, to free
liberty to thy youthful will to range abroad, upon confidence of repentance in
thy last and least part of thy life; For (alas) what can helpless old age
help, when all the strength of the body, all the faculties of the mind, all the
parts and passions, are not only daunted, and out-dared with sickness, but
also worn out with multitude of years: when as age-spent David, is not able to
retain heat of himself, 1, Reg, 1,
but Abishag the Shunamite, must cherrish him: when as Mirabilium cap: de sen.
Senix is quasi semi senex, an old man half deaths man, destitute of all good
means to conversion, unfit to fast, unable to pray, unapt to watch, or any
other exercise. What voice is there more lamentable, then that of Milo, (when
Cicero de Sen:
seeing the young Champions striving each with other to obtain the conquest)
he cried out with tears, At hi iam mortui sunt, looking on his withered
arms, my blood is dead; my veins wrinckled; my sinews shrunk to nothing.
The counsel of the wise man may be a present memorandu^ to every man, Memento
Creator is tui, (says he) in Eccle, 12
diebus iuventutis tuae, remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while
the evil days come not; that is, in thy prosperity of strength, in thy
hopeful youth, in thy vigor and lustines of years, before forgetful old age
ouer-take thee. Take thy self unto him, that took thee out of the dust, and
created thee to his own likeness: for otherwise it were an everlasting blemish
of ingratitude, a most infamous stamp of injustice, to hope for the receipt of
eternal glory, to receive at one instance an Angels inheritance; to enjoy for
nothing, a place with Christ; and not to tender the best of thy self to GOD
his father. If it were pollution, to the Altar Malac. 1, August. Sermon: 36 in
Luke.
to offer the lame and sick, with what face the^ can thou present that
little, short, and maimed piece of service, which lymping old age will afford?

Qui mayor est etate, mayor est iniquitate, he which is the child of many
years, no doubt is the Father of many sins, for life, the longer it is, the
more sinful it is. If in oblation of burnt offerings, and peace offerings, the
young Lambs Leuit. 1.
without blemish were selected for the sacrifice: If the chief Exodus, 29,
fat of the Ram, made the sweetest savor unto the lord, Leuit, 3,
then stands it against the rule of decency and good manners, to serve in
Gods mess, with the bare, lean, and rotten bones of sins, that have lien as
many score years in the pit of corruption, as did Lazarus days in the grave.
If none were admitted to stand before Nabuchadnezer, but children Dan, 1.
that were most beautiful, how dare man shuffle into Gods presence, disioynted,
crooked old age, and slothful? There is no reason in the world, that the world
should reap that harvest, which GOD has bought with the sweat of his blood;
no law to give him the lees of wine, that has taken pains to plant the
vineyard, and to tread the press; no equity to leave him the gleanings, to
whom the whole sheafe belongs; no justice to divide the heart, which he
has made one, and to give the sick and feeble part unto him, and the strong
and lusty unto the devil. Nisi venerit vobiscum Gene, 44,
frater vester minimus, unless you bring your youngest brother (says Joseph)
you shall never see my face again: So unless we bring young Beniamine, that
is, the first fruits of our youth, and tender them to our everlasting high
Priest, we shall never partake his joyful presence; never enjoy his comfortable
grace; never be comforted with his divine happiness. As the^ young Samuel, and
young 1, Sam, 2 1, Reg, 18
Obediah, being (as it were) in their child clouts, ministered unto the Lord:
Even so I, in the spring and prime of my youth, (no way relying upon aged
repentance) will confess my sins, and at the bar of Gods bounty, will I
sue out a pardon, saying, O God be merciful to me a sinner.

If in David's Peccaui, the fire of his devotion did ascend, and moon the
Heavens to scabberd up the wrathful sword in the sheath of mercy, I doubt not,
but with the same flame to kindle the like sacrifice; and with as strong a
voice as had Eliah when he brought food 1, Reg, 17
from Heaven, to move the same God to compassion. My vow shall be as able to
quench the fire of Gods justice, as was the voice of the three children Dan: 3,
that ouer-came the hot burning furnace; My voice shall be as able to procure
life, as was the voice of Ezechias, 2, Reg, 20 Jonas, 2, 3
that overcame death. As Jonas out of the belly of the Whale, so I out of the
hell of sin, will call; As blind Bartimeus for his want of sight, so Mar. 20,
I in the sight of my wants, will cry, O GOD, be merciful to me a sinner.

As young Tobias was not destitute of a Guide to conduct Tobi, 5,
him to Rages, so am not I left ignorant of the way to heaven. Abraham in his
journey Gene, 12,
to Canaan took a Map of the upper Canaan, and left it registered to all
posterity: first therefore, Egrediendum de terra mea est, I must leave my
Country behind my back, de terra mea, that is, de carne mea, et de meipso* I
must depart, and bid adiewe to the flesh, the world, and my self: from pride
descending to low humility; leaving anger to shake hands with patience; giving
lust the farewell to welcome chastity; excluding envy to entertain charity,
renouncing cruelty for the exchange of clemency.

Secondly, egrediendum est a cognatione mea, I must relinquish and forsake my
own kindred, that is, the old custom and acquaintance I have had with Sin;
shaking the unclean spirit out of doors, and being washed, never to return
to my old vomit; and being made whole, I will sin no more.

Thirdly, de domo Patris mei, I must turn from the sinister and left hand of
this World; from the Prince of darkness my father, to the right hand of
righteousness, to the King of Kings, my heavenly father: which dwells in
Terra Viuentiam, in the Land of Virtue, not in the Land of Vice; in the Land of
Peace, not in the Land of Pain; in the Land of Joy, not in the Land of
Sorrow* and be partaker of that desired Benediction wherewith Isaac (in the
type and figure of Christ, blessed his son Gene, 27
Jacob; Ecce ador Filij mei, behold, the svveete smell of my Son: the sweet
smell of my Son, that savors not of the Onions and Garlic of Egypt, but
the sweet smell of my Son, that has been daintilie fed with the choice
Milk and Honnie of Canaan.

No flight is more commended, Iere, 51, Exodus, 2.
then to fly out of the middle of Babylon, to hasten out of Egypt: where
miseries have no period; and to travel to the promised Land, where is rest
without remove; mercy without measure; love without limit; goodness in all
kind of greatness; where habitemus sine metu, abundemus sine defectu, sine
fastidio epulemur: where every Soul may (like the Done in Noabs Arc) rest
without fear, enjoy Bernard.
plenty without want, take her repast without contempt.

FINIS.
In Coelo sola libertas.
A prayer to be said in the time of sickness.
I Find good Lord that there are two things in me, the one is Nature, which
thou have framed, the other is Sin, which by mine own folly I have heaped: I
confess, O Lord, that by sin I have deformed my nature, so that all that is
thine is extinguished, and nothing left but mine own filthiness and iniquity:
Take away, good Lord, this sinful veil of mire, that the pure brightness may
appear, lighten mine eyes, least I sleep in death, let not mine enemy say,
he has prevailed against me. Enter not Lord into judgment with me, whether
I have deserved this or not, for in thy sight no living creature shall be
justified. I see the pains of death due unto me, for that the floods of
iniquity have ouer-whelmed me; I perceive the snares of mine adversary ready
laid, and the plagues of hell ready for my sins, but thou (O Lord) art my
Rock and defense, thou have preserved me from the shell, and wilt not now
forsake my groaning spirit, when it has most need; Good Lord of thy mercy
save me; good Lord save me, who have lost my self; the greater my offenses
are, the more is thy merits; I am thine own good Lord, thou made me, thine
own fingers fashioned me to thine own similitude; will thou deface thine own
picture? will thou deliver to beasts such souls as confess thee? No, good
Lord, this is not thy nature, I wholly rely upon thee, I trust assuredly to be
saved in the blood of Jesus Christ, in his death and passion: I challenge mine
enemy, and defy the sting of death; I confess his bleeding wounds, his
stripes, his torments; his cruel plague, his precious death, and his bitter
passion. I know he dyed not in vain, but for the safety of me, and all
mankind; and in this faith, hope, and knowledge, I cry to thee even as he did,
O heavenly Father, into thy hands I commit my Spirit. Hear my voice, o Lord,
from thy holy temple, let my cry pierce into thine ear, receive the soul of
thy poor servant, offering it self unto thee. Not that it is worth thy
presence, being polluted with uncleanness, but in thy divine power, which
with one word can make it clean: Cleanse it, o Lord I beseech thee,
vouchsafe it that thy holy presence set thy seal upon it, that mine enemy see
it, and be confounded. Receive it good Lord, for to thee it yields it self,
and to none other; Thou art my GOD, my Savior, and my Redeemer. Unto thee be
all honor, glory, praise, and dominion, for ever.

Amen.
A Morning Prayer.
OEternall God and heavenly Father, seeing that by thy great mercy we have
quietly passed this night, grant we beseech thee, that we bestow this day
wholly in thy service: so that all our thoughts, words and deeds, may redound
to the glory of thy Name, and good example of our Brethren. And as it has
pleased thee to make the sun to shine upon the earth, to give us bodily
light, even so vouchsafe to illuminate our understanding, with the brightness
of thy Spirit, to direct us in the way of righteousness; so that what thing
soever we shall apply our selves unto, our special care and purpose, may be
to walk in thy fear, and to serve thee, looking for all our wealths and
prosperity to come from thine only blessing: and that we may take nothing in
hand, which shall not be agreeable to thy most blessed will. Furthermore, that
we may in such sort travel for our bodies, and for this present life, that we
may have always a further regard, that is, to the heavenly life, which thou
have promised to thy children: and in the mean season, that it may please thee
to preserve and defend us both in body and soul, to strengthen us against all
the temptations of the devil, and to deliver us from all perrills, and dangers
that may happen unto us, if we be not defended by thy godly power. And
forasmuch as to begin well, and not to continue is nothing, we beseech thee
to receive us, not only this day into thy holy protection, but also for the
time of our whole life, continuing and increasing in us daily thy grace and
good gifts thereof, until thou shall bring us to that happy estate, where we
shall fully and for ever, be joined unto thy son Jesus Christ our Savior,
which is the true light of our souls, shining day and night perpetually: and
to the end we may obtain such grace at thy hand, vouchsafe most merciful
Father, to forgive and forget all our sins, which either wittingly or
willingly we have committed against thee, and for thine infinite mercies sake
to pardon the same, as thou have promised to those that ask of thee with
unfeigned heart: for whom, as for our selves, we make our humble petitions unto
thee, in the Name of thy son, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in such sort
as he himself has taught us, saying: Our father which art in heaven. etc.

An Evening prayer.
O Eternal God, and most merciful Father, who this day, and all the time of
our life, have graciousdefended, nourished, and preserved our souls and
bodies, and made such fatherly provision for us poor sinners, that of thy
loving kindness we have rich portions, not only in the creatures of heaven and
earth, but also in that plentiredemption, which thy most dear son Jesus
Christ, has purchased for us. Grant unto us (o merciful Father) the
assistance of thy grace, and holy Spirit, that as our bodies shall now take
their natural rest, even so our souls and minds, at the beholding of thy
goodness toward us, may quiet themselves in thee, and conceive such inward
pleasure, and heavenly sweetness in thy love, that whatsoever we shall from
henceforth either think, speak, or do, that it may be all to the honor of
thy holy Name, through Jesus Christ thy dear son, our Lord and Savior.

Amen.
FINIS.

