HISTORIA DE DONE FAMOUS.

Or The Roman Iubile which happened in the year 855.

Disputed lately, that there was a Woman Pope named Ione the eight, against
all the Jesuits, by a German, but especially against Rob. Bellarmine Father
of all controversies, his Treatise De Roman pontifice. lib. 3. cap. 24.

Newly translated into English. In Honorem (...).



Imprinted at London for Edward White, and are to be sold at his shop, near
the little North door of S. Paul's, at the sign of the Gun. 1599.

Historia de Done Famous. Or the Roman Iubile, which happened in the year. 855.
THE Jesuits being a new kind of Sacrificers, and of mystery mungers: first
in our age at Venice, of a certain Spaniard a soldier (enriched with rapine
and spoils, without any religious restitution made of his wrongs done) they
took their offspring. And they of that Pope Paulus the fourth were well
approved, being apparently worthy of such an Author: And therefore nothing
deserving the surname of our Savior Jesus, because they being malcontent
with the common commendable name of the Christians, do usurp the title of
Jesuits. Too much are they fruitful and multiplying in our soil of
Germany: But God wot only for the rooting out (as the swine use) of the Cockle
from the Corn, the very Tares and Darnell of all Heresies. And so to reduce
wandering sheep, wavering and lost into the soul and lap of their Mother
Church. That no where but many of them are prepared and bent, that as soon as
of one or an other forerunner any den or starting hole is praeoccupied, by
and by all the residue flock thither.

A certain Prince of ours did therefore nothing fondly after this manner
jesting term Jesuits, or rather as other men after their deserts fitly term
them Esauites: resemble them unto those lice which of a secret part of the body
they use to offend, were called for their offense inginuals or Crab-lice, of
which kind even of one, there remaining presently innumerable propagation and
multitudes of issue are stirring: a fit comparison for such a flock. And not
unlike he did compare them unto a game at Cards in the which the gamsters like
Loadam play, and bring them forth last, that are of most price, to beat down
the adverse party: or like the Ase of Hearts at Mawe (the game is called with us
Kumstich). So the Pope with his five fingers, the Jesuits now at last when all
is gone in Germany, sending forth his craftes-masters of Embassage, unto the
(...)
late lost authority here, thinks either to recover the game, or to save the
residue in his deuilish hand, I name the^ Sacrificers, although this their own
words, as they signify by the expurgatory index, and book of reprehension,
they would else where to be now left out, affecting rather as Lords to hear
themselves exalted to the society of Jesus. But I was about to name them
Monkies, save that is improper, yet Monks, such as Franciscanes or other
orders of the beggars, are called unaptly Monks, when they use nothing else
but only a Imgring life in frequent and rich Cities, where the profit of
vagrants is fruitful, there they make their nestes near to some Granar, like
to mice or rattes: vt prodat seipsum sores: yet they differ from Franciscanes
not only in vesture or garment, shauing of their head, and in other apparel
of the body, less absurd and monstrous, and less envied, and in hatred less
abominable, even with the commons of our land. But also in this, that whereas
they at men's doors by exacting of their reward, and by parcel^^ea peece^,
require their bodily sustinance, the Jesuits more stately in Bishoppricke and
Abbeys, rich and well regarded, do spend their days, and do receive from
thence by large sums, their whole prebents o^ maintenance, the Franciscanes
for this their beggarly life, they are rather less acceptable in neighborhood
and Scholler-ship, to the Bishops and Abots, and to those number of Princes
which are too too much obs^quious and faithful to their Sanctificed Father. I
fear me they would it were to the detriment and utter loosing and pernition of
our Country and us. Not alone, for that part that depends and to pure and
innocent religion belongs, the which they no less then Esauites, murderers
of Martirs, wish to be oppressed, nay wish to be extinguished, yea with all that
part that belongs unto our Politic State and government, of which these
Sinones are triers and betraiers, openly bewraying their bad cause, and
secretly betraying our good, unto their Italianates and other strangers unto
us, by reason of our rites of Ecclesiastical government and amendment, and our
abiectment and reiectment of al their pontifical monarchy and yoke, for their
attention and intention, to recover v^ unto their pristine and old state of
government called now Tyranny. Most like are those Esauites, if not more like
unto those cowled and whooded beggars in one thing, for that pressing
themselves into the Courts of our Princes: yea and into the nurcery too, they
observe, harken (...).
out and require to know what counsel is in handling what matters are one foot
that so their news to their betters may strike a stroke in Princes marriages,
may moderate the elections of Bishops and Abots, and may disigne in the common
wealths as yet Popish, both consuls and other Magistrates, with their privy
persuasions, and secret in^tinct of nature. To this purpose, they propose their
venomous and secret insinuation into the familiarity of the chiefest of those
Cities by whom they may undermine the secrets of their government, which
known (if it be known worthy) they signify it to their great Masters and
Lords. Unto which policy of fishing, fowling and bunting after men's secrets,
noe one engine and wile does more fit then confession, which we call auricular
or rather occular, al witness yt may be, which unto this use so like a bayte
they retain and defend it, and to be so necessary for all Christians, as they
are for their Mystagoge and (...).
Prince of Sacrificers, who in the beginning have sworn to do it to them. And
furthermore whether in chastitye they do praeexcell these poor Whood-men or
no, it may be doubted (not without cause) saving that sometimes at the Alter,
whiles they missifie themselves and others with the Mass, whiles they preach
in the Pulpet, whiles they teach in the chair, then they appear to al men to
be continent.

And moreover if it be a branch of chastity, voluntarily to swear and vow a
single life against God and nature, and every man not to have his own wife,
who then dare deny these Esauites truly to observe chastimony? O but so many
societies, so flourishing a multitude of youth, of lively youth, securely,
finely, want only living: which one, may meet so neat, so fair, as if they
were brides, so vegitatiue, with such a habit of strength, as if they were
Champions* such shall we say purely to lead singleness of life? hardly will
it be believed of any who know the stimulation, (will say it is simulation) who
know the force of inhumane nature unto generation, to be divinely invested in
them, as all things else, will they think, will they understand it? For note
what flagitious and prodigious, and wretched lust was re^ealed in the Colleges
of Priests, in the den^es of Munkes, under a pretext of continency uttered:
shall we not now think they wrestle as weakly with their insuperable nature?
In our own Country of Germany, in England, in Denmark^ and other places, where
they were looked into, espied and meritoriously abolished, it is a thing so
^ryed to be true in them, so notified that there need no more words to prove
it.

Neither is it enough for these new Hypocrites to cloak themselves with this
simuled and false chastety, and by it to sell themselves away in vain
ostentation unto the foolish credulous vulgar people. But not content with
this, they defraude the Ministers of the reformed Churches, proudely and
disdainefully, of their good names, as if they were incontinent and effeminate
with their own wives, terming their children bastardes, because they fearing
God do yield to nature, the handy-worke of our good God obeying it in chaste
matrimony, living married, (a remedy for that only sin, and an only remedy
for that sin of lust) and do beget issue, and do well bring them up, and take
care for their familyes, and for the most part do with great difficulty, care
for them, and do tolerate the matter with godly sorrow, while they without all
oecononicall and household grief of mind, or molestation of life in the
commodities thereof, (without all discommodity) live in abundance of pleasures,
delicacy and rioteousnes: Whence it is that necessarily must ensue (a
consequent of time) that they act these things warily and covertly, until
time revealing all things, does also bring to open light and open shame, their
misdeedes, even as already with us the filthy and uncivil lusts of the Monks,
are at such a height gone up, that they appear to all men: whereupon late fame
of two in Polonia being Esauites, it is delivered to us that one of them has
brought forth a child in their walks: many never suspecting it, yea many
maleuolent and backbiting our religion, have thought it very agreeable, and
recounting the condition of such a society of two and no more, and remembering
the like euentes in the Monks, especially in wandering runagates, and
land-leapers with their beggary, have granted it might be true: Neither, yet
is this rumor supplanted out of all men's minds there from suspicion: albeit
by the Kings own edict, it was forbidden, any such wicked event to be
misdeemed of two so holy Fathers. But thought they say is free. As perhaps
neither does this seem a fable altogether vain, nor can many be so easily
dissuaded from that was said lately to be seen in the town of N. in a
certain Canonical house of a Canon there, A Jesuit was gining her child
suck^.

These men do imitatethe Esauites, these former Munks in this thing also, that
with no less happiness then diligence, they allure younglings, young men,
ingenious, swift and full of speech, and many (in good time) not deformed, but
want on Gammedes, and profane Jones cup bearer ( procul a phano) they know
what secrets I mean, and also some more fortunate, by whom to the society of
poor Jesus much profit may rise, by their institution and nurtering of such,
borne as it were desastrouse, they intise them into the cod of their net, by
the which a perpetual Seminary is supplied, increasing with old men and their
merits, and the merits of them dead succeeding others. For the institution of
their Seminary and discipline they are to be praised, for that diligently
they instruct them in the tongues, and in Arts (but that only in the seven
liberal Sciences): More were they to be praised, if they did it to
instruction, and sincerity, and piety, to the defense and conservation of the
kingdom of Christ and his glory, not unto Antichrists Idols and tyranny, to
be strengthened and confirmed on their side for profit and honors sake. Such
Mundum pellectum. For Pellicio is with blandishment to entice, therefore the
whore of Babylon is called pellex quasi (...). A Gel. lib. 4. c. 3.
are these and all other their deeds, full of guile and fraud, full of their
trecheries, only right and well tending, that with the shape of this good,
which is altogether great in approved government and right discipline, they
may by little and little accustom the world (harlot like enticed) unto them,
and once again unto the pontifical Majesty, and to his worship. Mean while
what do they? they indue the tender minds of the youth of the pontificalitie,
it is of corrupt religious doctrine, and corrupt love, with hate and apostacy,
of utter forsaking of plain and sincere truth, which never after they
unlearn nor leave: for what then think you of such men not feined nor
colored can be performed, who in so great and daily a light of Christianity
already restored unto us (notwithstanding) employ their diligence to
darkness: all their wits, yea and all their erudicion, indeuouring to defend
the same, who in so manifest deprehending, yea and open detecting of the high
Priests of Rome, of their household, and all their clients, of their sliding
back, apostacy, and fraudulent religion, shrouded under foyson of truth, a
tinfoile of deceit, practiced against the people of so many ages,
notwithstanding, they would defend themselves to be men, and men for all this,
good and holy, the standard bearers of piety, and most worthy too, unto whose
trayning, whose prescript order, men that are men indeed, must obey: thus they
persuade the unskillful and fatuate commons to believe.

This verily is the endeavor of the sodalitie, the fellowship of Esau, and of
others his fellow servants, more then devilish, by which no more worthy nor
efficient way to deprave or overthrow the doctrine of the church, could be
premeditate and usurped, because they not only call in question, degrading
certain of the latter writers, such as Stapulensis, Erasmus, Polydorus,
Capino, Caspiniarus, and others, these sometimes not reverently reporting (like
men of better note) against their pontifical and the wilds, tyranny, pride,
disdain, and riot of their Prriests. And not resting there but in all unrest
and disquiet, they would musle up the mouths of the ancient Fathers, being
the better sort of the interpreters of the holy Scriptures. And because they
are wholly against their pontifical opinions and Monarchy (of which these
knaves the Esauites publish themselves in profession, to be the very Atlas and
Axell-tree to uphold all) in our age in a manner their Books have been
Printed after the ouldest examplar in written hand, sought forth, perused, and
with the most noble diligence and incredible labor of Erasmus and others, most
learned men, renewed from their defects, repurged of the written faults by
their side committed, and thereupon Imprinted at Basile, and else where
faithfully and truly, both Augustine, Jerome, Cyprian, Hillarie, Irenaeus,
Chrysostom, and others, whose names they have not signed in the book of life,
but in their expurgato^ie Index, their censure of the whole world, most
perfidously, wickedly, heinoussie, and all ungodly: some of these books they
may me like a headl^sse trunk or stock, some they deprave, some they
increase, some they decrease, even agreeable for their own purpose as they
please. And these by their own types and forms, their own Printers by the
mandate of their Prince of the Apostles, and by the under commandment of
other Princes, footmen to the Prince of Rome, Pages to the pontificals, they
empress and set them forth, intending guile, foul fraud, and sacrilege, to
all the Christians, both present and in future time hereafter, and that only
to recover and uphold the stature of the Idol and of their Lord God the
Popes authority, power, and his grace. Which usurpation of theirs, both by the
Apostles own writings (which I fear me in time they will also s^t upon to
corrupt too) and by the Fathers ancient monuments, are oppugned, are slided
from their first creation, in as much that they may see themselves overthrown
both horse and foot. O worthily worthy, that for this so great wretchedness,
wickedness, and sacrilege, Scala Gemonia were the sleds for the damned in
Rome. Cor. Tacit(...). they lay in Auentine, in the thirteenth ^e* gion of the
City.
of us Christian people to be stoned to death, but more* in a more feeling
fashion, is the master of them Anresignanus worthy to be dragged a long Rome
on the Gemontan sled. And thus by reason of these capital fals^ries the
Esauites both Bishops, Abbots, yea and the Princes of our prouince^, pluck
down to ruin noble and rich houses* vnbuilde them, to feed these with the
fattest and fa^rest Prebends: and thus they nourish that serpent Coluber in
their own bosoms.

Therefore to conclude them* behold, behold, I beseech you, and lend an ear
too, with what study and industry Parasites execute their office, affirming
by demonstration (the best argument that is) on every side, by all means and
ways, their absolute and perfect sanctimony and holiness, the inviolable
majesty of their Lord: insulting and singing according to the Proverb
Canentes vernaculum, Canentes Vernaculum.
that, Chansowne, Chansowne, of whom they are fed. And they dare too deny a
truth, confidently, impudently being compelled thereunto, as it were infolded
in gravel, with the arguments of the story, the verity* whereof almost for
the space of this eight hundred years, even in the Pontifical kingdom (in
Rome) was never doubt made, or disputation of controversy of any man offered
before, but that all the libraries with one concent with one voice speaking,
affirmed the faith of that history. Now at last and at least forsooth, it is
called in question, Vile Theatrum eat pessum Cortina lebescat: Senica nunc
Comus cesses adulteria. (...) Deus panim: pro papa.
brought under doubt by adulatory Parasites, sith they perceive the person,
and the adored majesty, to be despect and despised, and amongst many other
matters, their own curtain and vilde theater set open, and the story to be
penned and played, stirred up and preferred more liberal of late then ever
before And mark the story follows.

About the year of our Savior Christ 855. Lotharius being Emperor, the son
of Jews called Pius* it happened to the holy sacred, and sacred holy
Catholic and Apostolic See of Rome, to the Columns pillars and standerd
bearers, to the hinges and Cardinals (if so be there were any hinges to their
doors or cardinals at that time) that their holy spirit, who in all their
counsels is present ever, absent never, so as to err, to be deceived, to slide
in any matter, they say of themselves they cannot, in some enormitie their
spright served them, deceiving themselves, whether of ignorance or of purpose,
or busied about other matters of more import, he suffered them in their
creation and consecration of a new high Priest, inwardly, outwardlye and most
ridiculously to err, and to be shamefully deceived, in choosing without any
discretion of sex a female Pope instead of a male. For Leo the fourth being
deceased, an Aedile and quaestor very industrious, (the Consultation for a
successor being propounded) there was conuersing at Rome, one as it appeared,
not one but two, a certain young man a German borne at Men's, named John
English in Schools, in some places and withal in Greece brought up in
erudicion. He or she, in wit, doctrine, eloquence, manners, habit, and
comeliness of body, to be admired at: at a word, such an one, that the
Primates and chief men there in Rome were beneuolent auditors, and did hear
her in certain Schools where she red, there: and by their endeavors and
sentence, she was preferred to the sacred Senate, designed and made a woman
high Priest, in the steed of a man: so many prudent perspicuous sages, so many
eyes and noses being by, yea without any admonishing of their holy spirit, so
as they know not the woman's sex from the man's, no not by a beard, which though
it had been rased after their own fashion, yet me thinks the stubbes should
appear, no not by voice and other notes and tokens hidden and unknown. At
last the fallacy was bewrayed in this plain event. In that her delicacie of
license to do what she list, lascivious nature admitted into her embracing,
either a Cardinal or some meaner man more familiarly, by whom she was begotten
with child. When her time was almost expired, and her next neighbor the birth
day was at her hand, so imprudently as a Heighfer not expert in her first
calfe, on the day of their litamie and Procession (as they call it) she walked
forth, and falling down in the very public walk amongst the whole rou^,
(beli^e expressing her estate, they left her for^orne) there with dolor and
pain, she brought forth her first begotten, and so in the child-birthe they
both perished.

This story the Esauites contend against, and would have it to be a fablement,
and so many of integrity, grave writers in whose consenets and momoments, it is
expressly red, they reprove so irreverently, so arrogantly, both of vanity
and falsehood, and that not for t^nthes sake and affirmation thereof, so much as
for that, wheresoever any thing makes against them, they do adultera^e or
suppress it, (as I showed before). But this is because they would wash away
the blot, and guilde their worthless copper (Pope) from this crime, in this
our latter age reject, and thrown into despect, and ignominy for their Roman
Hierarchy, the foundation whereof in perpetuity, even from this time unto the
succession of Don Petre: (for Peter himself was never at Room) they would
site and derive it: which rope of sand made like a chain broken, by reason
of this woe to man, dolefully they brook it, being desirous to have it to
remain in integrity, linked with their petty degree.

In former times, books of such Histories were red of (...). Of the triple
Crown.
few, and they that might read them, they in honor and grace of the Triple
Crown, of the Viccar of God, upon the earth did dissemble them, and retain
them in silence, as a thing too shameful, not only evil but absurd, and
(...).
to his estimation and glory, a great detriment: now the Esauites unto whom as
unto triers or old soldiers of the Trianios.
rereward, the sum in gross of regaining and revenging from all vice and
fault, the Majesty Pontific^ll at this day is delivered, will persuade us with
their loquence that this is a fiction, and that no such thing could be. Albeit
upon the matter, there i^ no great moment in it, whether it be a fable or a
veriety, of this Pontifical and Puer perium.
Great-belly^ yet to express in this pageant, their harlots foreheads, and the
whoores faces of these Parasites, and how much in other great matters they are
to be believed, and trusted unto, and that men may be warned and armed, the
more from their frawde, I will with Gods help, truly repeat the brevity of
Historio-Graphers, as many certain as have been seen of me, their
testimonies, the matter in fact (not a fiction) and affirmed, and confirmed by
them, which being red, let any stout and just arbitrator censure, whether more
faith and credit, is not to be ascribed unto the tradition (old and
concenting together) of so many excellent men in piety and integrity, or
rather unto the denial, new and never heard of before, of a few fresh
Hipocrites and Gnathos, denying what they lust, and affirming what they lust,
in favor of their own Master. Of all that truly are read of the men of our
time (as Radal. Flauiens, by ye course of nature, might be at it, and so
(...), they re fer his age unto 930. the fact was done 75. years before he
dyed, if this reference be true in 855.
I suppose) the most ancient writer of this Feminine Lord, is old Raphe
Flaniencis, a benedictine Monk, alleged in the centuries of the
Ecclesiastical History, and whom Trithemius terms a brief Cronicle, which
the Authors of the Centuries name Polycronicon, they say that he writ it,
referring his age unto the year of our Lord 930. my self have not yet
obtained the reading of it: but they site the fifth book of Radulphe, Chapter
the 32.

To produce the first that I have red, I have Marianus after his native country
surnamed Scotus, whose honesty and verity by this may be esteemed, that the
fellowship of the Benedictines, both Cullin, Fulda. and Mons received him, and
striving with entertainment, at his first coming into Germany, where he dyed
Anno Domini, 1086. He in the third book in the sixth age of his Cronicle: in
few words shows the matter to be so igno^inious, and especially in that
time, not to be ripped up* nor heaped upon: yet of all faithful
Historiographers not to be pre^ermitted neither, in brief, he says thus. In
the year of Lotharius the 14. the woman Ione succeeded L^^, for two years,
five months and four days. This testimony of Martine, the Esauites do
eleuate and make light of, because in their manuscript books it is not extant.
But with what face can these falsaries require, that in this matter or manner,
can trust be given to them? who themselves in describing, omit what they lust,
and things that other men write, some they eat out, and some they blot out.
The Copy which the Printer of Basile did imitate came forth of the Library
of the College of Saint Bartholmewes in the City of Frankeford, by the
commandment of the Bishop of Men's, in which exemplare, these words (which they
deny to be in their copy) were found co^texed. With like fidelity, they deny
this story also to be found I remember I have seen this in Sigisb. Gembl. 1.
Milo Smith a famous Doctor, showed me the book printed at Paris. Nor am I
ignorant that Bellarmine answers in ipsius Si gisberti, (...) non inne^itur:
but without witness that it is Sigisb. own hand, written now above 500. years
save only on John Molane lately living Doctor of Louane who it may be plucked
out the leaf: now is ready to swear with Beilar. that it is not in the first
copy, and that they knew Sigisb. own hand 500. years since written: it were
a miracle if they suf^er any copy, now to remain in their Territoryes much
less in their Libe^ties, therefore I believe Bellar. and Mollane both in this.
in a certain old book of Cronicles of Sigisbert* a Monk, which in all
other his books are expressed, and are to be read in this manner. Fame
reports that this John was a woman, and known familiar to some one only,
who it seemed embraced her, being great with child, she was delivered being
Pope. Wherefore some do not number her amongst the High priests: Therefore he
makes no number of that name. Sigisbert lived in the time of Henry the fourth,
about the year of our Lord God, 1110.

I find next unto Sigisbert Martine surnamed of Polone a Monk, of the order
of Preachers, penitentiarie unto Pope Nicholas the third: after Archbishop of
Consentin^, at the year of our Lord 1320, whose Narration of John the Pope, is
this, John English, borne at Men's, sat in the Seat two years and five months
he dyed at Rome, and all the offices were void the^ for one month. This John as
it is affirmed was a woman. And when in her childhood of a certain lover of
hirs, she was brought to Athens in man's apparel, she did so profit in diverse
Sciences, that no one was found to be comparable unto her, in so much that
afterward she reading at Room openly, obtained great Masters to be her
scholars. And then in the City she being of great fame by her conversation
and science, by counsel of them all, she was chosen to be Pope: But in the
Papal seat by her familiar friend, she became pregnant with child, yet
unskillful of the time that women recon for their birthright: when she was
tending her journey from Saint Peter's unto Lateran^ (the Popes Palace) being
environed betwixt the Colossis and Saint Clements Church, she fell in labor,
and was delivered, and afterward when she was dead, she was buried there, as it
is said in the Colossis.

Now because that my Lord the Pope, does always shun that place, that way:
it is believed on all sides that he does it for detestation, and hate of that
fact. Neither is it put into the Catelogue of the holy high Priests, as well
for the sex of her womanhood, as for the deformity of so foul a deed. These
same words wholly in a manner are to be red in the book of Richard the Monk
of Cluniacens, the title whereof is, The number of the, Roman high-priestes,
which is kept in the Library. Which words a man very honest certainly told
unto us, that he saw them at that place written (being there) about sixteen
year ago. Richard was before Martine, and was his antecessor a hundred and
fifty years, upon Trithemius report.

This same express and so clear a narration of Martine, the Popes own
penitenciary, which office is not a little credit among these vain
Paper-puffed men, in which he behaved himself so, that for his reward, he was
endued with an Archbishopricke, by the which no body could be more certain of
the Acts and Histories of the high Priests then he might. And yet these
Esauites (chiefly Bellarmine) do enuic still-that before Martine Polone, not
^ne betrayed, this to the memory. But have you not marked how both Sigebert,
Mariane, Radulphe, and Richard were all before him: yea and many more out of
whom he but gathered these and other things too, as he himself in the
Proaeme, beginning his Chronicle does well signify? And besides that Mariane
in the very entry of his work does rehearse, out of whose monuments he
heaped up this story, who were either all of them interred then, or else done
to dust some where, or being dead, they were dismembered and lay hid, not any
alive. But if it were true that Martine was the first that ever commanded this
to writing, shall we therefore think it to be a fable? Many things certes in
stories both divine and profane we read of, the which their own Authors
having heard it of old men, their elders and betters, did first before any
others comprehend it in writing.

And should we therefore doubt in ambiguitie of the truth of all these writers
and matters? Anastasins the keeper of the Library (they allege with others)
in that same time suruiuers being Chroniclers, do make no mention of Ione the
woman High Priest. As though all men wished it, and as if no man, in his secret
opinion and judgment, could think it a thing so unworthy of the Pontifical
seat (even at which themselves blushed) but would not be content to pass it
to the sink of oblivion in silence, to all posterity, slumber, and funeral,
of such a fact. As touching certain Greek writers Zonaras and others, that
they did decline (as the Esauites suppose) from their institute purpose, and
that it was proposed by them only to handle the matters of their own Emperors
and Churches, and not of the Roman High-priestes, and for their hatred this
cause of shame they opened. O but does not Leonicus Chal^^condilas an Athenian
in the sixth book of his Demonstration of Histories, rehearse the manner and
rites of the electing and proouing of a new High Priest? (...). etc. (...).
That is, they place him who is chosen upon a sell having an open hole, by
which his golden fleeces, hanging down, of some one deputy to this office,
they are handled, that it may be known whether he is a man: for they perceive
that in times past, a woman crept into the Sea of Rome because her sex was not
discerned, (and therefore almost over all Italy and the western regions, the
men do apparentlie shave their berdes.) And when she was great bellied, she
was going to a certain sacrifice, and there (...).
brought forth her infant in the view of the people, whereupon for sure
knowledge, and no doubt, they handle the manly parts and he that feels,
cries alowd: A man is our Master. And now I will not allege that their
argument of authority, brought in negatiuelie, Ab authoritate negative.
and so drawn forth (according to the Logicians) is nothing worth. As for
example, if you reason thus: Frisingensis and Vribergensis, who then lived, did
never remember us of that inhumane* and more then Scythian insulte and revenge
of Alexander the third, in which he spurned Frecoricke the first Emperor of
that name, prostrate before his feet, exclaiming in the troop to a
circumstance of his flatterers, the Psalm: Thou shall make thy perambulation
upon aspes and Basiliscus, etc. Ergo, they that did write of this do make a
lie: a s^und argument.

An other objection of Bellarmine is, that the writers of this story differ
amongst themselves whether she were borne in England or at Men's. Alas alas
Martine does not so write as they cavil, that England was her native Vocatus
de Anglia As many men are called John French, John Holland, John Ireland. that
never were in any of these Nations, much less borne there.
country, but that she was syrnamed of England, being borne at Men's, Johannes
Anglicus, nati^^e Moguntmus, and not as Bellarm^ne places the Comma, and
calls* Martine a simple man, Johannes Anglicus natione, Moguntmus: and says
Martine knew not whether Men's were in England or in Germany, a frivolous
excuse. But this thing, Iacobus Curi^ Hosemius sometimes Physician unto Alv^^^
Bishop of Men's and Cardinal, in his Chronicle he confirms ^^ saying. After
that the Saxons were overcome by Charles the great, and reduced to
Christianity, there came out of England unto Germany, men learned, for
propagation of religions sake, and amongst them the Father with the mother,
great with child of this woman: being banished, brought forth this daughter
of hers at Men's, and named her Gilberta. And thence it comes that she was
syrnamed of England. And I pray you what marvel were it, if a matter ^o
prodigious and hideous should be told of some one way, and of some an other
way, of which the true men would set forward truth, and liars would either
conceal the truth, or deprave it?

They object that at Athens then was no study of learning and Philosophy,
they prove it out of an Epistle of Cardinal Bellarmine says very ill: Ne
vestigium quidem literarum in t^ta Gracia.
Synesius, who went the there in the time of Theodosius the younger, when there
he found no Schools. But Synesius does not write that he found altogether
none, not a flock, nor a hear, but not a handibredth, not eight ounces or
inches of learning, and that he found not such store there as he thought he
should have found. There were also then Colleges of Docters and Scholars, yea
in other neighbor cities of Greece, at Thessalonica and Constantinople, where
the studious, whom the fame and former opinion of great Athens conceived, had
deceived, might very well bestow themselves.

Objection: The high Priests at that time did not dwell in Vaticane but in
Latherane! what does this hinder it, but that Martine should declare a truth?
He does not say, that the High priest went foo^^h in Procession from his
palace Vaticane unto Latherane, but from S Peter's, whose house then was there,
without all controversy, or I am fowly deceived. From that house returning in
his pomp, groned as mountains do, and brought forth a Mowse. It does seem to
these wandering Esauites, that Martine was a most simple man, ^^ one that writ
many other fables: it does seem to us the contrary, that he was a man of a
noble stomach, and true hearted, not any fable^, for else his Chronicles would
not have been written out into so many examplars and manuscripts, before any
Printers were ever borne, in so much that in all the best instructed Libraries
it might have been found. And then our videtur is so much the more available
then their videtur, for because whatsoever makes against them, that, they
contempteously and scoffingly with a nose of Simon, and crook backed, are wont
to mock at, when with reasons they cannot confute it.

There is another Martine of the family of the Minorits, in his Chronicle to
which he gives title. The flowers of time, pertaining even till Charles the
fourths time, that reports the same of Ione, adding this also, that she
adiuring a certain man possessed with a Devil, demanded when the devil
would depart, unto whom the evil spirit ver^ifying, answered.

Papa pater patrum, papiss^ pandito partum,
Et tibi tunc edam, de corpore quando receda^^.
Good Pope our Fathers Father, send forth our mothers mother,
And then from thee I Will start, when I from her depart.
I have seen this Chronicle in written hand in Latin, and in the German
tongue, with types Imprinted at Ulmes in the year 1486. This notable woman
(perhaps) esteemed that it would come to pass, that the very devils and all,
would be obsequious and obedient, to give place to her, indeed as to a
familiar, and well deserving favorite and minion of theirs. For as it is said,
she writ a Book of Necromancie, of the power and strength of devils.

Francis Petrarch a man on every side chief, I suppose they will not deny him
to be of so sound judgment, that between a fable and a history, he knew well
enough how to discern, and to be of such gravity and vprightnes, that what he
had suspected to be false, he would not have sent it for a truth in open
tables, to all after times and prosperities. Out of his Chronicle written in
Italian, and Printed at Florence in the year 1478. this I translated into
Latin, in the year of our Lord God 855. John English, held the High
Priesthood two years, five months and four days. The Church was vacant for
one month. He is not placed in the Catelogue of the Popes, because he was a
woman: who in her nonage, of a certain lover of hers, was brought to Athens,
in the habit of a man, there in diverse studies and sciences, she escaped their
knowledge and did prove excellent. After when she came to Room, she ascended
such a height of fame, that she was had in admiration with all men, whence it
happened by concord and suffrage of the best, the supreme honor of a Pope was
attributed unto her. Which thing afterward betrayed it self to the world.

In her time in the City of Brixie, three days and three nights it rayned
meruailously blood: and in France appeared monstrous Locusts, having six
wings and six feet, and teeth very hard, flying through the air admirably,
which after were all drowned and suffocate in the Sea of Britain. From whence
the carcases of them were beaten to the shore, and did so corrupt the air,
that a great part of the inhabitants there dyed. This Petrarch dyed in the
year of our Savior Christ, 1374.

John Bocace inwardest friend to Petrarch, both for his wit and for his
similitude of study, and manners, an other he, does rehearse this Ione, and
describe her, first called Gilberta, as he says in his book of noble women,
Chap. the 99. which in these words he concludes. To detestation of whose
filthy whood, and contynuance of memory of her name, even unto this day, the
chief Priests of the Rogation, with the rest of the Clergy, and people going
to do Sacrifice, they abhor that place of her child, borne in the midst of
her journey, and omitting it, they decline thorough by ways, and streets, and
so that detestable place spurned at, reentring home, they end their journey
which they began. There is also placed in a book, to be seen, the picture and
spectacle of the Childbirth of the Pontifical, with circumstances of
Cardinals and Bishops, standing by, like Midwi^es or Nurses. That same book
of Bocaces making, is turned into the German tongue, of a Physician in the
City of Vl^^es, and Dedicated to the Duchess of Austria, in the year 1473.
Imprinted in the same City, with old Caracters and rude, and with all the
picture of her bringing forth her child. To this do agree certain rimes
consonant in Italian, out of an old hand written book taken, whose title is,
Historia de Do^ne Famous, and of famous Women.

Historia de Done Famous.
Gion^^ni setti^o, infra queste astute,
La se^^a gloria del Pontificato,
Administro con cure alt^. etc.
Eper in temperantia lei dif^s^,
No^ f^c^ asua lasi^ia, etc.
Un gi^rno ac^^dde, e fu vicina alparto,
Una solemnita, est ^matae digna;
Onde con^i^^, chel suo termin coart^
S^e discoperto, in procession ven^re:
D^^e a quel tempo il figlio in ^^rr^ hasparto.
E con dolor f^ vista partorire,
In presentia del p^p^l con tormento:
E l* vne l'altro, lor vita fi^ire.
Interpretation word for word.

The seventh, John, amongst these w^ly snares,
The sum and glory of the richest Seat,
A Ione for John, did minister with cares,
And wanting temper did her self defeat,
Withouten cesse by her lasciuiousnes.
It fell upon the feast near lying down,
Solempnity, high, holy, and of fame,
As ought her term restrain, her triple crown
Detect. To Letany all as they came,
Laid instantly her birth, upon the earth.
With dolors doom how soon she was unbent?
With peoples eyes how sore she was torment?
So he and she did dye forlorn in lent.
Anthony Archbishop of Florence, in the second part of his history, to the
narration of Ione, out of Martine the peni^entiary repeated, he weueth this
same Web, says there is a certain sign of a marble Sculpture, in the way
where this happened, placed there for a memorial of the matter. And to the
matter, he proclaims as a Respr^p^ana non prucula phano.
thing so wicked, so profane: (yet not far from the Temple) this saying of S.
Paul, O altitud^ ^^pientia and s^ientia Des, etc. As if our good God had
procured and perfected this punishment, not as if that wicked fiend the Devil,
foul and abominable, had been the sole author of it: yet the end he says if
it were true (as granting) yet to none is there any prejudice by this of
Salvation, because neither the Church then, was without a head* which is
Christ, etc. yet he speaks doubtfully, (in a plain case) least a blot so
filthy to the Church (otherwise pure) should not appear to be abhorred.

The standing Image of which he makes mention, the Esauites do suppose that
it has not the shape of the woman and her infant, but of some Priest with his
boy going before him to Sacrifice, least otherwise they should ^a^ nothing to
contradict it. The way that declyneth from the right way (as in all other
matters) so in this, they do take it to be the most commodious way for them to
go in presession, whereas we do hear by others, that have with contemplation
curiously beheld both, say this way is more commodious and shorter then the
other. But some think this monument of such dishonor, (...) in the Monumentum
quasi. (...).
most memorable place of all others, is distroyed, abandoned and unbound, now
and a good while ago: to abolish or to deminish her fame, with us the
Heritiques and adversaries to the Church of Room, that do so play on stages,
and stir it up in this our time. As with all the visage of this popit or
little Pope, momit or little mome, in the City of Seen in the primary, Church
there made with a woman's face, with this inscription, Femina de Anglia. (But
all English men defy her) and together with many other Popes, which are now a
few years past, either called in, or removed away as we hear.

William James Monk of Ecmondence near to Alcmaria, in a parchment book now
two hundred years past, as far as I can conjecture written, does contain the
lives of the Popes in meeter, such as were used in that time to be composed,
too too curiously even unto obscurity, therein being observed the number of
Sillables, and the rithme, which such as they are, as touching this Ione accept
I pray you.

Priusquam reconditur Sergius, vocatur
Ad summa qui dicitur Johannes, huic addatur,
Anglicus. Moguntia iste procreatur, etc.
The Lions gone, the Seriant is vntoomb'd, one calde,
To climb, whom travel had with child benu^b'd, Ione stald,
Would flying fame, of her had never humb'd, she faid.
Whom England named, but Men's did bring her forth,
Whom sentence yields, was more then woman's worth;
By Sex as sequence plain demonstrate does.
Abbreauiate voice! though Annals do exceed,
Of her, of whom less said the better meede:
She was the Queen Amason by our creed.
But Men's her native bower relinquished, And Grace, That Fleece, One Piece.

She studious sought and schools unfinished,
Of Colchis learned men diminished.
Of Room the walls, by her wit raised were,
As music Thebes or Athens Phrines gear:
Her sex exalted she was nere the near.
It Is said her servant help her to a son, The birth, Vngirth, O^irth!

At hand, she climbed a horse at noone:
Near weeping Cross Precession was begun.
Enormity Gods shamed in our City,
In Clements street a child borne without pity?
Both by Colossis buried nothing witty?
Shall Poets know that Popes do in by hate, Plaine-waies, By-waies, Noon days.

And love by reason of this mortal fate:
And all we miss the way to heaven gate.
O then deny that ever we so slided,
And that her name is from our names divided.
This Poet here saying, de qua breui^s dicta minus ledunt does insinuate that
he himself is ashamed of this declaration, and fears least some should be
offended with it, he adioyneth Ione to Sergius, after Leo the fourth was past.

In the Chronicle of Albert Abbot of Stade^s, which ends in the year of our
L. 1255. lately Printed at Helmestade, he is named John the seventh, and a
little after John the nynth, there being left out and omitted Ione the eight.
Otto Bishop of Frisingens, of equal age Frisingens^.
with Frederick the first, in his first book, in his Catelogue of Popes,
placed John the woman in number the seventh, as does the Sculpture, and graven
Image at Seen in Tussis. Which diversity and perturbation in Seen not far
from Rome a famous City which Breanus Captain of the French built, for his
old soldiers* and for his poor, Anno ante Christi aduentum 362 Author Pompo
^^^s, Lib, 3.
Chronicles, rise up of this, because certain of the Antyquaries did
altogether exclude this woman* others did conclude and agree of her, but placed
her in a spare place distant out of order, as the Author of Fasciculus
Temporum, the fardel of flowers has, and as here this Poet of theirs, does
intimate it was done.

But it is no more absurd, that such a Pontifical should confound the order
of history, then that Pontifex puer pera, the woman Pope, with his Feminine
name and nature should disturb all the Rules in Grammar.

In the antique Chronicles ( Augustiano) written in Latin hand I red this.
Furthermore not far from that tempestious time of the year of our Savior
Christ 855* there was at Room a Pope John the eight, named ( qui mulier) a he
woman, yea that filthy harlot Gilberta of Men's, led about in man's apparel:
of a certain Monk of the Monasterye of Fulda, both thorough Greece and
Italy, a beast most littered, I would say lettered, and most learned, most
changeable and crafty, Camelion like; escaped out, and endued with a
Pope-doome, inscaped in the City likewise.

Raphaell Ualaterane in his Commentaries, Dedicated to the very Pope Julius
the second, was not afeard to write thus of John: John English whom they call
a woman, in her desembling habit, otherwise most famous for learning, they say
was overtaken in the way, where she brought forth a Child.

Now let us produce Platina: who albeit he had tried the cruelty, and
severity of the Pope Paul the second toward him: yet he feared not to
write of Ione unto Sextus the fourth, which story now as vain these pield
fellows do reprove, so far were they from indyting or penning it, they
durst not write a word of it: the which he confesses is taken out of Martine,
and because they are induced before time, and recited as his, I will not
repeat them now, to which he subioyneth these. There are which object these
two things. That the Pope when he should go unto the Princely Court of
Laterane, Basilica (...) properly a hall of judgment, as Hesiod* intends
where the Judges are called (...) Doniuor^s Iudices Bud^^s.
for detestation of so foul a fact, does decline from that way, of a set or
consulted purpose: and for because he would shun the sight of such an error:
whiles first he is placed in the seat of Peter, which is bored thorough with a
round hole, that the secret parts may be handled of the last of all the Deacons
there.

Touching the first of these objections, I will wink at it: for the second thus
I think. That Seat to be prepared to this end, that he that is constitute,
and ordained in such a Magistrates place (for Magistracy will soon show what a
man is) may know himself not to be a God, but to be subject to the
necessities of nature: as for example, digestion and such like, whence the
seat is called meritoriously A close stock, this that I have said is commonly
carried about, but by uncertain and obscure Authors, which I therefore
instituted, to set down briefly, and barely, least obstinately and frowardly,
I should seem to omit, that which almost all men affirm. Let us err therefore
with the multitude, in this matter: albeit it may appear that this that I have
said, is out of those things, which may be, by possibility believed to be true.
Hitherto Platina, whose latter words, whiles he says fieri potuisse, do
manifest why he said Erremus cum vulgo, least God wot, he should offend his
Lords in affirming the story directly. But the cause of the Popes declining the
way, he confesses to be the young child of the woman High Priest.

But for the use of the Stercorary stool which he says is not convenient, for
such holiness and divine Pontificiality o which ye simple and foolish
superstitious rout is of opinion that he stooleth nothing but Ambrosia which
he eats again, to be converted wholly into the substance of his deified
body, which vulgar so religious opinion of Gods Viccar made of earth: O it is
by no means to be dimished (no, no beware of that). Again, if any necessities
of humane nature remaining in him, were to be represented (...)ciolum (...).
by any right: o it were more decent to do it by a dishe of sweet meats, and
by the receiving of food, then that that it should be done by egestion of the
excrements. For by that Antecedent, this consequent would ensue, and come to
light. That, He that does eat, he must stools so again, He that does stool,
he must eat. Pl^ni^ remembering (like the best remembrancer) of a story
natural to the Grasshoppers, makes them to have no wicket, neither for a
Cricket to void excrements by, he adds with all, neither mouth to eat food
by.

And when brother Robert the French Dominicane, in his book of Visions,
written 300. years since, does report of this Throne to be seated in the Po^ch
of the Palace of Porphyre stone is that we call Marble, or Lapis Numidicus of
the Romans, indeed a stone out of Numidium, so named of the color because it
does (...) glitter like Rubish or Iron or the privy stool might be
porphyretica and perforata both even as they report.
Laterane, by which the Pope is tried, whether he is a man and which he in an
extasis or dream, did behold to be made of Porphyrie stone, such as others
have also exhibited unto us, have seen it what it was: it is nothing likely
that the Author of this common place of Ajax being Benedict the third, by who^
he says, it was placed there, should riot so insolently and impudently withal,
that he would prepare an instrument so precious, (out of Numidia) and so
splendent with all, to signify so filthy a matter, to wit, the deiectment of
the belly. Therefore the Esouites have co^mented (for what may not commentaries
do?) upon a more honest allegory of this Throne, and less unclean: that is,
they term it an Ajax or S^ercorarie, because it does admonish the new Pope
sitting upon it, that he is made of humane dung out of low estate (being but
poor Cardinals and Princes fellows) out of humility unto sublimity, out of
minority to superiority (as they speak) to be raised. And there upon of the
Clergy compassed about to him, to O inexpected and intolerable blasphemy
open to the world by Cardinal Bellarmine.
him, all tongues and Organes resound out of the Psalm: He raises the poor
out of the dust, and out of the dung he does erect the beggar that he may place
him with the Princes (nay then above the Princes) of his people: We could
admit the Commentary and fiction, but that Stercus, Ajax, of whom forkes and
scowpes and tumbrel^, named dunke-finders, dung-fillers and dung-carters or
carriers, are fitly derived and called S^ercorarie and S^erquilinie, if of the
earth it were called earthly, there were more tolleration, and a cleanly
similitude in the interpreter. Wherefore we do assent unto their sent, as the
truer relators, who do affirm that it is a relative used, not usurped, but
made to try the genitall parts. Yea and we are drawn unto it (as we esteem)
by this argument, because oftentimes we have heard in the Popedom, that the
sacrificing sort have iested, and termed those manly parts (by the figure
Antonomasia) pontificals (for they make a high priest) truly of none other
cause, but that by these rightes well known to them, in Ab infimo Di^con^
membru^ attractatur.
which the most infamous Deacon of the Cardinal, does handle that part of the
new Pope hanging through the hole, and does handle them, exclaiming Habet: it
were out of use in times past this experiment to have been, by which they now
approve themselves, the root of evil not to want, when as before their
Priesthood they begat bastards, which done, those they had about them, some
Cardinals* some Bishops, and called them the Sons of brothers and of sisters.
This approbation of verity Johannes Pannonius Bishop of five Churches, does
finely note in these verses.

Unlock the heaven gates? no woman can assume,
That has not made her trial in the air
Where empty nothing is: none dare that seat presume,
Except some new Hermophroditus heir.
Anthony Sabelicus does affirm almost as much as Platina says of love in his
ninth Enead, placing her as Frisingensis did number, the seventh of her name.

Iacobus Philippus Bergonie, of the family of the Hermites, in his supply of
supplies of Chronicles, has as touching Ione, some things not differing from
these that Martine, Platina, and the rest do write: he says, she travailed
with child publicly, without a Midwife, and in the same place she dyed
miserably with her child, and buried there without any honor at all, in whose
place, says he, Benedict the third was chosen. This Book is imprinted in
Latin at Venice Anno 1503. and there also in Italian, in the year of our Lord
God 1540.

The like things are red in Matthew Palmers continuation of Eusebius and
Prosperus, which begins at the year 449. and ends in the year 1471. The
exemplarie was Printed at Basil 1549. neither do they differ from this, which
of this Pope the Duke of Genua calde Baptista Fulgosus, of the same age that
Palmer was of, noted in his Book of Memorable sayings and deeds, set forth at
Basil in the year 1541.

Trithemius in his Chronicles of the Monastery of Hirsaugia, in the life of
Luitprando the first Abbot, after other things, he speaks of Ione the high
Priest. They say that she being of a certain familiar of hers* mpressed,
brought forth child in the open street. And for that many would not place her
amongst the Popes, as it were abhorting the unworthy fact.

John Stella Priest of Venice, in his book, the title whereof is, The lives of
two hundred and thirty of the highest Priests, from blessed Peter the
Apostle, even unto Julius the fifth of that name, and the Preface is to Dominic,
Grimane, Cardinal there, and the same matters delivered which Philip of
Bergonie handled, touching Ione the Pope.

I have beheld a History book ample and fair, and precious too, set forth
at Norimberge in the year 1493. with Picture of Emperors and Popes, in which
at the Narration of Ione the Woman Pope, was expressed the shape of the woman
pontifically crowned, but for her Rochet pontifical, she had a garment
woman-like upon her shoulders, and for her triple Crosier and thrice crossed
scepter, she had an Infant in her arms.

Naucleare Prepositer and Chauncelor of Fabinge in his great Historical work
does report no otherwise of Ione the eight, then is of these asore, then that
which Martine and which Platina do intimate.

Valerius Anscimus in his Chronicle dedicated to them of Bernia. Ione the woman
of Men's climing the pontifical seat, by her excellency of manners and
learning, left it by the infamy of her childbirth, and dyed.

Albertus Cranzius by his judgment betwixt true and false, being a grave
Historiographer, and Deane of Hanburgh, betwixt consenting and dissenting a
Judge, of all readers his monuments worthily, are much attributed unto. He in
a Catalogue of the Priests, strictly does note Ione in these words: John
English of Men's was a woman belying her own sex, with an acute wit, with a
prompt tongue, learnedly she could speak, in so much that she converted all
men's minds toward her, to the intent that she should obtain the pontifical
seat only, one servant had secret intelligence of her sex, by himself made
pregnant, compressed, it is said she brought forth at the Colossis, in the 2.
year not expired of her reign, in childe-birth she dyed.

Carthusiane the Author of the Fardell of times (as the wiser sort do judge)
not to be contempned, placed Ione without the number of the Popes, with this
description. That John English by Syr-name, but by birthe of Men's* is said to
be about those times, and she was a woman clothed in habit of a man.

She did so proceed in divine scripture^, and profit withal, that none was
found like unto her, she was chosen to be Pope. But after being made pregnant
with child, when publicly she should proceed in procession, she was
delivered and dyed. And this seems to be the sixth Pope that had the name of
sanctity without any desert to this day. And like others of them (observe the
verity of this man) she was plagued and not placed in the Catalogue of Popes.
Some trifle in this cause, that no Almaine should be chosen Pope, which
appears to be false for Carthusiane the Monk dare say, yea that before Ione
and before our age 800. years, there were wicked Popes, and well worthy the
infamy of Ione. The same thing in this Esauiticall age a man, may say of Popes
much more wicked then these were both Horrible, blaspheming, and heresy,
worthy of fire and faggot.

Baptista Mantuanus in his third book of Alphonsus and (...)
description of a place of Tartarus or hell makes there John the Pope hanging,
an abominable matter expressed in very sweet verses.

Hinc pendebat adhuc sexum mentita virilem,
Famina, cui triplici phrygiam diademate mitram,
Ext^llebat apex and pontificalis adulter.
And seineth her in the entrance of Tartarus in the first place of hell, as is
fit for a Pope (before all other) which are there varioushe vexed, to hang with
her adulterer and concubine, it is a marvel verily that these falsaries do
not relate and bring into their damnation book called Thexpurgatorie index.
Mantuans works also which are so many stomaching the defiled Popedom of zeal
and godly indignation. Her Ca^^e^^^es may see her perform her purgatory
without all deliueri^ as well she deserves to do.

Neither may I omit here a rich testimony of Coelius Rodeginus, a man of
infinite reading, whom it appears nothing lay hid from, that was contained
in books, of whose integrity and gravity in judging, so much the less men
may doubt, because every where in his work he be areth a godly mind,
speaking reverently of our Savior Christ, which virtue to him and but a few
more Italians, especially in this age is common. He in his forth volume of
Antiquarie lections, numbering learned women names Ione, what says he? do
not we know that in Chronicles it is resolved: that Ione English only from the
beginning of the world alone, in the form of a man, durst invade the seat
Pontifical of Rome, in the shape of a man, Yea verily, and admit one of her
familiars, who only inwardest, hit nail on the head, knew the matter and the
manner, was admitted unto the bed and chamber, therefore unto the bed chamber,
and then she with child in the sum of dignity and disdainfulnes, travailed
with child? This was done in the year of health, eight hundred, fifty three.
There is more fidelity to be attributed to this man, yea and an Italian too,
his testimony, his affirmation more this matter, then to all the inficiation,
all the denial of the Esauites, which Parasites and hierlings will do any
thing to demerite the altar, and say any thing for their Lord and master.

The Chronicle of John Lucidus begun from the beginning of the world, unto the
year of our Lord 1536. produced. And from thence he being dead, it was
increased by a certain Monk unto the year 1575. And dedicated unto a
certain general (as they call it:) an Abbot, does present verilye John
English in the form of the Popes, but not in the number of them: saying, John
English a woman, reigned two years, five months, and four days, she is not
put in the Cathalogue of the Popes, and therefore the seat was then void,
until the year of our Lord 855. This Book is Imprinted at Venice in the
year 1575.

John Henald a Frenchman, of the state of the Church from the time of the
Apostles under Nero, unto Charles the fifth Emperor (says so of this Pope, as
the rest of the Histories, and adds, that this is a true figure of that great
spiritual fornication of the Roman Popes. And after this the harlot daily
more and more, did manifest her self, and greater was the iniquity of this
commanding seat laid open.

In a German Chronicle in written hand, out of many Authors gathered by James
of the Kings court (Uon Konigs Holen) a Priest of Argentine, which begins
God Almighty and everlasting, etc. ending in the year 1456. in Eugenius the
fourth it is read, folio 110. Ioannes von Men's was Pabst. etc. John of Men's was
a Pope two years and five months, she was a woman Pope, etc.

The Chronicle of Martin in Germany restored, reteineth the very same
altogether, which is in the Latin. The exemplarie hand writing that I have
seen, is absolute in the year 1429. distinguished, and lined with titles
every where.

An other German with greater letters set forth at Augusta in the year
1487. says. John von Men's a^ Rhein, etc. der wasein Weib, etc. John of Men's
upon Reign, was a woman: and it has the verses, papa pater patrum, etc.
repeated before. It is ended in Sixtus the fourth.

An other written at Constance with the proper language of the Heluetians,
pertaining unto the year 1400. says, Ein Weib hiesse Ioannes von Men's was
Bapst, etc. A woman called John of Men's was Pope, who dyed with child-birthe,
which a Cardinal got in the year of our Lord 855. Iahre.

And in another with somewhat greater Characters. Printed at Ulmes in the year
1486, there you may read Der Keyser Arnolphus (it seems it should be red
Lotharius) when Casar or Emperor Arnolphus there was in that time a Pope that
was a woman, and in the open streets of Rome there she laid her young one.
This was such a shame to the Popes, that they shun to come any more that
way. This Chronicle does end in the ouerrunning of Men's in the year 1462.
There are many Annals of this same stuffing, which I omit to prefer unto you.

I would allege more fresh writers, some as Melanctbon, which is the author of
Charions Chronicle, Robert Barnus, Peter Virete, John Functius, Casper Hedion,
of whom is cited Mall^^lus Tigurinus, of equal age with the counsel of Basil,
Peter Paulus Vergerius, sometimes Bishop of Iustinople (who in a peculiar
libell to himself, painted forth and described this child birth) with John
Bal^, and a whole Jury of others, but that they are censured for Heretics of
the Esauites and of adverse party to the pontifical dignity, and therefore
their testimony in this business is both suspect and reject. Yet one of these
new writers they cannot reject, Pistorius Nid^nus late an Evangelist, now a
pontifist, whom verily I do not think, though in religion he is a Buskin, or
rather a shipmans hose, with like inconstancy he will deny a History, and
that written by him long ago, and set forth: and me thinks the Esauites
should assent unto him, being one of their own flock.

Amongst the writers of the Acts and Iestes, one has escaped me, The
Compiler of the Anonymies, that is, without names, in whom this is read. There
was likewise an other false Pope, whose name and years are not known, for
she was a woman, as the Romans do confess, and of elegant fame and of
great science, and in hypocrisy of wonderful life: she under pretext of a
man's habit, lurked, until she was chosen to be Pope, and in her Popehood
conceived with child, and when she was great, the devil in Consistory court,
publicly before them all bewrayed the deed, exclaming Papa pater patrum*
papissa pandite partum. To these above mentioned, and the like, or to the very
same, their own Isengrine does mention of this Pope, in his Chronicle of two
Languages, even in the kingdom of the Esauites, set forth with Grace and
privilege of the Caesar's Majesty, in the year of the Lord 1564 whom their
familiar friend, with what cauilations, or with what foyson or color they
could refute, saluing his estimation and honor, that he might not be offended
(if he were living) they should perceive it well enough.

Now therefore the verdit follows: Let indifferent readers and arbitrators
give sentence. Whether of so many Histories, by so many worlds continued and
consented, we must believe the affirmative of them, or the infection and
negative of a few Freshmen, hired as it appears thereunto, and whose
profession it is by all ways and means, with all force and policy, where
the pontifical dignity lies overthrown, to raise it up, where it is ready
to flide (that is every where) to underprop it, and for the most part (Gentle
Gentlemen) those whom I have induced were Historians, Priests, Monks, or
otherwise sworn to the Pope, or bound to him. Yet notwithstanding, look what
was comely for a story, they remembered, which of their Ancestors rather they
heard, or of their superiors in Books worthy of note and remembrance, and fit
for all posterity, they thought well of, that they brought into their books
and volumes of greatest account and authority without all respect of persons,
nothing then fearing the offense of the potentate, who (it may be thought) was
nothing offended with this verity. No man ever before this time did deny this
history, no man took it grievously, no man contradicted it, no man call it in
question, it being Dedicated to the very Popes themselves to the Cardinals, to
the Abbots, by the Authors of this story. And these for the most part were
Italians, neighbors to the great Pope, and therefore more worthy of our
belief in this, for that they might sooner and easier get notice of these
matters, then other strangers, both by the relation and report of their
seniors, as also by the Lybraries near at hand.

We have showed you before, that Martine was not the first Preacher that
bewrayed so bad a cause, and betrayed so good a one, as this (God wot) is. But
if he were, should therefore it be thought fained or uncertain? By such an
Enthy^^^a, or by the like Silogisme, this might be concluded. Herodotus does
first commemora^e the war betwixt Cirus and Cr^sus, Ergo it is a fiction.
Sweto^i^s first does utter the portent and hideou^ (not hidden) wickedness of
Nero, Ergo they are not to be believed.

Before Moses time, the horrible Sodomits sinned, shamed, and punished, was not
extant nor described; who after four hundred years, at last was commanded to
writing, is it therefore a doubtful matter? Certes by this means, detraction
and back-calling, of most matters done before our memory, which out of writers
and monuments of old we learn, may shamefully be used, then nothing certain^,
but what our own memory holds, shall ever come to light.

O you Esauites do you arrogate unto your selves such sagacity, such
intelligence, so confident, so impudent are O ^ane a tergo quem nulla Ciconia
pinsit.
you, dare you peck out ye eyes of Ianus, the eyes of the Cornix, whom no
Ciconia, no Crane dare peep at, as the proverb says* What think you*
Petrarch, Bocace, and such like, were so dull of eye sight, their noses bitten
off, that betwixt a similitude and a truth, and a fablement, they wanted skill
to discern, so light and vain* that they would set open to all after times,
things that should seem to carry form and shape of lies.

Will you alone, nay dare you argue of falsehood and reprove of lying, so many
Bishops, Princes, so many Acadiemes, so many Cities, and their Libraries, in all which, this story is red? You object that for the most part they, those
Authors, do speak doubtfully* referring over the matter to a dubitation,
Aiunt, Fe^tur, Scribitur, Aseritur. Are not men wont to say so, especially of
things very strange, unexpected, unhoped for, prodigious, and detestable? Which
they did for this cause, (no doubt) that they might show themselves wishing,
and willing well, that no such error, such contumelye, should be fall the
Capital of Rome, the head Church upon the earth, and to the sanctified holy,
and holy sanctified counsel thereof.

Onuphrius they oppose against it, as if ye Authority of such a Monk, and
fellow servant unto you, of that Priesthood, especially in that tempest
(betwixt us) in which your own and your companions, fraud of old, your
wickedness, your heinousnes, is detected, is chanted alowde, were of force to
refel, and oppress, so inueterate integrity of religious men, so consonant
tradition of others. You oppose likewise Auentine, who coniectureth that the
matter was otherwise. This man was grave and historical and nothing vain, yet
of him more suspicion may be made, thathe in favor of Matthew Langius Archbishop
of Saltzburgh, Cardinal and legate of the Apostolic seat his great Maecenas
diuerted the intent of this story to an end contrary then ought, especially in
that time, when as then the Pontifical kingdom began to favor like carrion,
co^temptible and spewed out of Germany, for which cause, and for defense of it,
and to deck and trim up again the buried corpse of Popery, Cardinal Langius
was sent as Legate. But what should I now so long stand, what matter of worth,
is it in this prolixity of words, showing and conuincing, that John the 8 Pope
was a woman, and a broody woman too? Verily this efficient cause. That I may
give document of study, and teach the cominalty of the windines and wafer
learning of the Esauites, hired, instructed and Emprested forth to conserve,
with instauration the Pontifical authority and tyrany chiefly, now swaying (or
swagering as they nickname it) in Germany, hear unto which one and only end
al their poisoned rumors (and all Sophistication) all their minstrill-like
diligence, histrion-like labors in Churches and schools does respect, belong
and tend: seeing so confessed and manifested verity, with so many testimonies
confirmed, they labor to pluck up by the roots, to euert and pervert, where
they esteem any faith remains for them, or any credit in the matters of
religion, in which business of Christian health, they challenge the Magistracy to
belong chiefly to them.

Verily they have rased out of all books which so many every where in Libraries
were found, and have blotted out of the minds and memory of man, this
Pontifical vncomelies and shame, this opprobrious event, videlicet. That the
societyes and sages of the Catholic Church of Rome deceived once (and never
but once) of their spirit so holy, chose a high Priest of the feminine gender
instead of the Masculine. O but how will they excuse and abolish other errors of
their holy of holiesito wit, unhallowed errors, yea and in voluntary cases,
wherein they elected improbous, unchaste, incestious, impure, credulous and
incredulous Popes, replenish ed and fulfilled withal the genders of wickedness,
all the species of holiness, instead of chaste, and mild, and holy, and good
Popes? Sergi^s for one he did so rauinously inrage, (with Salomons shrewd
passion, anger) the bird yt often lights on, but should be kept from building
in the tree, that he hated his Decessor Formosus, whose competitor and Emulus
he had once bin for the Papal attire and dignity, being in his grace, (the
mansion house of the dead) which the Civil law does never allow so to open, he
drew him forth of his Sepulcher, in which he had slept eight years, beheaded
him, dismembered him, and so cast the headles trunk into the river of Tibris.

John the 13. was slain taken in adultery without the City, by the husband of
the adultresse out of hand, in the tenth year of his reign, in the year of
our Savior Christ, 964. Siluester the second, mighty and execrable, had a
familiar Devil in a Brazen man's head from whom he had answers, and at length
when he was missifying, saying Mass in the Vestry, a place calde Jerusalem,
with a present Fever, he dyed.

Hildebrand, that Firebrand (which is Gregory the seventh) whose Pontifical
virtues, Cardinal Benno, who was his inspector, and arbitrator of his iestes,
and Ane^tine likewise do Preach of, how great he was in magic, how many
Popes before him he did to death, what bloody and capital hatreds he
exercised against Henry the fourth, whose life both for this life (and
otherwise besides) he laid trains enough for. The Emperor was commorant at
Rome a while, with his Empress, where in the Church he used to be at their
holy exercise, and there to pray, and upon a beam over him, this holy Father
commanded great stones to be placed, and so to be cast down suddenly upon him
at prayer. Whiles the minister of this wickedness was on the beam over laden
with stones, and the burden great, the beam brake, and so he fell down with
it, and was crushed to pieces.

This immane disturber of the German Empire. Hildebrand, who came in like a
Lion reigned like a Fox, and dyed like a dog, as all the true historiographers
do resolve of him.

Alexander the sixth, a Spaniard, his elogies are celebrated of Guichardine
(Leiuetenant to the Pope) and amongst other things, with what love he embraced
his own daughter, and his two sons, even that he was used to incest the
daughter himself, drawn from her husband, to whom he had married her before,
and had his two sons his riuals, both wittingly and willingly (horrible to be
spoken). And how that one brother slew the other in the night (worse the^ the
Catelnies did, for their murder was not incestious) and that because both in
their lusts, as with all in other manners, the one had prelacy and superiority
above the other, being thus slain, the Father fished for him that was cast
into Tibris, this only way of fishing showing himself and none other devise,
like unto a fisher for men. He dyed by a draft of poisoned wine, which was
provided for certain Cardinals to take them away from amongst men, in a Garden
Banquet in a Bower, the poison was given to him by one that waited, the flagons
being changed by error of the servant that attended.

Paul the third whose name before the Priesthood was Alexander Fernesius, how
horrible and libidinous, whoredoms, incestes, murder of parents, witchcraftes,
proditious and betraying of men, are well remembered of him? These and others
like to these, with many, every where in the acts of your Popes are read, and
shall for ever be read, how many expurgatory index soever you make, wherein you
would persuade that they are false, even now at last to approve the explete
and sanctified innocensie on every side, and the sanctity of Hierarchy.
Convince you therefore of like falsity, the Authors of the History of Ione the
Pontifical.

Laurentius Valla no stranger, but borne in the City of Rome a Canon, his
reprehension of Popes of his time as liberal, so true and very true, that if
you deny it, yet we and many other, neither have doubted nor ever will doubt. I
say, (quoth he) and I exclaim (neither will I fear men being accustomed with
God) not one in my time, in the Pope-doome, was either faithful dispensator of
the mysteries, or wise, who are so far from giving bread, that they give a
bait unto the family of God. The Pope himself, now wars is pacified, does
bring in war upon his own people, and sows discord betwixt the Cities and
the Princes. The Pope both thirsts after other men's goods, and suppeth up his
own treasures. The Pope makes profit, not only of the common wealth, but
also of the Ecclesiastical wealth, and sells the holy Ghost. And when he is
warned of this, he denies it not, but openly confesses it, and glories in
it, that it is so lawful for him, upon any reason to make sale of the
patrimony of the Church, endued and given him by Constantine, to wrest it from
any the occupiants of it. As if it would come to pass that it so being used,
the Christian religion, would thereby become more blessed by it, and not rather
as it is more cursed with all wickedness, luxuriousnes and libidiousnes
oppressed, if possibly it may be more oppressed, and if any farther place of
misery be remaining. Thus Ualla feared not out of a Godly stomach, all peril
neglected to exprobate the papacy, to hit the^ in the teeth in his time, now
1140. years ago, so uncorrected ever since* that daily it is made worse and
worse, and worse is like to be.

Reprove if you can, that which Io^^niane Pontane a man of your religion, but
otherwise verily, more simple, and more sincere in his writings of Popes and
Cardinals then you are, he writ a Dialogue of Charon and Mercury, if perhaps
you have not the book at hand, thus it follows.

Charon. I pray you do not the Popes and Priests themselves meet with this
wickedness? albeit of all number and sorts, and orders of creatures, where daily
I am carried about, I see no men of worse note, and marked with such filthy
marks. Mercury. Indeed no men are less careful for true religion, because
they are as such who are careful and whose endeavor it is, to amplyfie their
private wealth to heap up money, and in feeding their carcases, to be well
occupied, and yet whereas too too wretchedly they are covetous, yet no men eat
more daintilye, nor clothe themselves more wantonlie then they do. Of late a
priest a Cardinal sent his Cator to buie a Woolfe fish, or a Pike, and because
he spared the money it being dear, for the price was three score crowns. O
with what reproach did he revile him, and had almost forbidden him his house as
a servant nothing careful of his masters life. And Charon, that you should
not mistake me, they term that life now, which heretofore was called death,
the appetite. An other priest also of the same College dying, bequeathed unto
a Exoleto. They are men that have bin wanton boys and are grown out of use,
by reason of age, of which kind not a few these ^ (...) (for so the Syrians
term their princes, as the Sun rising they make their God, and the Papists
do call their Pope a God, D. deum nostrum papu^) these are meant by Pontanus
hear. But o were they now served, which flow so out of kind every where, as
Alexander Seuerus plagued them whom his predicessor Hielogabalus kept, he sent
them all to shipwreck to the Islands. Read Cicero pro Milone, and Herodian lib.
5. Clodius vt secum, semper scorta, semper exoletos, semper lupas ducebat,
filthye wanton Boys, and greedy She wolves, that is, Common whores.
* Minion of his, thirty thousand crowns. Char. O would I wanted eare^,
rather then to hear these things! shall any mortal men suffer such
wickedness to pass, and cannot punish it? in superstition are they holden,
etc.

Confute if you can the dialogue of Erasmus and H^t^en, so noble, so notable,
in writing, depainting out the manners of your Julius the second, and such
acts: that when he was dead, the gates of Heaven, which with his own keys he
was wont to set open unto other men at a price for money, he could not unlock
for himself, and Peter would not open them to him when he knocked, that he
might go to hell beneath with his company, and his whole court of guarde being
excluded.

Refell if you can these (or expurge) with true arguments and reasons) the
acts of these high Priests repugnant unto the acts (God it knows) of the
Apostles, as one end of the diameter is unto the other, the Axeltree of the
world the East unto the Weast, which are of John Bale of England set forth,
all which a Christian man, yea an Ethnic only well mannerd, would fear to
here them read. Such a sink of wickedness, and for the most part of Popes,
thence from John's travail with child, unto this our age is to be felt. If
such like you endeavor to purge, what else do you seek, but to wash a Negro to
be white? Seace you therefore from hence forth to cast a miste before men's
eyes, and to sell smoke for fire in such a world fit for Argus many eyes, as
this. Leave off, leave off, to stuff with straw, and deck up your throne of
Antichrist any more in vain, unless your selves mean to inioye such
flattery: by such devises and aduises, you would perceive, receive, and take
more easily from your Patrons, the commodities of this present life,
feelinglie, being honored with the opinion of sanctimonie of your disciples,
boys and young men, and of the fatuate common people, indeed many of them being
Midas rich, whom your adulatorie old songs do please. All which, if you
deem them more acceptable then Christian verity, sincerity, and blessedness:
hold on, hold on, to lie, laugh, flatter, and face, to simulate and dissemble,
to play the Historions, to abuse religion unto cursed fraud, until ye try
at last that God will not be deluded, if happily you will differ in this one
and in all, from your Coryphaus, and from his purple mantle crew, to think
there is a God, who brings all human souls unto the universal judgment
after this mortal life. To him be all honor and glory both now and ever,

Amen.
Trino and vni sit omnis laus honor and gloria. Amen.
T. B.


