HOROLOGIOGRAPHIA. The Art of Dialling: teaching an easy and perfect way to
make all kinds of Dials upon any plain plat howsoever placed: With the
drawing of the twelve Signs, and hours unequal in them all. Whereunto is
annexed the making and use of other Dials and Instruments, whereby the hour of
the day and night is known: Of special use and delight not only for Students
of the Arts Mathematical, but also for diverse Artificers, Architects,
Surueyours of buildings, free-Masons and others.

By T. Fale.



AT LONDON Printed by Thomas Orwin dwelling in Pater noster-Row ou^ against the
sign of the Checker. 1593.

SINGVLIS ARTIVM MATHEMATICARVM STVDIOSIS IN CELEBERRIMA CANTABRIGIENSI
ACADEMIA, THOMAS FALVS EIVSDEM ALVMNVS, ET VERAE MATHESEOS STVDIOSVS, EXIGVVM
HOC GRATI ANIMI MONVMENTVM DD. ANNO. 1593.

Simonis Muri ad lectorem carmen.
Scire cupis certa cur machina tangitur vmbra?
Et breuis aethereum line a fignat iter?
Haec, licet euoluas, facili praecepta libello
Tradita, sed voto non leuiora tuo.
To the friendly Readers, and namely to such as be welwillers to the
Mathematiks.
THe Arts Mathematical (gentle Reader) in regard of their antiquity and
excellency may be compared with any other of the liberal Sciences whatsoever.
For Seth who lived in the first age of the world is commended of Josephus, Lib.
1. c. 3.
and Abraham of Berosus, to have been skillful masters in these mysteries. And
the very name imports, that in old time these of all other were esteemed
worthy to be taught, being called for their excellency Mathemata, that is,
Sciences Aul. Gell. de ^oct* At. l. 1 Ram. Scho. Math. lib. 4.
meet to be learned. These be Arithmeticke, Geemetrie, and Astronomy, from
which this Art of Dialling takes his beginning: a knowledge also ancient and
necessary, and therefore practiced by Princes and famous men of former ages.
The first Dial that histories remember is Lib. 2. cap. 20. of the Kings in the
holy 2. King. 20. Vitruuius de Archit. lib. 9. Munst. Hor. in praef. Lib. 2.
c. 76.
scripture, where the Lord turned the Sun back 10. degrees for Hezechias
sake, whereby it had gone down in the Dial of Ahaz. This Ahaz was King of
Jerusalem, and reigned in the 3200. year after the creation of the world, and
in the first Olympiade of the Grecians. Afterward as Pl^^e writes, Anaximenes
Milesius the scholar of Anaximander, first found out the reason and proportion
of shadows amongst the Lacedaemonians, and there taught the Art of Dialling,
who lived 200. year after the reign of Ahaz, and was a famous Philosopher in
Greece before Platoes time, as Diogenes Laertius reports. But some affirm
that it was Anaximander himself that found Call. R^^digin.
out this Art, and set forth the first Map of the earth.

Herodotus says, that the Grecians learned this art, and the division Lib. 2.
of the day into twelve hours, of the Chaldeans. Diodorus writes that one
Hyperion first observed the hours. But if we may believe Macrobius, it seems
that this Science came from the Egyptians: for they called the Sun Horus,
which by his motion limitteth to each hour his appointed time.

Vitruuius rehearses sundry inuentors of this Art of Dialling, Lib. 9.
as Berosus the Chaldean, Aristarchus Samius, Eudoxus, Theodosius with others,
who were renowned, and lived many years before the birth of Christ. I need not
here remember Architas Tarentinus, who by art made a Dove of wood to fly in
the air: neither Archimedes, who defended Syracusa against Marcellus, Plutar^.
in Marcel.
and affirmed that if he had a place to stand on, he would move the earth with
his engines: both of them no doubt skillful in this Science.

It was long after the invention that this Art was known in Rome: for in the
twelve tables was only mentioned the rising and setting of the Sun, and
after certain years the midday was added. Then in the first Punike war the
Romans obtaining victory, there was a Dial brought amongst other spoils out
of Sicilie. But in process of time they began to be more common in Rome: for
100. years before Cicero his time, the parasite in a Comedy, being hungry,
spoke against the multitude of Clockes and Dials which were then in the city,
Optans vt suus cuique venture sit horologium.

Pliny also tells of a Dial placed in the field of Flora at Lib. 36. c. 10
Rome, which by the space of thirty years had not agreed with the Sun: and
the reason was as he thought, because that either the Sun had taken a new
course, or else the earth was slipped from his Center, wherein at the first it
stood: or the style was put awry by the shaking of the city. Since which times
learning spreading it self into diverse parts of the world, this Art has been
amongst the rest in great account.

Concerning the profit of this Art, daily experience teaches how needful it
is in a well ordered Commonwealth, seeing nothing can be done in due and
convenient season, where this Science is neglected: for the division of the day
into certain parts or hours, (which this Art teaches) does limit and allot
to each action his due time. This Art being then so ancient, and the use so
necessary, I trust none will think this labor superfluous, unless they be
rude without civility, or such as have always at hand a Dial of natures
framing, of whom this verse seems to be made:

*Si tuus ad solemn statuatur nasus, hianti Morus.
Ore, been ostendas dentibus hora quota est. Many have promised (but none as
yet performed) to write of this Science in our English tongue, which has bin
published in other languages, as D. Record long since, M. Digges, M. Blagraue
with other, who if they would take the pains, I know could do it with great
commendation.

Diverse have written hereof in the Latin tongue, as Munster, Schonerus,
Orontius, Witekindus, Clauius and others: yet every one differing from other in
precept. Some teach the making of Dials by the help of the Globe, as Gemma
Frisius: some by the Astrolabe, as the same Gemma Frisius and M. Blagr. which
Instruments every man have not. Some use the table of Sines and Arithmetike, as
Witekindus, which way as most plain and easy, is observed in this book;
though in some kinds for want of trial Witekindus deceived himself. Munster
uses a Rectificatorie with a circle, which is unfit for small plats, and
fails in greater, without great heed. Schoner wandreth in a wilderness of
lines, that a man know not where to begin, or when to end. Vlmer has not the
Delineation of all kinds.

Othersome observe the rules of Geometrical proportion: which order also we
thought to have observed in all kinds, as we have done in the South and North
erect declining: but that sundry precepts of the same thing would have bred
tediousnes and trouble to the learner, and the cutting of the Figures would
have been very chargeable. By means whereof we contented our selves with this
one way here set down, not doubting, but that every one with small pains may
attain to the making of all kinds of Dials in this book expressed. As for a
great part of them, every Artificer may easily understand.

Only thus much I advertise the unlearned, that they must acquaint themselves
with some few Mathematical principles, as to know what the Elevation of the
Pole means, how a squire line is to be drawn, and such like, which (if they
want a teacher) they may sufficiently learn by themselves out of Records
Castle, his pathway and ground of Arts, published in the English tongue: for
these terms could not be avoided, neither plainly described without much
tediousnes.

We have here added also examples and figures to every kind, that so the
precepts might appear more plain and easy: so that there is no plain plat
or wall howsoever it stands, or be placed either Declining, Reclining, or
Inclining, but by the help of this book you may draw a Dial upon it.

If any man complain of obscurity, he must know, that Difficilia quae
pulchra, and yet small pains overcomes all.

The making of the Horologicall Cylindre, and the Ring, with some other
Instruments, we have presently omitted, partly for their curiosity in cutting
and delineation, and partly because (if occasion serve) we will entreat of
these kinds of Horologicall Instruments by themselves, together with the
making of all kinds of plain Dials in this book, prescribed by the way of
Geometrical proportion. In the mean while (gentle Reader) committing this
book to thy favorable acceptance, and thy self to the protection of the
Almighty, I end.

Tho. Fale.

To my loving kinsman Thomas Osborne.
THis book, which seven years since, was in a manner perfected (as you know)
does now upon just occasion present it self to the view of the world: wherein
you have taken such pains for the trial of each example, that I think none
can find any great fault, but such as can see far into other men's faults,
and forget their own. For after we found some precepts in Witekindus to be
false, we were enforced to try and examine with great care each figure and
example in the Sun. And therefore if any receive benefit by this our
travel, I would you should have your due praise you deserve.

I have altered some few things, and added the making of the South and North
Erect Declining Dials, by the way of Geometrical proportion: because those
kinds be most in use, and I would the learner should have his choice of the
easiest way.

The grauer of the Figures was one M. Iod. Hondius, who has showed himself an
excellent workman in the great Globes set forth by M. Mullineux, and the Mappes
of England for M. Camdens book: and whether he has performed like diligence
in these, I refer it to your self to judge. If any be desirous to have the
Instrument mentioned in the beginning of this book for the trial of plats, I
hope you will help them to it: for being of your own invention, I know none
so fit as your self to make it: on which Instrument also, it were convenient
to draw the Quadrant Horologicall, that so it might serve for diverse uses.

I trust you will not be offended in that I leave under our names this small
monument unto the world, as a speaking witness of our thankful hearts to
this our Country, and a testimony of our affection toward the Arts
Mathematical. Thus beseeching the Lord (who has endued you with
extraordinary knowledge in all Manuel Sciences) to finish that good work of
his heavenly grace already begun in you, to his glory and your own comfort,
I take my leave. Commend me many times to your self and all our good friends.

From London, January. 3. 1593. Yours, assuredly, T. F.

Aduertisements to the Reader.
NOte always, that in every Dial the one end of the Style must be placed
directly toward the North Pole, and the other end toward the South Pole: for
about these two stars the whole heavens are moved, they remaining immovable.
The North Pole is a star in the North part of the heaven, being raised above
the earth or our Horizon 52. degrees. And this changes his height, if you go
Northward or Southward one degree in 60 miles: but Estward or westward it
alters not. The Elevation of the Pole is the height of this star above the
earth.

Observe also, that the Substile is the line or place over which the Style or
Gnomon in your Dial directly hangs. The space between the Style and
Substile is the just height thereof.

One line cutteth another squire-wise, when they make right and equal angles.

The Contingent or touch line, is that which is drawn by any point of another
line or circle, so that it touches the same: and this line commonly in all
Dials is drawn squire-wise to the Substile.

A quadrant is the fourth part of a circle.

The Meridian and twelve a clock line are all one.

I call these lines parallele which are every where of like distance one from
another: example whereof you may see in the Est and West Dial, where all the
hour lines be parallele.

You may make all kinds of plain Dials upon one stone, if you prepare it first
to be square like a Dye, and then take off the eight corners, and all the
sharp sides, so shall you have 25. plain plats besides the base, or foot
whereon your Dial must stand.

If any be desirous to have this Instrument ready made, let him enquire at the
Printers, and he shall hear of them.

The making of an Instrument to find out the situation of any plat or Dial,
and to place them already prepared. CAP. I.
FOr as much as it is necessary before you can draw my Dial, to know how your
plat is already or ought afterward to be placed, it shall be expedient to show
the making and use of an Instrument, whereby you may examine and try all plain
plats and place all dials being ready made and prepared.

Provide therefore an half circle of Peare-tree, Walnuttree, Bor, or any other
close grained and solid wood, being well seasoned, so that the alteration of
the weather at any time may not make it change from the first proportion there
of. Let it be perfectly tried on both sides of an even thickenesse, half or
three quarters of an inch thick or more if you will, and sir or eight inches
broad as you think good. The edge or side A. B. must be very right. The^ draw
the Line C. D. three quarters of an inch equally distant from the side A. B.
place one foot of your compasses in the center E. which is the midst of the
line C. D. and with the other draw half a circle from C. to A. divide it into
two equal parts or quadrants, and laying your ruler upon the center E. and
upon this division draw the line E. F. this done, divide each of these
quadrants into 90. equal degrees or parts, which you may thus do: First,
divide each of them into three equal parts, and every of these into three
other parts, so shall you have 9. divisions in either quadrant, whereof every
one shall represent ten degrees. Again, part every one of these into two, and
each of those into five (if you can) and so is each quadrant divided into 90.
degrees.

Moreover, it were necessary if your Instrument were large enough, to part each
degree into 60. minutes, or at the least into 3. whereof each part may contain
20. minutes. This done, fasten a thread well wared in the center E. with a
plommet of lead on the end, so that it may move at free liberty.

You may also (if you will) upon this side of the quadrant between E. D. draw
the dial whose delineation is taught in the 28. Chapter.

dialing diagram It were necessary to have here a little hole with a cover to
put in your pl^^^et and thread.


The ^omer ^^^ of ^^^^ Instrument thus finished, let the other be altogether
li^e unto it, except that in stead of the the thread with the pl^^^^t, you must
have a plombrule made in this manner.

Prepare a piece of very good wood, try it perfectly on both sides to an equal
thicknes, let it be about half an inch thick, and twice so broad as the space
between the line C. D. of your instrument and the edge A. B. in the midst
thereof draw the right line G. H. and placing one foot of your compasses in the
point G. with the other make a half circle according to the breadth of the
ruler, whereby you may cut the end round, make the other end with a sharp point
right in the end of the line G. H. as you see in this figure.



Let the distance between the point G. and the end H. be so much as is the
semidiameter of the quadrant, make by G. an hole so great that a plo^met of
lead hanging by a thread from the sharp end, may move therein at liberty:
Make also an other round or square hole, wherein you may place a needle touched
with the Loadstone, as in the compasses or dyals you see. Finally, make a
little hole in the point or center G. and with a broad headed name of brass
fasten it upon the center E. of your Instrument, so as it may move and turn
which way you will, and then your Instrument is finished.

Note that you may make your Instrument in form of a quadrangle rightangled,
as Witekindus teaches, cutting a round furrow without the circle and degrees
made, for the plo^met to hang at liberty in: so shall you need but one side
of your instrument to use, with a compass or needle touched with the Loadstone
for declinations. But the form of the other, whose making we have taught,
seems more commnodious, behold the Figure.

The use of this instruement. CAP. 2.
dialing diagram

The use of this instrument is in examining and placing the plat or dial. In
immoueble plats, to know how they stand, as if you would make a Dial upon a
wall, first you must understand whether the wall be erect or else recline or
incline: then whether it be direct East, West, North, or South, or else decline,
which you cannot know without the help of this Instrument. Again, in moveable
plats for the placing of them, as if you have made a South dial or any other
kind, by this Instrument you shall easily and perfectly place them.

The trial of a plat for a Horizontall Dial.
IF your plat seem to lie plain, making no angle with the horizon, set the
side or diameter A. B. of your Instrument upon it, and erect the plombrule
right up between the two quadrants precisely over the line E. F. then if the
thread with the plommet hanging at liberty fall directly upon his line G. H.
which way soever you turn your Instrument, such a plat is said to make no
angle with the horizon: and therefore the dial which is made upon it, is
called a Horizontall dial. In like manner may you place this kind of dial
being ready made parallele to the horizon, and by the help of the needle direct
the style toward the North pole.

The trying of plats for Erect, Direct, South, North, East and West Dials.
WHen the plat stands upright, it makes a right angle with the Horizon, and
is called Erect, whereof some behold one priucipall part of the world directly
as the South, North, East, or West: other decline as the South and North,
toward the East or West, of which kinds hereafter.

To examine an Erect plat, apply the side or diameter A. B. of your Instrument
unto it, the thread with the plommet on the foreside hanging at liberty. If the
thread fall upon the line E. C. or E. D. the plat is Erect.

This done, apply the said line or diameter A. B. to y^ plat, your Instrument
being placed equally distant to the Horizon, and the plombrule upon the line E.
I. then if the needle stand directly over his caracter, the end touched with
the Loadstone being next to the plat, that plat is called a South Erect Direct.

In the North all the foresaid things are to be considered, except only that
the end of the needle touched with y^ loadstone is farthest from the plat.

These things known, you may easily find out the East and West Erect Direct,
if either you have a line drawn squire wise to the caracter of the needle, or
else if you place the plombrule over the line E. C. or E. D.

And here note, that the East and West, are not said to decline, because the
declination is accounted from the south and North, to the direct East, and West
points.

The examining of plats for Declining Dials.
ALl such plats as behold not some principal part of the world directly, are
called Declining. The quantity of their declination is found out thus.

Apply the diameter A. B. of your Instrument to the plat, remembering to hold it
equally distant from the Horizon. Then move the plombrule until the needle
stands right over the caracter, and the point of the ruler, which touches
the degrees in the limb, shall show how many degrees and minutes it does
decline: either toward the East if y^ plumbrule lie in the quadrant C. E. F. or
toward the west, if in the quadrant D. E. F.

The trying of such plats as recline.
IF the plat stands not upright, but makes an obtuse or blunt angle with the
Horizon, it is said to recline. The degrees of reclination are found out thus.

Apply the diameter A. B. of your Instrument to the plat, the one end placed
upward, the other downward: the^ move the plomrule (the thread with the plo^met
having free course) until the thread hang precisely over the line G. H. then
the point of the ruler shall show the degrees of reclination.

How Inclining plats are tried.
BUt if the angle which the plat makes with the Horizon be acute or sharp,
then it does incline. The quantity of inclination is thus known.

Apply the diameter A. B. of your instrument to the plat, the thread with the
plo^met of the former side hanging at liberty, and mark what degree and minute
the thrad shall cut, for so much is the inclination.

The manner of trying those plats which recline and decline, or incline and
decline.
IF your plat shall both recline and decline, or incline and decline: First
seek out the reclination as has been showed, and then the declination as in
Erect declining.

The making of a Horizontall, or plain lying Sun Dial. CAP. 3.
YOur plat being prepared smoothe and plain, draw upon it two lines, as in
the figure following, the one A. B. the other C. D. cutting themselves
squirewise, that is, making right angles in the point E. upon which make the
quadrant of any circle from the line E. C. to the line E. A. or E B and write
at C. the North, at D. the South, at A. the East, at B. the West. And the line
C. A. which here is the quadrant being divided into 90. degrees or parts, the
elevation of the Pole shall be accounted in it (which in our example is 52. d.
from C. to A. and at the end of this number draw a line from the center E.
which shall be E F representing the style and artree of the world. Then draw an
other line K. L. by C. or by some other point of the line D. C. squire wise, so
long as you can which shall be called the touch line, or line of Contingence.
Then measuring with your compasses the least distance of the point O. and the
line E. F. or the Style, the one foot placed in O. which is the point of
intersection, and the other extended toward E. where it shall chance to divide
or be placed in the line E. C. mark that point or center with the letter G.
and draw with your co^passes a half circle upon this center for the
equinoctial circle, from H. by C. to I. whose diameter must be equally distant
to the line L. K. Then divide this half circle into 12. equal parts: this
done, lay a ruler upon the center G. and upon every mark or division made in
the half Equator, and where the ruler shall touch y^ line of contingence, there
make marks or pricks, by which pricks draw lines from E. for the hours. E. C.
is the 12. hour, E. B. the 6. in the morning, E. A. the 6. at evening, the
rest you may see in y^ figure.

And whereas in Summer the 4. and 5. in the morning, and also the 7. and 8. at
evening, shall be necessary in this kind of Dial: prolong or draw the lines of
4. and 5. at evening, beyond the center E. which shall show the hours of 4.
and 5. in the morning. And likewise the 7. and 8. in the morning, for the 7.
and 8. at evening.

You may observe an order both in these and in all other erect direct dials, by
dividing the one half of the Equator, drawing hour lines for the forenone,
and observing the same distance from the meridian line, on the other side for
the afternoon: for the line of the 11. hour in the forenoone is of like
distance from the Meridian, that the 1. is in the afternoon, and the 10. as 2.
and so of the rest.

When you would draw or make the half hours, you must divide every part of
the Equator into 2. equal parts, (...) the ruler and the line of contingence
as you find in the drawing of the hour lines.

And this remember for the drawing of the half hourelines, not only in this
kind, but also in all other kinds of dials, which afterward shall follow.

The Style must be fixed in the center E. hanging directly over the Meridian
line E. C. with so great an angle, as the lines C. E. F. make, declining from
that on neither sides.

The Equinoctial circle, the Quadrant, the line of the Style and of
Contingence, must be lightly drawn, because they ought to be put out again,
in that they serve to no use but for the drawing of the Dial. And this
likewise remember in all other kinds of Dials, that the preparatiue or pricked
lines must after the making of the Dial be omitted and extinguished, as
altogether unprofitable.

This and all other kinds of Dials may most fitly be drawn upon a clean
paper, and then with the help of your compasses placed on the plat.

dialing diagram

The making of a South Erect, direct Dial. CAP. 4.
THe making of this, is almost altogether like unto other before. Draw here
also a line A. B. parallel to the Horizon, out of the midst whereof, let the
line C. D. perpendiculer to that be extended: and let the Quadrant be drawn
from A. to D. or B. to D. parted into 90. degrees, as before. Above C. let
Zenith be written, beneath D. Nadir; nigh unto B. the East, and by A. the West.
In y^ Quadrant number the Elevation of the Pole (which in our example is 52.
degrees) from A. toward D. And at the end hereof draw from the center C. the
line C. E. representing the Style: and by D. draw the line of Contingence, I.
K. squirewise, as before. Then the least distance of the point or intersection
D. and the Style being taken with your Compasses, extend th^n in the line D. C.
the one foot placed in D. set the other in F. toward C. and draw by F. the
Diameter of the half circle of the Equator equally distant to the line K. L.
which must be made upon the center F. from G. by D. to H. and divide it into
12. equal parts, upon every one of which and the center F. the ruler being
placed, whersoeuer it shall happen to touch the line of contingence, there make
marks. Then from the center C. by these marks the hour lines must be drawn.
The line C. A. shall show the 6. in the morning, C. B. the 6. at evening, C. D.
the 12. etc. The Style must be placed or fixed in the center C. hanging
precisely over the line of the 12. hour, with so great a distance, as the
angle D. C. E, is. This kind of Dial does receive and show only but 12.
hours at the most.

dialing diagram

The making of a North Erect, Direct Dial. CAP. 5.
HEre as in the South make a line Parallele to y^ Horizon, A. B. cut it squire
wise with the Perpendicular C. D. let C. be the center. At C. write Zenith, at
D. Nadir, ^c. From C. draw the Quadrant of a circle to D. or B. divide this
into 90. Degrees, account the Elevation of the pole (which in our example is
52. d) from A. toward C. Draw at the end of of this number the line E. F for y^
Style. Afterward draw the line of Contingence by C. squire-wise, and take the
shortest distance, with your compasses between the point C. and the Style,
placing the one foot in the point C. extend the other toward E. in the line C.
D: making a point or prick G: whereupon (as a center) the same wideness of the
compasses remaining, describe the half Equator by C. ended with the Diameter
H. I. equidistant to the line of Contingence. When you have divided thus half
circle of the Equator into twelve equal parts, lay the ruler upon the center
G. and upon each division of the Equator, and where it shall touch the
Contingent line, make marks. This done, draw the lines for the hours, by
those marks from the center E. but those very few, that is, two nigh unto A.
and two by B. but prolong and extend them beyond the center E. so that their
contraries may be made: for in this kind of Dials there be but only ten
hours profitable, that is, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, before noone, and 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
after noone; which show but only in Summer, from the entering of the Sun into,
until such t^ne as it enters.

The Style must be fixed in the center E. placed upward, directly over the
lint E. C. with so great an angle as I. E. C. is. Let the line C. D. be placed
upward perpendicularly, but so that it may not be almost seen, as afterward
serving to no use, because it is only a line preparatiue.

Behold the Figure.

A North Dial erect, direct.
dialing diagram

The making of the East and West Erect Dials. CHAP. 6.
IF you know the making of one of these, you may easily make them both, for
they be very like, differing only in the naming of the hours, for the one
contains hours for the forenoone, and the other for the afternoon.

You must therefore on your plat make the quadrant of a circle A. B. C. which
may afterward easily be put out, as all the other lines must be, except the
hour lines: let the side A. B. be Perpendiculare: B. C. Parallele to the
horizon, and let the arc behold the South, which being divided into 90.
degrees, number therein the elenation of the Pole dounward from A. toward C. by
the end of this number, and by the Center B, draw a line so long as your plat
will give you leave, whose South end shall behold precisely the Equinoctial
circle. At which end draw a circle whose diameter shall be almost the third
part of the line. Then draw another diameter or line in the center, squire wise
to the other, which shall show the axtree of the world, and be the line for the
6. hour. After ward at the cutward sides of the circle, draw two contingent
lines, one beneath, the other above, so that they may be Parallele to the
middle line. Divide each quarter of the circle into six equal parts. Then
place the ruler upon the center, and each of those marks or parts, and where
it touches the lines of contingence there make marks in them. Afterward draw
a line by those two marks which be next to the 6. hour, in the lines of
contingence, which may be equally distant from the line of the 6. hour.

In like manner do with the rest; so that you may have in the East Dial, two
above the 6. hour, the 4. and 5. in the morning, and under it 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
In the West Dial like wise 7. and 8. in the evening above the 6. hour, and
under it 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. Neither of them do show the 12. hour, because at
that time the Sun beams be Parallele to the plat.

Fix the Style in the center of the circle right up from the Plat, so long as
the Semidiameter of the circle is: only showing the hour with the very top or
end thereof. Yet it were more convenient to have it placed along over the line
of the 6. hour, being a plate of iron or some other metal, being so broad as
the Semidiamer of the circle is.

Behold the figures following.

The East dial Erect.
dialing diagram

The West Dial erect.
dialing diagram

Note that these five kinds of Dials before taught may be made upon a stone cut
square in form of a die.

The making of a South Erect declining Dial, which may be placed on any
upright wall whatsoever. CAP. 7.
IN all Declining Dials because the Style does not hang directly over the
meridianline, therefore you must first find out and place the Substile (which
is the line over which the Style directly hangs) and lik wise the line of the
Style: which may be both eastly and speedily performed in this manner.

First, by your instrument seek out the Declination of the wall or plat,
whereupon you would make a dial, which for example suppose I had found to be
50. degrees.

^ Therefore draw the Horizontall line A. B. let the Meridian C. D. cut it
squire wise in the point E. which may be in any place of the line A. B. and let
the line F. G. cut the meridian squire-wise in the point C. which you may like
wise take in what part of the Meridian you think most convenient. Upon the
center E. describe the quadrant of a circle from C. to A. if the declinatio^ of
your plat be Westward, or from C. toward B. if Eastward (as in this example
it is) divide it into 90. degrees and number in it from C. toward B. the
Elevation of the Equator 38. degrees, and laying your ruler This is always so
much as the Elevation of the Pole, wants of 90. degrees.
upon the center E. and upon the end of this number draw the line E. H.

Again account in the quadrant from C. toward B. the declination of the plat
being 50. degrees, and draw the line of Declination E. I. from E. to the end of
this number.

Then take your compasses, set one foot in the point C. extend the other unto
H. (which is the intersection point of the line E. H. with the line C. G.) and
that same widnesse remaining, place one foot in the center E. and with the
other mark the point 1. in the line E I. and from the point I. draw the line
I. K. squire-wise to the Meridian E. C. placing K. at the intersection it
makes with E. C.

Moreover take with your compasses the just length of the line I. K. and
placing one foot in C. turn the other toward F. and make the point L. in the
line C. F. draw the Substile from E. by L. Let the line of Contingence be
drawn squire-wise to the Substile in the point L.

This done, take the distance between the center E. and the point K. and place
it in this line of Contingence from the point L. unto M. and make the point M.
that the line E. M. may be made from E. unto M. for the style.

Measure with your compasses the least distance between the point L. and the
Style, and with the same widenes, one foot remaining in L. turn the other
toward E. and make the center O. in the Substile: upon which describe the
Equinoctial circle. Then placing your ruler upon O. being the center of the
Equinoctial circle, and N. (which is the point of intersection of the Meridian
and Contingent) marking where it cutteth the circumference, for there you must
begin to divide it into 24. equal parts, not withstanding those 12. are only
in use which are next the contingent.

Finally, place your ruler upon the center O. and upon the several division
points of the Equator, and where it touches the line of Contingence make
marks, by which from the center E. draw the hour lines.

Place the Meridian perpendicularly upon the wall, the center E. upward, the
Style pointing downward. Let the Style hang directly over the Substile making
an angle equal to E. M. L.



The making of a North Erect Declining Dial. CAP. 8.
THe North Erect declining Dial differs from the South only herein, that the
center is to be placed downward, the Style pointing upward to the North Pole,
and that the Meridian represents the 12. hour at midnight and not at noone.
Therefore if the declination be toward the East, you must account the hour
lines from that which is as it were the Meridian forthward 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 etc.

But if it decline toward the West, number them backward, 11, 10, 9, 8, etc.
omitting the first 3. which are before Sun rising and after Sun setting in
our elevation.

Let the line E. D. be placed perpendicularly upon the plat, and the Style
point upward to the North Pole. Compare this figure with the former.



Another way to make the South Erect Declining Dial. CAP. 9.
ALbeit we have plainly and perfectly showed the making of the South and North
erect Declining Dials, in the two former Chapters; yet to satisfy them that
delight in variety; here is also declared another way, whereby you may make
them, namely, by the help of Arithmetic, and the Table of Sines which is Read
the ^se of the Table of Sines.
placed in the end of this book for this intent.

Therefore the Elevation of the Pole being known, and the Declination of your
plat, by your Instrument found out:

Multiply the Sine of the complement of the Elevation, by the Sine of the
complement of the Declination, divide the product by the whole Sine (which is
100000) and you shall have a quotient Sine, whose arc is the distance of the
Style from the Substile, which distance keep.

Then take the complement of this distance, and the Elenation of the Pole, and
multiply the Sine of the lesser by the whole Sine, parting the product by the
Sine of the greater: the quotient Sine which shall come of this division, shall
give you an Arc, whose complement is the distance of the line of the Substile
from the Meridian, which distance you shall likewise keep. For better
instruction herein, consider the example.

Example of a South Dial declining 45. d. Elevation of the Pole. 52. d.
FIrst I enter the Table of Sines, for the Sine of the complement of the
Elevation, which is 38. d. and I find it to be 61566. Then I look for the
Sine of the complement of the Declination, which is 45. d. and I find that to
be 70710. This done, I multiply the one by the other, and the product is 435333
1860. which I divide by the whole Sine being 100000 whereof comes a quotient
43533. With this quotient Sine I enter the Table, and because I find not the
just number, I take that which is next either greater or less unto it: (which
you must always remember to do) for so small a difference makes no
alteration, and therefore I take in stead thereof 43523. whose Arc is 25 d. 48.
m. which is the distance of the Style from the substile.

Then I take the complement of this distance, which is 64. d. 12. m. whose Sine
is 90031. and the Elevation of the Pole 52. d. whose Sine is 78801. and
multiplying ye Sine of the lesser, (which is the Elevation of the Pole) by the
whole, 100000. the product is 7880100000. which I divide by the Sine of the
greater, to wit, the Sine of the complement of the distance of the Style from
ye Substile, whose Sine is 90031, whereof comes this quotient 87526 whose
Arc is 61. d. 5. m. The complement of which arc is 28. d. 55. m. being the
distance of the substile from the Meridian. These distances being thus found
out, the drawing of the dial follows.

First draw a line Parallele to the Horizon A. B. out of whose middle point C.
draw the Meridian line squire wise C. D. upon the center C. make the quadrant
of a circle between A. and D. Here understand that generally in all kinds of
declining Dials, if the declination be toward the East, you must draw the
quadrant toward the West, (except in the South reclining declining, and the
North inclining Declining, where the contrary is prescribed) But if the
declination be Westward, the quadrant must be drawn Eastward. Hereby you shall
easily know on which side you ought always to draw the quadrant, and which way
the figures following do decline. Your quadrant being made, divide it into 90.
degrees: number therein from D. the distance of the Substile from the Meridian,
(which is 28. d. 55. m. Draw at the end of this number the line C. E. for the
Substile. Then from E. toward A. account the distance of the Style from the
Substile, which is 25. d 48. m. and at the end hereof, draw the line C. F. for
the Style. Afterward by the point E. or in any place of the Substile draw the
Contingent line G. H. so long as you can squirewise to the Substile. Then take
with your compasses the least distance between E. and the Style, the one foot
remaining in E. and the other extended in the Substile toward C. place at the
prick there made with the compasses, I. upon which prick as a center, the
same widenes of your compasses remaining, draw a circle by E. which shall
represent the equinoctial or Equator. Then lay the ruler upon the point I. and
the intersection (whose mark is K.) of the line of Contingence and the line C.
D. which is always drawn so that it may cut the other) and where the ruler so
placed shall touch the circle, there make a mark, and there begin to divide it
into 24. equal parts: notwithstanding those 12. only are to be used, which
do behold the contingent line. Then lay the ruler upon the center I. and the
Contingent line by every division of the Equator, and where it shall touch the
line of Contingence, there make marks, by the which from the center C. draw
lines for the hours, so many as shall be necessary.

The line C. D. shall always show the 12. hour, which must hang
perpendicularly. Number the residue of the lines in their place, as they follow
in order.

The line A. B. in such as do decline is unprofitable, except it so chance
that some hour line falls in it.

Let the Style be fixed in C. hanging directly over the Substile, with so great
an angle, as E. C. F. is, declining on neither side.

Note diligently the making of this declining Dial, because in those which
follow, we mean not to repeat those things which here have been taught. And
this one kind well known, all the other will seem most easy. For better
understanding hereof behold the figure.

A South Erect declining Dial.
dialing diagram

The making of a North Erect declining Dial another way. CAP. 10.
THe distance of the Style from the Substile, and of the Substile from the
Meridian, is found out altogether like to the South Erect declining. Therefore
you may resort thither for the working hereof, I will only draw the Figure.

Let the line A. B. being parallele to the Horizon, cut C. D. squire wise,
placing E. at the intersection Draw the quadrant from C. to B. divide it into
90. d. accounting therein from C. toward B. the distance of the Substile from
ye line, which is (as it were) the Meridian, which distance is 28. d. 55m. At
the end of this number draw the line E. F. for the Substile. Then number from
that line the distance of the Substile and the Style, which is 25. degrees, 48
minutes toward B. Draw likewise at the end of this number the line for the
Style E. G. This done, let the line of Contingence be drawn squire wise by the
point F. and then taking the least distance between the point F. and the
Style, extend the compasses in the line F. E. the one foot being placed in F.
where the other shall divide the line, place the letter H. With the same
widenes of the compasses draw upon the center H. the Equator, and where the
ruler shall touch the same, being laid upon the center H. and the intersection
of the Contingent line, and yt which is (as it were) the Meridian, begin to
divide it into 24. equal parts. Finish all things remaining, as in ye South
erect declining, only this excepted, the Style being fixed in the center E.
must be placed upward, beholding the substile with so great a distance or
angle, as the letters F. E. G. do show. The line C. D. being applied to the
plat perpendicularly, shows as it were the 12. hour at midnight: therefore
account from that the hour lines, as they follow in order, 1, 2, 3. which
hours have no use in this kind of Dial for our Elevation, but from 4. etc.

Let the line A. B. be parallel to the Horizon, being lightly drawn, as the
other preparatiue lines be, serving afterward to no use.

Note, if the plat decline toward the East, as this figure does, it is for the
forenoone: and you must account the hour lines from that which is (as it were)
the Meridian, forward 4, 5, 6. etc. If it decline toward the West, account them
backward 11, 10, 9. as we showed before.

A North erect declining Dial.
dialing diagram

The making of a Meridionall or South Reclining direct Dial. CAP. 11.
IF the Reclination of the plat be less then the complement of the Elevation
of the Pole, add this complement, and the Reclination of the plat together,
and with this number as if it were the Elevation of the Pole make a South erect
direct dial, and it will be perfect and fit for your plat.

Example and delineation of a South Dial, reclining 25. d.
MAke the first line A. B. draw also an other C. D. cutting the other with
right angles. Then add the Complement of the elevation of the Pole (which is
25. d,) to the reclination of the plat (which is 38. d.) and the total sum
shall be 63. d. which number being in place of the Elevation of the Pole, account
it in the Quadrant from A. toward D. and at the end hereof, draw the line F.
for the Style. Then make the line of Contingence K L. squire wise to the line
C. D. Afterward take the least distance with your compasses between the point
G. and y^ Style, with y^ widenes, the one foot extended toward C. make a point
or prick E. by which point draw the line H. I. equidistant from A. B. or K. L.
upon E. make a half circle from H. by G. to I. which being divided into 12.
parts, finish the rest as the South Erect direct.

A South Direct reclining 25. d.
dialing diagram

BUt if the Reclination be equal to the complement of the Pole, make your
Dial on this manner, like to the East and West.

Draw a line Parallele to the Horizon A. B. so long as the plat will give you
leave, divide it into 7. equal parts, and with the same widenes of the
compasses, in the midst of the line, make a circle representing the Equator.
Then draw two lines of Contingence by the circumference of the circle,
equidistant from the first A. B. Divide the Equator into 24. equal parts.
Finish the rest like the East or West dial: except in naming the hours, for
that which is in them the 6. hour line, is here the 12. etc.

A South Direct reclining 38. d.
dialing diagram

BUt if the reclination of the plat be greater then the complement of the
Elevation of the Pole, substract the complement of this Elevation out of the
reclination, and that which remains shall serve in stead of the Elevation of
the Pole: with which Elevation make your dial altogether like a Horizontall,
which you shall find fit for your plat.

Example of a South Dial, reclining 55. d.
FIrst I take the complement of the Elevation, which is 38. d. out of the
Reclination of the plat, which is 55. d. and there remains 17. d. which
number keep for the Elevation of the Pole.

In Delineation of this Dial, draw a line Parallele to the horizon A. B. draw
another C. D. making right angles with the line A. B. Then make the quadrant
from A. to D. which being divided into 90. degrees, number in it that, which
is, as it were, the Elevation of the Pole, namely 17. degrees from D. toward
A. Then draw the line of Contingence K. L. in any point of the line C. D.
squire wise. Take with your compasses the least distance of the point G. and of
the Style: extend them forth in the line C. D. I mean, from G. toward C. make
there a point marked with E. upon which point or center with the same
wideness of the compasses, draw the Equator from H. by G. to I. divide it
into 12. equal parts, etc.

Finish that which remains in all respects, like to the Horizontall Dial, in
naming the hours, drawing of the lines, fixing of the Style, etc. for in this
kind of Dial, the Style must be fixed in the center C. standing upward, with
so great an angle, as C. D. F. is.

Behold the Figure following.

A South Reclining Erect.
dialing diagram

The making of a North Dial Reclining Direct. CAP. 12.
IN these kinds, if the Reclination be less then the Elevation of the Pole,
subtract that from this, and keep the remainder for the Elevation of the Pole:
according to which Elevation, make a North Dial Erect Direct, and it will be
fit for your plat. In which the hours about Noone are placed, being profitable
only in summer: and not then unless the Reclination be greater then the
distance of y^ Trop^k of S, from y^ Zenith. And the more your Dial Reclineth,
the longer time it will show in Summer.

Example of a North Dial Reclining 45. degrees.
FIrst I take the Elevation of the Pole (which we account 52. d.) (...) the
Reclination of the plat, which is 45. d. and there remains 7. d. which shall
be in place of the Elevation of the Pole.

Then for the drawing of it, resort to the North Erect Direct, because their
Delineation is like: remembering always to call that which remains the
Elevation of the Pole: which in this example is but 7. degrees. In the figure
following you see that most part of the hour lines be drawn opposite from the
Contingent, beyond the center E. as you must do in any of this kind, if you
will have the hours about noone.

dialing diagram

Example of a North Dial Reclining 52. degrees.
BUt if the Reclination be equal with the Elevation of the Pole: then describe
a circle upon the center E. and divide it into 24. equal parts, beginning the
division at the 12. hour. Draw by those points, lines for the hours from the
center E. so many as shall be necessary: erecting the Style (being some small
wier) in the center E. right up. This kind of Dial serves only when the
Sun is in the north signs, which be,,,,,.

A North Reclining Direct.
dialing diagram

You may with the help of a small brass quadrant and a needle placed
conveniently make this a portable and fit Dial for any Elevation of the Pole.

Again, if the Reclination shall exceed the Elevation of the Pole: add the
complement of the reclination to the Elevation, and with that number as if it
were the Elevation of the Pole, make your Dial altogether like a Horizontall,
and it shall be fit for your plat. In which notwithstanding in winter, very
few hours will show, and those about noone: and yet not these, unless the
Reclination shall be greater, then the ^^hest bending of the Trop^ke of, from
the Zenith.

Example of a North Dial reclining 80. d.
FIrst add the complement of ^he reclination of the plat, which is 10. d. to
the Elevation of the Pole 52. d. and with the total number 62. d. ^^ ^f it
were the Elevation of the Pole, make a Horizontall Dial, as is showed cap. 3.
Always remember to call the two numbers added together, the Elevation of the
Pole.

A North reclining Direct.
dialing diagram

The making of an East and West Dial reclining. CAP. 13.
FIrst multiply the Sine of the Elevation of the Pole, by the Sine of the
Reclination of the plat, and divide the product by the whole Sine: whereof
shall come a quotient, whose arc is the distance of the Style, from the
Substile.

Compare the Complement of this distance with the Complement of the Elevation
of the Pole, and which you shall find least, multiply the Sine thereof by the
whole Sine, parting the Product by the Sine of the greater. The quotient shall
yield an arc, whose Complement shall be the distance of the Substile from the
Meridian.

Example of an East or West Dial, reclining 45. degrees.
FIrst, I multiply the Sine of the Elevation of the Pole 52. degrees being
78801. by the Sine of the Reclinatio^ of the plat, which is 70710. and the
product 5572018710 I divide by 100000 the whole Sine, and the quotient is
55720. the arc whereof is 33. d. 52. m. which is the distance of the Substile
from the Style.

Then I compare the Complement of this distance, which is 56. d. 8. m. with the
Complement of the Elevation of the Pole, which is 38. d. and finding the
Complement of the Elevation to be least, I multiply 61566 the Sine thereof, by
the whole Sine: and the Product arising thereof is 6156600000: which I divide
by the Sine of the greater, which is the Complement of the distance, whose Sine
is 83033. And the quotient 74141 yields an arc 47. d. 51. m. whose
Complement is 42. d. 9. m. which is the distance of the Substile from the
Meridian.

First draw a line Parallele to the Horizon A. B. draw The delineation of the
figure.
another squier wise, C. D. Then make the quadrant from A. to D. Number therein
the distance of the Substile from the Meridian (which we found to be in our
example 42. d. 9. m.) from A. toward D. At the end of this number from the
center C. draw the line for the Substile, C. E. Account from this line the
distance between the Style and the Substile, which is 33. d. 52. m. draw
likewise at the end of this number from C. the line C. G. for the Style. Let
the line of Contingence be squire wise to the Substile in any point where you
will. Then take with your compasses the least distance between the point E. and
the line of the Style: with that widnesse the one foot remaining in E. extend
the other in the line of the Substile toward C. make there the point F. upon
which draw the Equator from H. by E. to I. Divide it into 12. equal parts;
beginning your division where the ruler being placed upon the center F. and the
intersection of the Meridian with the Contingent shall touch the equator. Lay
the ruler from F. by each of those marks, and where it shall touch the line of
Contingence, there make marks: by which from the center C. draw the hour
lines so many as shall be necessary. The line A. B. is the Meridian, and
shows the 12. hour. Finish all other things, as in the rest before you were
taught.

Note that if it be an East dial, you must make the quadrant from A. to D. If
a West, from B. to D. Finish the residue as before, etc.

An East or West reclining.
dialing diagram

The making of a South reclining declining Dial. CAP. 14.
FIrst, in this kind, as in other which follow, you must find out and place
the Meridian, the Substile, and the Style, which being done, that which
remains is finished as in those before.

Therefore the Declination and the Reclination of the plat being known by your
instrument, multiply the Sine of the Declination by the Sine of the complement
of the Reclination, dividing the product by the whole Sine. The quotient Sine
shall yield an Arc, whose complement shall be named the Complement to be
repeated.

Afterward augment the Sine of the Complement of the Declination, by the whole
Sine, divide the Product by the Sine of the Complement to be repeated: where of
shall come a Sine, whose arc shall be the distance of the Meridian from the
Horizon.

Again, multiply the Sine of this distance, by the Sine of the Complement of
the Reclination, part the Product by the whole Sine, the arc of whose
quotient shall be called the Elevation of the Meridian.

Then compare this Elevation of the Meridian, with the Elevation of the Pole,
and which you shall find least, subtract that from the greater, and that which
remains keep, (for it shall be called the difference kept) being mindful
which of them was the greatest.

This done, multiply the Sine of the Complement to be repeated, by the Sine of
the difference kept: dividing the Product by the whole Sine, whereof shall come
a Sine, whose arc shall be the distance of the Style from y^ substile.

To conclude, compare the Complement of this distance, with the complement of
the difference kept, and which you shall find least, multiply the Sine thereof
by the whole Sine: part the Product by the Sine of y^ greater, and thereof
shall come a Sine, the Complement of whose arc shall be the distance of the
Substile from the Meridian.

Example of a South Dial
Declining 18. d. Reclining 25. d.
First look out in the Table the Sine of the Declination, which is 30901. Then
the Complement of the Reclination being 65. d. the Sine hereof is 90630.
Afterward multiply 90630: by 30901. and the product 2800557630 divide by the
whole Sine, which is 100900. the quotient shall be 28005. whose arc is 16. d.
16. m. The complement whereof being 73. d. 44. m. is the complement to be
repeated.

This done, multiply 95105 the Sine of the Complement of the Declination 72. d.
by the whole Sine 100000. the product shall be 9510500000. which being divided by
95996 the Sine of the complement to be repeated, the quotient shall be 99071,
whose arc is 82. d. 11. m. which is the distance of the Meridian from the
Horizon.

Afterward augment the Sine of this distance 99071. by the Sine of the
complement of the Reclination, which is 90630. and the product 8978804730 part
by the whole Sine: and the quotient 89788 shall yield an arc 63. d. 53. m.
which is the Elevation of the Meridian.

Then compare the Elevation of the Meridian, with the Elevation of the Pole,
which in this example is 52. d. and finding the Elevation of the Pole to be
least, substract this namely 52. degrees) from 63. d. 53. m. the Elevation of
the Meridian, and there remains 11. d. 53. m. which is the difference kept.

Now multiply 95996 being the Sine of the Complement to be repeated, which is
20591. the product is 1976653636. which divided by the whole Sine, the quotient
shall be 19766, whose arc 11. d. 24. m. is the distance of the Style from the
Substile.

Then to conclude. y^ Complement of this distance, which is 78. d. 36. m. being
compared with the Complement of the difference kept, which is 78. d. 7. m. you
shall find the Complement of this difference kept to be least, wherefore
multiply 97856 the Sine thereof, by the whole Sine, and the product 9785600000.
part by the Sine of the greater, to wit, of the Complement of the distance of
the Style from the Substile, which is 98027. the quotient shall be 99825. whose
arc is 86. d. 37. m. The Complement whereof is 3. d. 23 m. which is the
distance of the Substile from the Meridian.

There be three sundry kinds of these Dials, the one differing from the other.

The first kind.
Mark therefore, if the Elevation of the Meridian be greater then the
Elevation of the Pole, draw a line parallele to the Horizon A. B. out of the
midst whereof extend an other C. D. squire wise to the line A. B. make the
quadrant from A. to D. number therein from A. toward D. the distance of the
Meridian from the Horizon, which is 82. d. 11. m. at the end hereof from y^
center C. draw the line C. E. for the Meridian. From which account backward
toward A. the distance of the Substile from the Meridian, which is 3. d. 23.
m. draw at the end of this number the line C. F. for the Substile. Then from
the Substile toward A. number the distance of the Substile from the Style 11.
d. 24 m. and at the end thereof extend the line C. G. which shall represent the
Style. This done, in the line of the Substile in the point F. (which you may
take where you will in y^ Substile) draw the line of Contingence squirewise to
the Substile. Then take the least distance of the point F. from the Style.
Afterward extend your compasses, the one foot being placed in F. in the line
of the Substile toward C. unto H. Describe upon the center H. the Equinoctial
circle by F. Divide it into 24. equal parts, beginning where the ruler shall
touch the Equator, being placed upon the center H and upon every mark of the
Equator, and where the ruler shall touch the line of Contingence, there make
marks, by which, from the center C. draw the hour lines somany as shall be
necessary, C* E. always she wing the 12. hour. Let the Style hang directly
over the Substile with so great an angle as F C. G. is: fixing it in the center
C. pointing* downward to the Pole Antartick.

Place the line A. B. parallele to the Horizon, having afterward as other
preparatiue lines no use.

A South Declining Reclining.
dialing diagram

The second kind.
But if the Elevation of the Pole, and the Elevation of the Meridian be found
equal, the making of your Dial differs from the former: yet y^ finding out
of the Meridian and the Substile, etc. is wrought as in the other before,
whither you may resort. It shall be sufficient here to show an example of this
kind.

Example of a South Dial, whose
Declination is, 32 d. Reclination is, 33. d. 30. m. Elevation of the Pole is,
52. d. 2. m.
First I multiply 52991 the Sine of the declination, by 83388 the Sine of the
Complement of the Reclination, and the product 4418813508 arising thereof, I
divide by the whole Sine: the quotient Sine 44188 yields an ark 26. d. 14. m.
whose complement being 63. d. 46. m. is ye complement to be repeated.

Then I increase the Sine of the Complement of the declination, which is 84804,
by the whole Sine, and the product is, 8480400000: which I part by 89700 being
the Sine of the complement to be repeated. The arc of whose quotient Sine
94541 being 70. d. 59. m. is the distance of the Meridian from the Horizon.

This done, I multiply this Sine 94541, by the Sine of the complement of the
reclination, which is 83388, and the product arising hereof, being 7883584908 I
divide by the whole Sine: the quotient thereof is 78835, whose ark 52. d 2. m.
is the Elevation of the Meridian, which I compare with the Elevation of the
Pole, and finding them equal, I end my work here. For this shall be sufficient
in this kind of Dial, as you may more plainly perceive by the delineation of
the Figure.

Wherefore if the Elevation of the Pole, and of the Meridian be found equal,
(as in this example it is) make a line parallel to the Horizon A. B. Draw
another C. D. making right angles with the line A. B. Draw the quadrant from A.
to D. number therein the distance of the Meridian from the Horizon from A.
toward D. which is 70. d. 59. m. being here in place of the Substile. Then draw
the line of Contingence squire wise to the Meridian C. E. (which is also the
Substile C E. in any point thereof, as before. Place one foot of your Compasses
in the intersection E. then set the other foot in y^ Meridian (or Substile)
being of any widenes: make there the point or center F. upon which center draw
the half Equator from G. by E. to H. Divide the one half thereof from E. to H.
into 90. d. Account therein from the Meridian E. toward H. the declination of
the plat 32. d. place the ruler upon the center F. and the end of this number,
and where it shall touch the Contingent line, there make a mark, by this mark
you must draw a line squire wise to the Contingent line, which shall be for the
12 hour. And where the ruler shall touch the Equator, there begin to divide it
into 12. equal parts, by which lay the ruler from the center F. making in the
line of Contingence marks for the other hour lines, all which shall cut the
Contingent line squire-wise. Note that sometime in dividing of the Equator, the
two parts at both ends next to the Semidiameter G. H shall both of them make
but one whole part unless you will make a whole circle for the Equator, and
divide it into 24. parts.

Let the Style be a small wire standing right up in the point E. being so long
as the semidiameter of the Equator. It may be also a plate of iron or brass
fastened in the Substile so broad as the Semidiameter is, as in the East and
West erect dialls, etc. Let the line A. B. be parallele to the Horizon. Finish
all other things as before.

A South reclining declining.
dialing diagram

The third kind.
If the Elevation of the Meridian be less then the Elevation of the Pole, the
making of this Dial i^ unlike to both the other mentioned before, yet the
finding out of the distance of the Style from the Substile is done like to the
first kind, as by the example following may appear.

Example of a South Dial
Declining 45. d. Reclining 45. d. Elevation of the Pole 52. d.
First I multiply the Sine of the declination being 7071* by the Sine of the
complement of the reclination which is likewise 70710, and the product
4999904100 I part by the whole Sine. The quotient is 49999 whose arc is 30. d.
The Complement of this arc is 60. d. which is the Complement to be repeated.

Then I increase the Sine of the Complement of the declination, which is
likewise 70710, by the whole Sine, and the product thereof 7071000000 I divide
by the Sine of the Complement to be repeated 86602: the quotient Sine 81649
yields an arc 54. d. 44. m. which is the distance of the Meridian from the
Horizon.

Afterward I multiply this Sine 81649, by the Sine of the Complement of the
Reclination, which is 70710: the product arising 5773400790 I part by the whole
Sine, the quotient is 57734. The arc whereof is 35. d. 16. m. the Elevation of
the Meridian: which I compare with the Elevation of the Pole (being in our
example) 52. d. and finding the Meridian Elevation to be least, I substract it
out of the Elevation of the Pole, and there remains 16. d. 44. m. which is
the difference kept.

This done, I augment 86602 the Sine of the Complement to be repeated, by 28791
the Sine of the difference kept, and the product 2493358182 coming hereof, I
divide by the whole Sine, the quotient Sine 24933 yields an arc 14. d. 26.
m. the distance of the Style from the Substile.

Now comparing the Complement of this distance being 75. d. 34. m. with the
Complement of the difference kept, which is 73. d. 16. m. and seeing the
Complement of the difference kept to be least: I multiply 95765 the Sine
thereof, by the whole Sine, and the product 9576500000 I divide by 96843 the
Sine of the complement of the distance, and 98886 shall be the quotient thereof,
whose arc is 81. d. 27. m. The Complement of this arc is 8. d. 33. m. which
is the distance of the Substile from the Meridian.

In the Delineation of this dial, draw first as before a line Parallele to
the Horizon A B. extend another C. D. making right angles with the line A. B.
Draw the Quadrant from A. to D. divide it into 90. degrees. In which account
the distance of the Meridian from the Horizon, from A. toward D. which is 54.
d. 44. m. draw at the end of this number the Meridian line from the center C.
which shall show the 12. hour. Account from this toward D. the distance of the
Substile from the Meridian, which is 8. d. 33. m. at the end hereof extend from
C. the line E. for the Substile. From this, number the distance of the Style
being 14. d. 26. m. toward D. if there be so much space, if not, account it
from the Substile toward A. make at the end of this number the line C. F. for
the Style. Let the line of Contingence cut the Substile squire-wise, in what
point you will. Finish all other things, as in the first of these three kinds
of South reclining declining Dials.

In this kind of reclining Dials, whose Style must be placed from the center
C. upward toward the Pole Artick: if at any time you cannot draw to both ends
of the Contingent line so many hour lines as shall be necessary: then prolong
beyond the center C. the lines opposite on the other side. As if you would make
the 8. hour line for the morning, draw the 8. for the evening beyond the
center C. and you shall have your desire.

Note that moreover, in this kind contrary to the other before, if the plat
decline toward the West, (as in this example it does) the^ draw the quadrant
toward the West, etc. But if the Declination be toward the East, make the
quadrant toward the East.

A South reclining, declining.
dialing diagram

The making of a North reclining declining Dial. CAP. 15.
The first kind.
IN this kind as in the South before: first multiply the Sine of the
Declination, by the Sine of the Complement of the Reclination: parting the
product by the whole Sine. The quotient Sine thereof shall yield an arc,
whose Complement shall be called the Complement repeated.

Then increase the Sine of the Complement of the Declination by the whole Sine,
divide the product by the Sine of the Complement repeated: the quotient Sine
thereof will give an arc, which shall be the distance of the Meridian from the
Horizon.

The same quotient Sine multiply by the Sine of the Complement of the
reclination: and the number arising part by the whole Sine: the arc of this
quotient is the Elevation of the Meridian.

Now add the Elevation of the Pole to the Elevation of the Meridian, and the
total number or arc hereof, we will call the compounded arc. And if the
compounded arc be less then 90. degrees: then multiply the Sine thereof, by
the Sine of the Complement repeated, dividing the product by the whole Sine:
and hereof shall arise a quotient Sine, whose arc shall be the distance of the
Style from the Substile.

Now compare the Complement of this distance, with the Complement of the
compounded arc: and increase the Sine of the lesser by the whole Sine, part
the product by the Sine of the greater: and thereof shall come a Sine, the
Complement of whose arc shall be the distance of the Substile from the Meridian.

But mark here the diversity which does arise by reason of the compounded
arc: for hereby you shall have three sundry ways, both in finding out the
distances between the Meridian and the Horizon, the Style and Substile, etc.
And likewise in the delineation of the figure. Whereof arises three sundry
kinds of Dialls: the first of them being already taught.

The second kind.
If the compounded arc be just 90. degrees: then the distance of the Style
from the Substile shall be the Complement repeated: and the distance of the
Substile from the Meridian shall be also 90. degrees.

Note that in the working hereof, there is no difference from the first kind.
For here as in the other before, you shall first ^inde out the complement
repeated: then the distance of the Meridian from the Horizon: Afterward the
Elevation of the Meridian, which being added to the Elevation of the Pole, if
the total number be just 90. d. you shall not need to proceed forward, for
this (as before I made mention) shall be the distance of the Meridian from the
Substile.

In this kind you shall have no intersection of the Meridian and the
Contingent line: therefore you shall begin the division of the Equator at the
line of the Substile, which shall show the 6. hour, either in the morning, or
evening, according as the plat does decline.

The third kind.
But if the compounded arc be greater then 90 degrees, substract it from 180,
and that which remains shall be called the difference kept. Then multiply the
Sine of the Complement repeated, by the Sine of the difference kept, dividing
the product by the whole Sine, hereof shall come a Sine, whose arc shall be
the distance of the Style from the Substile.

Then compare the Complement of this distance, with the Compleme^t of the
difference kept, increasing the Sine of the lesser by the whole Sine, and
parting the product by the Sine of the greater: whereof shall come a Sine, the
Compleme^t of whose arc, being taken from 180 degrees, the remaynder shall show
how much the line of the Substile must be distant (upward by the Horizon) from
the Meridian. For the better understanding of these three kinds, mark these
three examples following, with the delineatio^ of their figures.

Example of a North Dial, whose
Declination is, 45. d. Reclination 45. d. Eleuatio^ of the Pole 52. d.
First I work this altogether like to the South reclining 45. d. declining 45.
d. until I have found out the Elevation of the Meridian.

Then I add the Elevation of the Meridian which is, 35. d. 16. m. to the
Elevation of the Pole 52. d. the total number is 87. d. 16. m. which is the
compounded arc: and being less then 90. d. I proceed with this arc, etc.

Now therefore I multiply the Sine of this compounded arc, which is 99884, by
the Sine of the complement to be repeated being 86602, and the product
8650154168 I part by the whole Sine. The quotient thereof is 86501, whose arc
59. d. 54. m. is the distance between the Style and the Substile.

Then I compare 30. d. 6. m. being the Complement of this distance, with* the
Complement of the compounded arc, which is 2. d. 44. m. and finding this
least, I increase 4768 the Sine thereof, by the whole Sine, dividing the
product, which is 476800000, by 50151 the Sine of the greater: the quotient
Sine yields an arc 5. d. 27. m. the Complement hereof 84. d. 33. m. is the
distance of the Substile from the Meridian.

In drawing of this Dial, first as before, make a line Parallele to the
Horizon A B. Then extend the line C. D. cutting the other squire-wise. Mark
the intersection or center with E. draw thereupon a circle A. B. C. D. whose
two quadrants at the least, toward A. (if the plat decline Westward, or else
toward B. if it decline Eastward) being divided into 90. d. each of them,
number therein from A. toward D. the distance of the Meridian from the
Horizon, which is 54. d. 44. m. and at the end hereof from the center ^. draw
the line F. for the Meridian, or 12. hour. Account from this upward toward C.
the distance of the Substile from the Meridian, bring 84. d. 33. m. make
likewise at the end of this number from E. the line for the Substile. Again
number from hence upward (if there be so much space, or else downward) 59. d.
54. m. which is the distance between the Style and the Substile, and at the
end hereof draw the line H. for the Style. Let the Contingent line cut the
Substile squire-wise in the point G. which you may take in any place of the
Substile. Then with your compasses the least distance of this point G. and the
Style being taken, with that wideness extend them forth in the line of the
Substile toward E. making there the point I. upon which draw the Equator or
Equinoctial circle. This done place the ruler upon the center I. and the
intersection of the Meridian and the Contingent line, and where it shall touch
the Equator there begin to divide it into 24. equal parts. Finish all other
things, as in those which went before.

A North reclining declining.
dialing diagram

The second kind of North Dial, reclining 45. degrees 14. minutes, declining
38. degrees.
IT shall not be necessary to show an example of this second kind, because
the Complement repeated, the distance of the Meridian from the Substile, and
between the Style and Substile, etc. is found out altogether like to the other
before, and that which follows. Therefore it suffices to set down the number
of these distances.

First the Complement repeated is, 64. d. 18. m.

The distance of the Meridian from the Horizon is, 60. d. 59. m.

The Elevation of the Meridian is 38. d. which I add to the Elevation of the
Pole being 52. d. and the total 90. d. is the compounded arc.

Draw therefore in this kind as before, a line Parallel to the Horizon A B.
make another squire-wise, C. D. Draw the two quadrants from C. by A. to D.
dividing each of them into 90. d. Then number herein the distance of the
Meridian from the Horizon, which is 60. d. 59. m. drawing from E. at the end
here of, the line F. for the Meridian. From this account 90. d. being here the
distance of the Substile from the Meridian: and like wise at the end of this
number from E. draw the line for the Substile. Again from this line downward,
(because there is no space upward,) account the Complement repeated 64. d. 18.
m. which here we take for the distance of the Style from the Substile: make
likewise by this number the line E. H. for the Style. Let the Contingent line
cut the Substile squire-wise in any place. Then taking the least distance with
the compasses of the point G and of the Style, with that widensse in the
Substile, make the point I. upon which draw the Equinoctial circle by G And
because here, (as in all other Dials, where the compounded arc is just 90. d.)
there is no intersection of the Meridian, and the Contingent line: therefore
begin the division of the Equator into 24 equal parts at the Substile, which in
this kind shall show the sixth hour, either in the evening or morning,
according to the declination of the plat. Place the ruler upon the center I.
and so many of these parts as you can, making marks in the line of Contingence
as before, draw the hour lines by them, etc. finish the rest as in the other.

A North Declining Reclining.
dialing diagram

Example of the third kind of North Dial before mentioned.
Reclining 21. d. 30. m. Declining 30. d.
Here first, as before I multiply the Sine of the Declination being 50000, by
93041 which is y^ Sine of the complement of the Reclination and the product
4652070000 I part by the whole Sine: the quotient 46520 yields an arc 27. d.
43. m. The complement whereof is 62. d. 17. m. being the Complement to be
repeated.

Then I increase 86602 the Sine of the complement of the Declination by the
whole Sine, dividing the product, by 88525 the Sine of the Complement repeated:
The arc of the quotient Sine 97827, is 78. d. 2. m, which is the distance of
the Meridian from the Horizon.

This done, I augment this quotient Sine 97827, by the Sine of the Complement
of the reclination, which is 93041: the product 9101921907 I distribute by the
whole Sine: and the quotient 91019 gives an arc 65. d. 32. m. the Elevation
of the Meridian.

Now I add 65. d. 32. m. being the Elevation of the Meridian, to 52. d. the
Elevation af the Pole, and the total number 117. d. 32. m. being the
compounded arc, because it is greater then 90. d. I substract it from 180, and
there remains 62. d. 28. m. which is the Difference kept.

Afterward I multiply 88525 the Sine of the Complement repeated, by 88674 the
Sine of the difference kept, parting the product 7849865850 by the whole Sine.
The quotient is 78498 whose arc is 51. d. 43. m. which is the distance between
the Style and the Substile.

Then comparing the Complement of this distance, being 38. d. 17. m. with the
complement of y^ difference kept, which is 27. d. 32. m. and finding this to be
least, I amplify 46226 the Sine thereof, by the whole Sine, dividing the
product 4622500000 by the Sine of the greater, which is 61955, and 74612 the
quotient coming hereof yields an arc 48. d. 15. m. whose Complement being
41. d. 45. m. I take out of 180, and the remainder is 138. d. 15. m. the
distance of the Substile from the Meridian.

The delineation of the Figure.
First as before, draw a line A. B. parallele to the Horizon. Make another C.
D. squire-wise to the former. Draw two quadrants at the least C. A. D. dividing
each of them into 90. degrees, number therein from A. toward D. the distance of
the Meridian from the Horizon, which in our example is found to be 78. d. 2. m.
draw at the end hereof from E. the line F. for the Meridian. Then account from
this upward 138. d. 15. m. being the distance of the Substile from the
Meridian, drawing likewise at the end of this number from E. the line for the
Substile. Afterward account from this line (on which side you will) 51. d 43.
m. the distance between the Style and the Substile, extending the line E H. by
the end of this number for the Style. Let the Contingent line cut the Substile
squire-wise in any point where you will. Afterward taking with your compasses
the least distance between the point G. and the Style, with that wideness in
the Substile toward E. make the point I. upon which draw the Equinoctial
circle by G. And because in this kind, where the Compounded arc is greater
then 90. d. there is none intersection of the Meridian and the contingent line
beneath the ceutre E. therefore draw forth the Meridian beyond the center, then
place your ruler on the intersection of the. Meridian and Contingent line above
the center, and the point ^. and where it cutteth the Equator, there begin to
divide it into 24. equal parts. Finish that which remains as before.

A North reclining declining.
dialing diagram

The making of a South Inclining direct Dial. CAP. 16.
IF the inclination of the plat be less then the Elevation of the pole, take
that from this, accou^ting the remainder for the Elevation of the Pole. And
with this number as if it were the Eleuafion of the Pole make a Dial like to
the South erect direct, and it shall be fit for your plat.

But if the Inclination of the plat be equal with the Elevation of the Pole,
make your Dial altogether like to the North reclining direct, whose
reclination likewise is equal to the Elevation of the Pole. They differ only
herein, that this is placed downward to the earth, and that upward.

But if the Inclination of the plat be greater then the Elevation of the Pole,
substract this from that, and with the number remaining, as if it were the
Elevation of the Pole, make your Dial like to the North erect direct.

Example of this kind incling 65. d.
Substract 52. d. the Elevation of the Pole, out of 65. d. being the
Inclination of the plat, and the remainder 13. d. account the Elevation of the
Pole. For y^ delineation hereof, resort to the North erect Dial, Cap. 5.

A South inclining direct.
dialing diagram

You see in this Figure, that all the lines for the hours are drawn opposite
from the Contingent line, beyond the center E. In like manner must you do in
the delineation of all such, which incline more then the elevation of the Pole.

Let the Style in this kind be placed directly over the Meridian, with so
great an angle as D. E. F. is, etc.

The making of a North inclining direct Dial. CAP. 17.
IF the Inclination of the plat be less then the complement of the Elevation
of the pole, add the inclination to the Elevation: and with that number, as if
it were the Elevation of the Pole, make a North crect direct dial, for your
plat.

But if the inclination be equal with the complement of the Elevation of the
Pole, then make a Dial as you were taught in the second kind of South
reclining direct: for as that plat so reclining in the South is placed upward:
so is this placed down ward. Note that this North dial shows but only 4.
hours, the two first in the morning, and the two last in the evening, and that
only in the midst of Summer.

But if the inclination be greater then the Complement of the Elevation of the
Pole, substract this lesser out of the other being greater: and with the number
remaining, as if it were the Elevation of the Pole, make your dial like to an
Horizontall. This kind likewise shows very few hours.

Example of this last kind, inclining 45. d.
First I take 38. d. being the complement of the Elevation of the Pale, out of
45. d. the inclination of the plat, and there remains 7. d. which I keep for
the Elevation of the Pole. For the delineation of this dial, resort to the
Horizontall, Cap. 3.

A North inclining Direct.
dialing diagram

The making of the East and West inclining Dials. CAP. 18.
MUltiply the Sine of the Elevation of the Pole by the Sine of the Inclination
of the plat, dividing the product by the whole Sine: the quotient arc shall be
the distance of the Style from the Substile.

Then compare the complement of this distance with the complement of the
Elevation of the Pole, increasing the Sine of the lesser by the whole Sine,
part the product by the Sine of the greater, where of shall come a Sine, the
Complement of whose arc shall be the distance of the Substile from the Meridian.

It shall not be necessary to show any example hereof, because the East and
West reclining be altogether like to this. Wherefore resort thither, for the
working of your example, for those distances in drawing this figure shall be
here observed.

The delineation of an East Dial, inclining 45. d.
First draw a line Parallele to the Horizon, A. B. make the perpendiculare
line C. D. squire-wise to the other. Describe the quadrant from A. to D. number
from A. toward D. 33. d. 52. m. the distance of the Substile from the Meridian,
and at the end hereof from C. draw the line E. for the Substile, account from
this 42. d. 9. m. drawing likewise at the end of this number the line G. for
the Style. Let the Contingent line cut the Substile squire-wise. Finish all
things else, as in the East reclining.

An East and West inclining.
dialing diagram

The making of a South inclining declining Dial. CAP. 19.
FIrst multiply the Sine of the Declination, by the Sine of the complement of
the inclination, parting the product by the whole Sine. The quotient Sine shall
yield an arc, whose complement shall be named the complement repeated.

Then increase the Sine of the Complement of the Declination by the whole Sine,
and the product divide by the Sine of the Complement repeated: whereof shall
come a Sine, whose arc is the distance of the Meridian from the Horizon.

Afterward, this Sine being multiplied by the Sine of the Complement of the
inclination, and the product parted by the whole Sine: the arc of the quotient
Sine shall be the Elevation of the Meridian. Which arc you must add to the
Elevation of the Pole. And if the total number be less then 90. d. it shall
be named the Doubtful arc. But if it be greater then 90. d. take it from
180, and let the remainder be called the Doutfull arc.

This done, augment the Sine of the Complement repeated, by the Sine of the
Doutfull arc: and the product arising thereof being divided by the whole Sine,
the quotient arc shall be the distance of the Style from the Substile.

Now compare the Complement of this distance, with the Complement of the
Doutful arc, multiplying the Sine of the lesser, by the whole Sine, dividing
the product by the Sine of the greater: the arc of the quotient Sine coming
thereof shall be the distance of the Substile from the Meridian.

But note, if the doubtful arc be found without subtraction from 180, (which
is if it be less then 90 d.) then you must subtract the distance of the
Substile from the Meridian out of 180, and the number remaining shall be the
true distance of the Meridian from the Substile.

Mark this likewise, if the doubtful arc be equal 90 degrees, let the
Complement repeated be the distance of the Style from the Substile: then shall
there be just 90 d. for the space between the Substile and the Meridian, as
before is taught in the North declining reclining, whither you may resort for
the working hereof. Here it shall be sufficient to show two examples, with the
delineation of their figures: the one, where the doubtful arc is subtracted
from 180 d. and the other, where there is no subtraction hereof, because it is
less then 90 degrees.

Example of a South Dial
Inclining 45 degrees. Declining 45 degrees.
Forasmuch as this is altogether like to the North reclining 45 d. declining 45
d. whither you may resort: I will omit the working of the former part of this
example, until I come to the finding out of the distance of the Substile from
the Meridian. The former part of this example you may find to be thus wrought
in the North reclining declining:

1 First the complement repeated 60 d. 2 Then the distance of the Meridian from
the Horizon 54 d. 44 d. 3 Next the Elevation of the Meridian 35 d. 16 m. 4 The
compounded arc there, which we call the doubtful arc here 87 d. 16 m. 5 The
distance of the Style from the Substile 59 d. 54 m. 6 Last, the distance of the
Substile from the Meridian 84 d. 33 m.
But here (as before is taught) you must subtract this distance from 180 d.
because the doubtful arc was less then 90 d. and then the remainder 95 d. 27
m. shall be the true distance of the Substile from the Meridian.

In the delineation of this dial, first, as before, make a line paralele to
the Horizon A. B. Draw another perpendicular C. D. cutting the former
squire-wise. Make two quadrants from A. by D* to B. If the plat decline
westward, number the distance of the Meridian from the Horizon from A. toward
D. etc. But if the declination be Eastward (as in this example it is) then
account this distance of the Meridian from the Horizon, which is 54 d. 44 m.
from B. toward D. drawing at the end hereof from the center C. the Meridian
line which shall show the 12 hour. Account likewise from that toward A. 95 d.
27 m. the distance of the Substile from the Meridian: making in like manner the
line E. C. for the Substile. From this line on which side you will, number the
distance of the Style from the Substile, being 59 d. 54 m. draw by this the
line G. representing the Style. Let the line of Contingence cut the Substile
squirewise in any point where you will. Make the Equator, begin the division
thereof, and draw the hour lines in all respects as in the North reclining 21
degrees 30 minutes, declining 30 degrees. Cap. 15.

A South declining inclining Dial.
dialing diagram

The second example of a South Dial
Inclining 33. d. 40. m. Where the doutfull arc is subtracted from 180.
Declining 31. d. Where the doutfull arc is subtracted from 180.
First 51503 the Sine of the Declination being multiplied, by 83227 the Sine of
the Complement of the inclination: and the product 4286440181 divided by the
whole Sine: the arc of the quotient is 25 d. 23. m. The complement whereof
being 64 d. 37 m. is the complement repeated.

Then I increase the Sine of the Complement of the declination which is 85716,
by the whole Sine, and I part the product 8571600000, by 90346 the Sine of the
Complement repeated. The quotient 94875 yields an arc 71 d. 35 m. which is
the distance of y^ Meridian from y^ Horizo^.

Again, I multiply this Sine 94875, by the Sine of the Complement of the
Inclination being 83227, and the product 7895961425 arising thereof, I divide
by the whole Sine. The arc of the quotient is 52 d. 9 m. which is the
Elevation of the Meridian.

Now this being added to the Elevation of the Pole 52 d. and the total number
104 d. 9 m. taken from 180, there remains 75 d. 51 m. which is the doubtful
arc.

Therefore I augment 90346 the Sine of the Complement repeated, by 96930 the
Sine of the doubtful arc, and the product 8760399890 I part by the whole
Sine. The arc of the quotient 61 d. 10 m. is the distance of the Substile from
the Style.

This done, I compare 28. d. 50. m. the Complement of this distance, with 14.
d. 9. m. the Complement of the doutfull arc, multiplying y^ Sine of the
lesser, which is 24446, by the whole Sine, dividing the product 2444600000, by
48226 the Sine of the greater. The quotient Sine 50741 yields an arc 30 d.
30. m. whose Complement 59 d. 30 m. is the distance of the Substile from the
Meridian.

First draw a line A. B. Parallele to the Horizon: draw another C. D.
squire-wise to the line A. B. make the two quadrants The delineation of the
figure. 71.
from A. by D. to B. And because this Declination is on the left hand, number
from A. toward D. 7 d. 35 m. the distance of the Meridian from the Horizon,
drawing by this from C. the Meridian line. From that toward B. account 59 d. 30
m. the distance of the Substile from the Meridian, making in like manner at the
end of this number from C. the Substile line E. Again from this forward (if
you can, or else backward) number the distance of the Style from the Substile,
which is 61 d. 10 m. Draw likewise by this from C. the line G. for the Style.
Let the Contingent cut the Substile squire-wise in any place, where you will,
etc. The making of the reclining declining Dials before, shall teach you the
finishing of this likewise.

A South declining inclining.
dialing diagram

The making of a North inclining declining Dial. CAP. 20.
THe working of this kind is altogether like the South reclining declining
dial.

First therefore multiply the Sine of the Declination, by the Sine of the
Complement of the inclination, dividing the product by the whole Sine. The
quotient shall give an arc: whose Complement shall be named the Complement
repeated.

Then augment the Sine of the Complement of the Declination by the whole Sine,
and the product part by the Sine of the Complement repeated. Whereof will come
a quotient Sine: whose arc shall be the distance of that which is as it were
the Meridian from the Horizon.

For the finding out of the Elevation of the Meridian, because it may be done
two sundry ways, I will set them down both, referring the choice to your
self.

Compare the Complement of the arc last found out, with the Declination of the
plat, multiplying the Sine of the lesser, by the whole Sine: and dividing the
product by the Sine of the greater. The quotient Sine shall yield an arc:
whose Complement shall be the Elevation of the Meridian. Or multiply y^ Sine of
the arc last found out, by the Sine of the Compleme^t of the inclination, part
the product by y^ whole Sine: and the arc of y^ quotient Sine shall be y^
Eleuatio^ of y^ Meridian.

Now comparing the Eluation of the Pole with the Elevation of the Meridian,
subtract the lesser from the greater, retaining the number remaining, which
shall be called the difference kept.

Afterward increase the Sine of the difference kept, by the Sine of the
Complement repeated, and divide the product by the whole Sine. The quotient
arising of this division shall give an arc, which shall be the distance
between the Style and the Substile.

To conclude, the Complement of this distance being compared with the
Complement of the difference kept, multiply the Sine of the lesser by the
whole Sine, and part the product by the Sine of the greater. The Complement of
the arc of the quotient Sine, shall be the distance of the Substile from the
Meridian.

But note, if the Elevation of the Meridian, and the Elevation of the Pole be
found equal, make an Equinoctial dial as before you were taught in the
Meridionall reclining declining: for there is no difference, but only that this
is placed downward, and the South upward.

There be of this north, as of the South reclining declining, three sundry
kinds of Dials, as by the examples and figures following you may perceive.

Example of a North Dial First example.

Inclining 20 d. Declining 30 d.
First I multiply 50000 the Sine of the declination, by 93969 the Sine of the
Complement of the inclination, and the product thereof 4698450000, I divide by
the whole Sine 100000, and the quotient Sine 46984 yields an arc 28 d. 2 m.
whose Complement 61 d. 58 m. is the Complement repeated.

Then I augment the Sine of the Complement of the declination, which is 86602
by the whole Sine, parting the product 8660200000, by 88267 the Sine of the
Complement repeated: the quotient is 98113. The arc thereof being 78 d. 51 m.
is y^ distance of the Meridian from the horizon.

Now in comparing the Complement Two ways in working the example, for the two
precepts, of the finding out the Elevation of the Meridian.
of the arc last found out, with the declination of the plat: I find the
Complement of the arc least. Wherefore I multiply y^ Sine thereof being 19337 by
the whole Sine: and the product 1933700000, I divide by 50000 the Sine of the
greater. The quotient 38673 gives an Both these ways tend to one end.
arc 22 d. 46 m. whose Complement 67 d. 14 m. is the Elevation of the
Meridian. Or multiply 98112 the Sine of the arc last found out, by the Sine
of the Complement of the inclination, which is 93969: and the product
9219566568 part by the whole Sine. The quotient shall be 92195, whose arc 67
degrees 14 minutes is the Elevation of the Meridian.

This done, I compare the Elevation of the Meridian 67 d. 14 m. with the
Elevation of the Pole 52 d. subtracting the lesser from the greater, and there
remains 15 d. 14 m. which is the difference kept.

Then I multiply 26275 the Sine of the difference kept, by 88267 the Sine of
the Complement repeated: parting the product 2318455682, by the whole Sine. The
arc 11. d. 47. m. of the quotient Sine 23184, is the distance of the Style
from the Substile.

Now the Complement of this distance being 76. d. 36. m. compared with 74. d.
47. m. the Complement of the difference kept, I increase 96494 the Sine of the
lesser, by the whole sine, and y^ product thereof 9649400000, I distribute by
97277 the Sine of the greater. And the quotient is 99191. whose arc is 82. d.
43. m. The complement whereof being 7. d. 17. m. is the distance of the Substile
from the Meridian.

The delineation of the Dial.
If the Equator of the Meridian be greater then the Elenation of the Pole, draw
a line A. B. parallele to the Horizen, make another C. D. squire-wise to the
former, describe the quadrant on the left hand from A. to C. (because the
Declination is on the right hand) numbering therein from A. upward 76. d. 32. m.
the distance of the Meridian from the Horizon, draw at the end thereof from D.
the line G. representing the Meridian. From this backward, toward A account the
distance of the Substile from the Meridian, which is 7. d. 41. m. making
likewise at y^ end of this number from D. the line E. for the Substile. From
hence account 11. d. 47. m. being the distance of the Style from the Substile,
drawing in like manner from D. the line F. for the Style. Let the line of
contingence cut the Substile squirewise as before, make the Equator in this, as
in the other before. Place the ruler upon the center H. and the intersection of
the Contingent line, and the Meridian, beginning the division thereof into 24.
equal parts, where the ruler shall touch the Equator. Finish all things
remaining, as before.

Remember that in this kind of North inclining declining Dial, the Meridian
line rather represents the 12. hour at midnight, then in the day: wherefore
in accounting the hour lines, let the meridian be always for the 12. hour in
the night. And then if your plat decline Westward, account backward as it were
11. 10. 9. which hours with the 12. you may omit in the delineation of your
dial, because they have no use in our Elevation. But account forward 8, 7, 6,
5, 4. etc. so many as you think shall be necessary, for some declination will
receive more, then other will: the greater the more, the lesser the sewer
hours. But if the declination of your plat be Eastward then account from the
Meridian line forward 1, 2, 3, 4. etc. so many as shall be needful, omitting
likewise y^ first three, etc.

A North inclining declining.
dialing diagram

The second kind.
But if the Elevation of the Meridian, and the Elevation of the Pole be equal,
the making of the Dial differs from the other before. For an example hereof,
and y^ drawing of the Figure, resort to y^ South reclining 33 d. 30. m.
declining 32. d. for these are both alike, only remember here, that if this
decline Eastward, make the quadrant likewise on the East side, etc. But if the
plat decline toward the West, make the quadrant Westward (as in the figure
following) finishing all things else as here you see done. Observe the same
order in naming the hour lines which I taught you before.

A North inclining declining.
dialing diagram

The third Example of a North Dial.
Inclining 45. d. Declining 45. d.
If the Elevation of the Meridian be lesser then the Elevation of the Pole,
make your Dial thus,

For the working of the example, and the delineation of the figure, resort to
the South reclining 45. d. declining 45. d. for that agreeeth with this, except
only that in this, the Style is placed downward, and shows but few hours,
and those likewise are drawn downward: but in the other y^ Style stands
upward, showing many hours, and those likewise for the most part are drawn
upward. Mark also in this kind, if your plat decline westward, draw the
Quadraut on the West side, but if the declination be Eastward, make the
Quadrant on the East side, etc.

The making of these, are more pleasant to know, then profitable to use:
unless the declination be the greater, for so it may show the more hours.

For the naming of the hours, do as you were taught before in the first of
these three kinds.

A North Declining Inclining.
dialing diagram

The delineation of those Dials, whose plat lies nigh to the Elevation of the
Pole. CAP. 21.
WHen as the declination and reclination, or declination and inclination, shall
cause the plat of your Dial to lie nigh to the Elevation of the Pole, then the
hour lines must be drawn very long, to make the distances somewhat large, so
that they may be discerned one from another. And commonly these following be
such as here we mean.

A South
Reclining direct. Declining erect. Declining reclining.
An Eastor West
Reclining. Inclining.
A North
Inclining direct. Declining erect. Declining inclining.
In all these kinds oftentimes the distance between the Style and the Substile
is so small that it is not possible to draw your Dial, except the plat be very
large: which at al times you shall not have.

Therefore the best way is this. First draw your Dial very true (as before
has been taught) upon a large paper, making your quadrant so great as may be.
Draw likewise the hour lines very long, which will cause the greater distance
between the Style and the Substile, and in like manner between the hour lines.
It will also procure y^ greater Equator, which will be a great help in the
drawing of your Dial, as by the figure following you may perceive.

When you have thus drawn your Dial, then at y^ end of the paper where the
lines be of greatest distance, draw the line I. K. parallel to the Horizontall
line, make likewise the other line L M. (according to the greatness of your
plat) of equal distance from y^ other. This done, find out (or rather draw a
line upon your plat which may represent) the true Horizon of the plat: cutting
the paper in sunder by the line I. K. and the line L. M. placing it upon your
plat very plain, so that one of the edges may be parallel to y^ Horizon. Then
make marks upon the plat at both ends of all the hour lines drawing by those
marks, y^ lines for y^ hours. Draw likewise light lines upon the plat for the
Style and the Substile, easily to be extinguished, as you did upon the paper.

Let the Style N. be fastened over y^ Substile as you have been taught in the
East, and West, or Equinoctial Dialls.

But here note, that the Style must not be of equal height at both ends. But
let it be so high, as the distance between the Style and the Substile is in
the place where it stands: as in the examples following you may plainly
perceive.

A North Dial.
Declining Westward 65. d. Inclining 22. d. 20. m. Distance of the Meridian
from the horizon 50. d. 50. m. Distance of the Substile and the Meridian 6. d.
35. m. Distance of the Style and Substile 4. d. 15. m. Elevation of the Pole
52. d.

Hitherto we have taught the delineation of all kinds of Dials, which are to
be made upon any plain plat or superficies: now follows the garnishing of
them, with the 12. Signs, and the hours unequal.
dialing diagram

How to draw the 12. Signs in all kinds of Dials before mentioned. CAP. 22.
FOr so much as sometime the 12 signs of the Zodiake are placed in Sun
Dialls, know in what sign y^ Sun is at any time (which albeit any kind will
receive, yet most commonly the vertical directly opposite to y^ South are
garnished therewith.) Therefore in drawing the 12. Signs, in these South, and
all other kinds of Dialls before mentioned, do thus.

Prepare a little Table of Iron, Brass, or close grained wood, in breadth 3.
or 4. in length 5. or 6. inches. Chose for the Diameter one of the shortest
sides, wherein draw upon the center A. half a circle to be divided into two
quadrants distinguished with a line drawn from the center A. to the arc B.
part each quadrant into 90. degrees. The line A. B. is here in place of the
Equator, showing in the arc the beginning of Aries and Libra. Moreover how to
find the other Signs on both sides, seek in the Table of the declination of
the Sun from the Equinoctial circle, which is afterward expressed. First
find out the degrees of the distance (in this Table) of the beginning of
Taurus from the Equator being 11. degrees 30. minutes. Account this distance in
the quadrant from the letter B. toward the left hand, and at the end of this
number draw a line from the center A. which shall show the beginning of Taurus
and Virgo. Account like wise the same distance on the other side from the line
A. B. and make a line for the beginning of Pisces and Scorpius. Again in the
20. d. 12. m. from the line A. B. you shall have the beginning of Gemeni and
Leo: and so many degrees and minutes on the other side, the beginning of
Aquarius and Sagittarius. To conclude on both sides in the 23 degrees 30
minutes there must be on the one part Cancer, and on the other Capricorn.

Afterward draw lines from the center A by every mark so long as your Table
will receive* and at the end of these lines let the caracters of the 12 signs
of the Zodiake be fixed: as in the figure following you may see.

dialing diagram

The use of this Trigonall instrument in writing the 12 signs in Dialls.
YOur Dial being made and the Style placed therein: take your Trigonall
instrument, and set it upon the Style, so that the whole Diameter thereof may
stand plain upon the edge or upper part, the center A. of your instrument
always remaining in one place of the Style. Let the line of bend upward to the
center of your dial, and the line of down ward. Then fasten a thread at the
uppermost end of your trigonal in every line of the signs, so that you may
direct it downward by the center A. to the plat of your Dial: and where the
end of the thread shall touch the Dial, make a mark. Then moving the Trigonal
on the right hand, so that the thread may be stretched on the left hand, make
there likewise a prick upon the plat. When you have thus done 4 or 5 times upon
the one side of the dial: (that is on the left hand) do so likewise on the
other side on the right hand. These marks being thus made, draw (with your
compasses or rather with a crooked ruler made according to those marks) a line
by them. Do thus with each one of the 7 lines of your Trigonal. When you have
drawn al these lines, (being crooked, except the middle line, which is right,
and represents the Equator) then at the ends of them write the caracters of
the 12 signs on this wise.

First on the right hand toward the East, at the end of the upper line, write
or place. At the second line downward. At the third. At the fourth. At the fifth
at the sixth, at the seventh. Then on the other side on the left hand toward the
West, at the end of the nethermost line place. At the second, at the third, at
the fourth, at the fifth, at the sixth. And finally again at the uppermost set.

This done, remember that in what place of the Style the center A. of your
Trigonall was placed, there fasten a small piece of iron or any such like
thing, which may show with the shadow thereof, the Sign which the Sun
shall be in at any time: unless the hour lines be so short, that where the
small piece of iron should be placed, you may cut the Style that the end
thereof shall show it. But the first is the most convenient way for the use
thereof.

dialing diagram

You may in like manner with this Instrument draw or place the 12 signs in
Horizontal, East, West, and all other kinds of Dials, which before are
recited: because the difference is nothing but in placing the 12 signs at the
ends of the lines: the true doing where of, you may easily perceive by the
course of the Sun. For in the South Erect, when the Sun occupies Cancer,
then is the line of furthest distant from the center of the Dial. But in the
Horizontall Dial, the line of is next to the center. Few words shall suffice
for this matter: experience shall easily teach you herein.

How to place the unequal hours in a Horizontall Dial. CAP. 23.
FIrst you shall understand, that by an unequal hour is meant the 12 part of
the day whether it be short or long. For when the Sun is in the Equinoctial
circle, the day has 12 equal, and like wise 12 unequal hours. But in winter
solstice, when the days be at the shortest, and contains with us (where the
Pole is elevated above the Horizon 52 degrees) only 7 hours, 36 minutes: then
the unequal hours be less. For if you divide these 7 hours 36 minutes by
fractions into 12: you shall find only 38 minutes of an equal hour, to make
one unequal hour. But in the summer solstice, when the days be at the
longest, and has 16 hours, 24 minutes: then one hour with 24 minutes makes
one hour unequal. These be like wise called the hours of the Planets, and
are placed in Dialls on this manner.

Your Dial being made and prepared, draw upon it the 12 signs of the Zodiake
(as you were taught before) so large as your plat will give leave, etc.

Note that always the Meridian line, or 12 equal hour, is the 6 unequal
hour. Mark likewise, that when the Sun enters into the beginning of and,
both the equal and the unequal hours be of like quantity. For the 7 equal
hour in the morning is the first unequal, and the 8 equal the 2 planetare
hour, etc.

But in the Tropike of it is otherwise: for then the unequal hours be greater
then the equal. Therefore account how many hours and minutes is in the longest
day for your Elevation, changing all the minutes of those hours into one
total sum. Then divide this number by 12: and the quotient shall show how
many minutes of an equal makes one unequal hour. Example hereof: with us
the longest day is 16 hours 24 minutes. Wherefore I multiply 60 which is the
minutes of an equal hour, by 16, which is the sum of hours of the longest
day, and the product arises to 960, whereunto I add 24 the minutes remaining,
then the number shall be 984, which being divided by 12, the quotient is 82.
Wherefore I conclude that 82 minutes of an equal, makes one unequal or
planetare hour. Then to draw them in Dialls work thus.

First in the Tropike of divide the space between each hour into 60 equal
parts, but because those distances be so small, for the most part, that this
cannot be done: therefore it shall suffice to divide every one of them into
three equal parts. Then shall every part contain 20 m. and three of them 60
m. which is one equal hour.

When as therefore you will place the 7 unequal hour, account from the
Meridian line, or 12 hour, 4 parts and 2 minutes (which is 82 minutes) and
make there a mark. Then place your ruler by this point or mark, and the
intersection of the line of and, and the first hour after noone: draw a line
from one Tropike to another, that is from to.

Then for the placing of the 8 unequal hour, account from the 7 last made, 4
of the foresaid parts and two minutes make there a mark, by which and the
intersection of the line of and and the line of the second hour after noone,
the ruler being placed, draw a line, as before.

For the 9, account from the 8 last made, likewise 4 parts and two minutes,
drawing a line as before. Do in like manner for the drawing of all the other
remaining: that is, for the 10, and 11. The 12 being the Sun sitting shall
need no line.

As you have finished the unequal hours on this side for the afternoon, do
in like manner for those in the forenoone: accounting from the Meridian 4 parts
and 2 m. of an equal hour, to each unequal, drawing, as before, lines from
one Tropike to another.

You may place the figures for the unequal or planetare hours, at the end of
the lines under the Tropike of Capricorn, or above the line of Cancer as you
will.

Note that the same part of the Style which shows the 12 signs, shall like
wise show the unequal hours. For better understanding hereof:

Behold the Figure following.

An Horizontall Dial.
dialing diagram

How to place the hours unequal in a South erect direct Dial. CAP. 24.
THere is almost the same manner of placing the unequal hours in this kind, as
in the Horizontall, differing only herein, that whereas you divided the spaces
between the hour lines, in the Tropike of, (which is next to the center of
your Dial) and accounted 4 parts 2 minutes of an equal, to one unequal
hour: in this you must divide the Tropike of, (which is likewise next to the
center of the Dial) taking only 2 parts wanting 2 minutes, (that is 38m.) of
an equal hour to each unequal.

Therefore your Dial being prepared, and the 12 signs of the Zodiake placed
therein, etc. account how many hours and minutes be in the shortest day in
your country, changing all the hours into minutes (giving to each hour 60
minutes.) Divide the product by 12, and the quotient shall show how many
minutes of an equal, will be answerable to each unequal hour. Example, the
shortest day with us is 7 hours, 36 minutes, which being multiplied into one
gross number of minutes, the product is 456, which I divide by 12, and the
quotient is 38. Therefore I affirm that 38 minutes of a vulgar or equal,
makes one planetare or unequal hour.

Then divide the Tropike of here, as in the Horizontall you did the Tropike of.
Afterward account from the Meridian line 38m. (or 2 parts wanting, 2m.) of an
equal hour to each unequal, etc.

Finish all things else in this Meridionall erect direct, as you were taught
in the Horizontal. The figure ensues.

A South Dial.
dialing diagram

The placing of the hours unequal in East and West Dials. CAP. 25.
FIrst draw your Dial true, then place the 12 Signs of the Zodiake in it:
which you may do on this wise. The Style of your Dial being fixed therein, as
before has been taught, take your Trigonall (before prescribed) and place it
upon the edge of the Style: then according to the direction of the thread (as
in y^ South Dial before) make marks upon the plat, as in the Figure following
you may see. Afterward by these marks draw lines as before you did, placing at
the ends of them the Caracters of the 12 Signs.

Moreover note that where the center A. of your Trigonall does touch the edge
of the Style, there fasten a small piece of Iron or such like thing, which may
show she place of the Sun in every Sign, and likewise the planetare or
unequal hours.

dialing diagram

When as therefore you would place the hours unequal in those kinds of Dialls,
account the m^mber of hours and minutes, which the half of the longest day in
your Country does contain.

Example.
With us the longest day contains 16 hours, 24. m. the half thereof is 8
hours 12. m. wherefore numbering in the circumference of the circle from A. to
D. 6 hours, (for that quadrant contains 6 equal hours) and from D. toward
C. the other 2. hours and 12 minutes, so that you may have from A. by D.
toward C. the just half of the longest day, at the end thereof make a point X.
Then divide the arc A. X. into 6. equal parts. Afterward placing the ruler
upon the center E. and each one of these parts, where it shall touch the
Contingent line D. F. make marks. Likewise in the other line of Contingence G.
B. make these marks, being of equal distance in this line from the point B.
as the other be from the point D. Then place the ruler upon two of these marks
(being equidistant from the points B. D.) in both the Contingent lines, and
where it shall touch the Tropike of make marks. This done, lay the ruler upon
the first mark in the Tropic of next unto X, and the intersection of the line
of the 6 hour, with the line of the beginning of and, drawing a manifest line
from one Tropike to another, which (if you have wrought all things true) will
be parallele to the Horizon, and it shall be the 12. unequal hour line in the
West Dial, and the Horizon or Sun rising in the East Dial. Again, place
your ruler upon the second mark in the Tropike of Cancer, and the intersection
of the line of the 5. hour with the Equator, or line of Aries and Libra,
drawing like wise a line, which shall show the first hour in the East, and the
11. hour in the West Dial, make on this wise all the other unequal hours,
namely the 10, 9, 8, and 7, in the West Dial. And the 2, 3, 4, 5, in the East
Dial.

dialing diagram

The making of an Horizontall Sphericall or hollow Dial. CAP. 26.
FIrst prepare your Sphere or plat perfectly hollow, of what quantity you will.
Then with your compasses divide the upper brimme thereof, into 4 equal parts,
marking it with the letters A. B. C. D. Afterward open your Compasses to the
widenes of one Quadrant, either A. C. or A. D. and with that wideness, one
foot being placed in the point D. draw an obscure or light line from A. to B.
This done, set one foot of your Compasses in the point C and with the other
you shall try whether the plat be perfectly Sphericall or not: for if it be,
your Compasses will fall in the same line which you made before, but if it be
not perfect you may amend it. And then draw this line manifest, so that it may
continue. For it shall be the Meridian line, showing the 12 hour. Again,
place one foot in the point A. drawing with the other a light line from C. to
D. then one foot being set in B. you may try with the other, as before, the
truth of the line last made. Now where these two lines cut each other in the
bottom of the plat, place the letter E. Then dividing the quadrant A. E. into
90. d. and accounting therein the Elevation of the Pole from E. toward A. make
y^ point F. by which the arc line of and, representing the equinoctial
circle, shall be drawn. Afterward seek out the greatest declination of the
Sun from the Equator, (which you shall find in the table of the declination of
the Sun) which is 23. d. 30. m. Then account 23. d. 30. m. from F. toward E.
making there a mark for the arc of Cancer. Likewise from F. toward A. number
the same distance, for the arc line of Capricorn. This done, account from F.
toward E. 20. d. 12. m. make there also a mark for the line of and. And the
like space from F. toward A. for the arc of and. To conclude, number from F.
toward E. 11. d. 30. m. making there also a mark for the ^ine of and: and so
much from F. toward A. for and.

When you have thus made marks for all y^ arkes of the 12 Signs, open your
compasses to the Quadrant of the Sphere, that is, from A. to C. which widenes
of the compasses remaining, place one foot in the point F. in the arc of and
in the Meridian: and where the other foot shall touch the same Meridian toward
B make the point G. which shall represent the Pole antartic^, by which as it
were from a center, draw a line from the point D. by F. to C. which shall be
the line of Aries and Libra. Then one foot of your compasses remaining in the
point G. with the other draw lines from one side of the plat to the other, by
every mark before made for the 12. Signs of the Zodiake.

The 12. Signs being thus finished, proceed to the division of the equal
hours on this manner. Divide y^ arc of the Equator into 12. equal parts,
beginning at D. by F. ending in C. Then open your Compasses to the quadra^t of
the plat, and the same wideness of them remaining, place one foot on the
first point of the division next C. in the Equator, and if you have divided the
Equator equally, the other foot will touch the first part beyond F. toward D.
by which from the center G to the edge of the plat, draw a line, which shall
show the first hour afternoon. This done, remove your compasses (that
wideness remaining) placing one foot in the second part from C. toward F.
and the other foot touching the second part from F toward D. make a line as
before, from the center G. to the brimme of the plat, to show the 2. hour
afternoon. In like manner, finish all the other hour lines, namely the 3, 4,
5, 6 7, 8, for the afternoon. Then do likewise on the other side for the
hours in the forenoone, namely the 11, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, and 4 drawing lines
from the center G. by every division, to the brimme of the plat, etc.

The placing of the unequal hours in this Dial.
When you will place the hours unequal in this Sphericall Dial, divide the
Tropic of Cancer and of Capricorn each of them into 12. equal parts, as
before you did the Equator for the equal hours. Then with the compasses join
each three points, of these three arkes, answerable into one line or arc,
until you have made 12. lines to show the 12. unequal hours, as in the
figure following you may see. Whereof the Meridian, or 12. unequal hour shall
always be the 6. unequal hour.

In placing the figures to the equal and unequal hours, and the Caracters to
the 12. Signs of the Zodiake, the figure may sufficiently show,
notwithstanding you may place them where you will, giving to each sign his
proper Caracter, and every hour equal and unequal their proper figures or
names.

Fire the Style in the center G. standing up so high as the brimme of the plat,
so that the upper end may appear as the center of the circumference, which you
may try, by placing a ruler upon the points A. B. And again upon C. D. In like
manner you may examine it with your Compasses, but the former, as practice will
teach you, is the more convenient way.

You may, if you will, have the Style stand above the plat, so that it may show
the equal hours above the edge of the Sphere, and then fasten a knot of
equal height with the plat, which shall show the motion of the Sun in the
12. Signs and y^ unequal hours, which otherwise the end of the Style should
do: as in the figure following you may perceive.

The Figure of an hollow Horizontall Dial.
dialing diagram

The making of a South Spherical erect direct Dial. CAP. 27.
YOu shall understand that the making of this kind differs almost nothing
from the Horizontall: except only in the accounting the beginning of the
Elevation of the Pole, and drawing the hours unequal.

First your Sphere or plat being prepared, and parted into four Quadrants, as
before in the Horizontall you were taught, divide the quadrant E. A. into 90
degrees. Then number in it the Elevation of the Pole from A. toward E. marking
the end of the number with F. Afterward open your compasses to the quadrant of
the plat, and the one foot placed in F. extend the other in the Meridian line
toward B. making the point G. where it shall touch the Meridian line: from
which point as a center you shall draw the lines for the 12 signs, as you were
taught in the Horizontall. Divide likewise, and draw the lines for the equal
hours, as before in the Horizontall.

The placing of the hours unequal in this kind is done, as in the South
Erect Direct upon a plain superficies, except only that whereas there you did
draw them with a ruler, here you shall do it with compasses on this manner.
Open your compasses to the Quadrant of the plat, that is, from A. to C.
accounsing from the Meridian in the Tropike of Capricorn, two parts wanting
two minutes of an equal hour, making there a mark: And that wideness of
your compasses remaining, draw a line from that mark made in the Tropike, by
the intersection of the line of Aries and Libra, and the line of the first
hour in the afternoon, unto the Tropike of Cancer. Draw all the other lines
for the unequal hours in like manner, as in the figure you may plainly see,

Fix the Style in the center G. as you did in the Horizontall, placing the
figures for the equal and unequal hours, and the caracters to the 12 signs,
as in the example following, or otherwise as you will.

dialing diagram

The making of a Dial upon a Quadrant, or the Table described in the beginning
of the Book. CAP. 28.
IF you will make this Dial upon a Quadrant alone, prepare and divide it
altogether like one of the Quadrants of the table, whose making is prescribed
in the first Chapter: or if you will make it upon that instrument already
prepared, work thus.

Divide the diameter E. D. into four equal parts; then leaving out the
fourth part next E. describe upon the middle point between C. and S. an
obscure half circle: which divide into six equal parts. From each point of
which division draw light lines unto the Semidiameter D. E. touching it squire
wise. Then draw nigh to the line D. E. two other lines parallele thereto: which
with the cross lines drawn from the half circle may make 12 unequal
quadrangles, wherein the 12 signs of the Zodiake may be figured: the North
toward D. the South toward S. And to the intent you may proportionally part
these Quadrangles into five or ten degrees: divide those six parts of the
half circle equally into so many degrees. Then draw again from those
divisions right lives to the Dimetient D. E. squirewise, as before.

This done upon the point E. from S. that is to say, from the end of and
beginning of, draw an arc to the Semidiamer D. E. which shall be for the
winter Tropike. Again upon the same center, draw another from the beginning of
and for the Equator. To conclude, make another from the angle D. that is, from
the end of and beginning of, which shall be for the Summer Tropike. By the
help of these arkes, you shall draw the hour lines, so that you first know
the height of the Sun above the Horizon, at every hour, when it occupies
the beginning of, and. Whose altitude is thus found out.

Take the Elevation of the Pole, and the Complement thereof: also the
declination of the Sun from the Equinoctial, and the distance of the Sun
from the Meridian, accounting 15 degrees for every hour, with the Complement
of this distance. Then if you desire to know the altitude of the Sun at six
of the clock either in the morning or at evening (at which hour only in
Summer it is above the Horizon) multiply the Sine of the Elevation of the Pole,
by the Sine of the declaration of the Sun, dividing the product by the whole
Sine, and you shall have your desire.

But if the Sun shall be distant from the Meridian fewer hours then six,
multiply the Sine of this distance (giving to every hour 15 degrees) by the
Sine of the Complement of the altitude of the Pole, and the product hereof
divide by the whole Sine. Then take the arc of the quotient from 90 degrees,
and the first number found out shall remain, which must be kept. Then compare
the Sine of this number found out, with the Sine of the Elevation of the Pole,
augment the lesser by the whole Sine, dividing the product by the greater:
Whereof shall come a quotient Sine, to the complement of whose arc add the
declination of the Sun, if it shall be in the North signs, or subtract it
from that, if it occupies the South signs. And if the number which comes
hereof shall be greater then 90, take it from 180, and you shall have the
second number found out. The Sine of this number found out being multiplied, by
the Sine of the first number found out, shall yield a product, which part by
the whole Sine, and the arc of the quotient Sine shall show the desired
altitude of the Sun for the hour propounded.

But if the distance of the Sun from the Meridian shall exceed six hours
(that is 90 degrees) take the degrees of that distance from 180, multiplying
the Sine of the remainder by the Sine of the Compleme^t of the altitude of the
Pole, dividing the product by the whole Sine, and subtract the arc of the
quotient from 90, the remainder shall be called the First number found out. The
Sine of which number found out compared with the Sine of the Elevation of the
Pole, increase the lesser by the whole Sine, and distribute the product by the
greater. Then take the Complement of the Declination of the Sun, from the
arc of the quotient, and you shall have the second number found out.

Finally the Sine of the first number found out, and the Sine of the second
being multiplied by themselves, and the product parted by the whole Sine; the
quotient Sine shall yield an arc, which shall be the altitude of the Sun.

But when the Sun occupies the beginning of or you shall find the altitude
thereof every hour, only by multiplying the Sine of the Complement of the
distance of the Sun from the Meridian, by the Sine of the Complement of the
Elevation of the Pole, dividing the product by the whole Sine, the quotient
which comes hereof shall yield the arc of your desire. At both the six
hours, because the one six is the rising, and the other the sitting, there is
then no altitude of the Sun above the Horizon.

Moreover, to know how much the Meridian altitude is, of the Sun entering
into, add the greatest Declination thereof, to the Complement of the Elevation
of the Pole: and by subtracting the greatest Declination of the Sun, from the
complement of the Elevation of the Pole, you shall likewise have the Meridian
altitude of the Sun entering into.

You shall likewise seek the height of the Sun, being in the 10 degree of
above the Horizon, at 8 of the clock before noone, and at 4 after noone: at 7
in the morning, and 5 in the evening: at both 6. and the 5. hour in the
morning, and 7. at night. Also at 5. in the morning and 7. in the evening, the
Sun being in the beginning of.

But because the working of this, to find out these altitudes, requires much
time and labor, we will set down these distances ready found out, calculated
for the Elevation of the Pole 50. d. and 52 d. which you may likewise use
without any notable difference, where the Pole is Elevated 49. d. 51 d. and 53
d.

The first table calculated for 50 degrees.
Hour. Hour. 10 degrees. 10 degrees. D. M. D. M. D M. D. M. D. M. 12 63 30 40 0 16 30
11 1 61 2 38 23 15 19 10 2 54 42 33 50 11 51 9 3 46 15 27 2 6 24 8 4 36 53 18
45 30 23 7 5 27 15 9 35 20 55 6 6 17 47 0 0 11 19 5 7 8 48 2 3 7 14 4 8 0 36 0
0

The second table calculated for 52 degrees of latitude.
Hour Hour 10 degrees. 10 degrees D. M. D. M. D M. D. M. D. M. 12 61 30 38 0 14 30 11 1
59 13 36 28 13 21 10 2 53 15 32 7 10 0 9 3 45 12 25 33 4 45 8 4 36 12 17 32 29
36 7 5 26 53 8 46 19 22 6 6 17 42 0 0 11 4 5 7 8 58 2 4 7 46 4 8 1 1 0 0

If therefore you will make your Quadrant Horologicall for the Elevation of the
Pole 50. d. extend a thread, or lay a ruler, from the center E. by the 63. d.
30. m. of the limb of the quadrant, beginning at F and where the thread so
placed shall touch the Tropike of, there make a point or mark. Again, let the
thread be placed upon the 40. d. of the limb, and where it shall touch the
Equator, there also make a mark. Thirdly let y^ thread be drawn by the 16. d.
30. m. of the quadrant: and where it shall touch the Tropike of, there make
likewise a mark. This done, search out the center (by the 5. Proposstion 4.
Euclid) and join these three marks into one arc, which shall be the line for
the 12 hour. Afterward place the thread upon the 61. d. 2. m. of the limb,
and where it shall cut the Tropike of note it. Draw likewise the thread upon
the 38. d. 23. m. of the limb, mark where it cutteth the Equator. Then by the
15* d. 19. m. of the limb extend the thread, making a mark in the section
thereof and the Tropike of. Draw into one arc these three marks (as you did
before) finding out the common center: so shall you have the line of the 11.
hour before noone, and 1. after noone. In like manner are the rest of the hour
lines drawn by 3. points accounted and found out by the altitude of the sun.
But because before 9. and after 3. in this Elevation of the Pole it will not
serve for this delineation, there must another be made by the table of the 12.
Signs or Quadrangles. Therefore draw that from the 10. d. of, so shall you have
a line or place wherein the third points may be marked. Then to prepare the
points of the arc for the hours of 8. and 4. of 7. and 5. and both the 6.
besides the two marks made in the Tropike of and the Equator, let the third be
noted in the arc drawn from the 10. degree of. (...) draw the line of the 5.
and 7. hours, use besides the Tropike of Cancer and this drawn from the 10.
degree of, the third which shall come from the beginning of. The line of 4. in
the morning, and 8. in the evening is very short, included in y^ angle next
unto I. Thus you have finished 9 arkes or lines for the hours, of which each
one of them does show two hours: except one which is only for the ^2 hour.

And to the intent that there should be no space left void and unprofitable
between the Tropike of and the center E. you may draw in that place the
unequal hours, which you shall very easily do on this manner. Describe upon
the center E. an arc very little distant from the Tropike of, to be divided
into 6 equal parts, and take the middle point between the beginning of that
arc at S. and between E. Then upon this point* as it were a center, make a
half circle from S. to E. which shall be the line of the 6. unequal hour,
that is of midday. Afterward one foot of the compasses being placed in the
same Semidiameter E. D. and removed each way as occasion shall require: and the
other extended in the mean time so far that it may touch the second point of
the arc divided into 6. parts, and the center E. draw an arc or line from
the center to that point, which shall show the 5. and 7. hours. Inlike manner
are the other 4. drawn, one foot of the compasses being removed, as necessity
shall require, in the Semidiameter E. D (which may be prolonged if it shall be
too short) and the compasses so opened, that the other foot may touch the point
of the divided arc and the center E. and join them all into one arc line:
then fix a thread in the center E. well waxed, having two small beads upon it
to move with a plummet of iron or lead. Last of all prepare two sights of
brass or other metal with joints, which you must place in one right line upon
the side or edge A. B. so that you may direct them, and again turn them down
upon that side A. B. at your pleasure: that (if you make this Dial upon the
Table or instrument prescribed in the beginning of this book) they be no
hinderance to you in trying or examining of your plats. Thus is your dial
prepared: but for further instruction behold the Figure.

dialing diagram

The use of this Dial or quadrant Horologicall.
TO know the hour of the day when the Sun shines, work thus. First seek out
in some Calender in what Sign and degree the Sun is at that day: then extend
the thread with the beads upon the Semidiameter E. D. and place the
neathermost beade upon that degree, in the Table of the 12. Signs, which the
Sun then occupies. Afterward lifting up your quadrant, the thread with the
plummet hanging at liberty, let the Sun beams pass through both the sights, and
then the neathermost bead shall show the hour of the day either before, or
after noone: for each line as you see, has two hours, but you may easily
discern what hour of the day it is.

The unequal hour of the day is thus found out. The nether bead being placed
upon his just degree in the Zodiake, lay it upon the arc of the 12. hour, the
thread being extended: thus holding this immovable, place the uppermost bead
upon y^ line of the 6. hour unequal. This done the Sun beams entering both y^
sights, the highest bead shall show the unequal, and the neathermost the equal
hour.

The rising and sitting of the Sun, whereby the length of the day and night
is known, you shall find out on this manner. Place the nether bead upon the
just degree of the Sun in the Zodiake, then extend the thread upon the
semidiameter E. F. of the quadrant, and the bead shall show at or between what
hours the Sun rises and falls.

The height of the Sun. above the Horizon at any time of the day is thus
taken. Receive the Sun beams by the holes in your sights, and the thread
with the plunmet having liberty to move, shall cut in the limb of the Quadrant
the just degree of the altitude of the Sun above the Horizon. In like manner
is the Elevation of the Stars above the Horizon searched out.

You shall find out the elevation of the Pole by the help of your Quadrant,
thus. Take the height of the Sun at 12 of the clock, when the days and
nights be of equal length, which being subtracted from 90 d. the elevation
remains. But if you assay that upon any other day then the Equinoct. you must
consider whether the Sun occupies the North, or the South signs, and then
use the table of the Declination of the Sun on this wise. When the Sun is
in the North signs, substract his declination from the Meridian height
thereof. But if it be in the South signs add the declination to his Meridian
altitude. The remainder or total sum being taken from 90. d. the Elevation
of the Pole shall remain.

How to make an instrument, whereby you may know the just hour of the night by
the Stars. CAP. 27.
FIrst prepare a plat or Table of brass or firm and solid wood, which will
not change or bend, somewhat thin, let the form of it be round, three inches
broad, or more or less as you will. Draw a circle nigh unto the edg, and
divide it into 12. equal parts: wherein shall be placed the 12. Signs of the
Zodiake, then divide each of these parts into 30. equal parts, which shall show
the number of the days that the Sun moves in every Sign. Make a second
circle, wherein you may number the days, and a third circle wherein write the
Caracters of the 12. Signs, as you see in the Figure following.

Draw likewise another circle, wherein you may write the days of every month
in the year, which you may do by any Calender, but for more easines behold
the Table following, whereby you may likewise do it.

Month. Days. Degrees. M. Caracters of the 12. Signs. Signs. January 1 20 13
Capricorn. 15 5 33 Aquarius. 31 21 44 February 14 5 52 Pisces. 28 19 48 March
15 4 36 Aries. 31 20 18 April 15 4 51 Taurus. 30 19 13 May 15 4 38 Gemini. 31
18 50 June 15 3 3 Cancer. 30 17 22 July 15 1 40 Leo. 31 16 58 August. 15 1 24
Virgo. 31 16 58 September 15 1 40 Libra. 30 16 30 October 15 1 30 Scorpius. 31
17 43 November 15 2 30 Sagittarius. 30 18 13 December. 15 3 38 Capricorn.

Enter this Table, and you shall find that the first day of January must be
placed against the 20. d. 13. m of Capricorn, and the 15. day against the 5.
d. 33. m. of Aquarius, etc.

Therefore lay your ruler upon the center A. of your plat, and upon the 20. d.
13. m. of, and where it shall touch the circle which you made for the days of
every month, there make a mark which shall show the first day of January.
Then lay it upon the 5. d. 33. m. of and the center A. and where it shall touch
the circle, make a mark for the 15. day of January. Then lay your ruler upon
A. and the 21. d. 44. m. of, and make likewise a mark for the 31. day of
January. Again place the ruler upon the center A. and the 5. d. 52. m. of, for
the 14. day of February: work thus with all the rest, until you have set down
the beginning and midst of every month, as the Table does direct you, then
having found out the beginning and midst of every month, you may at ease
divide every space into so many parts, as there be days in the month, which
it serves for, according as you see in this figure following. It shall be also
necessary to make one circle to write the number of the days of the month,
and another for the names of the months: you must make also a hole in the
center of this plat, of such bigness, as you may see a Star through it: as in
the figure you may perceive.

dialing diagram

Having prepared this plat with the circles upon it, for the 12. Signs and
months, you must prepare an other wheel full of teeth, which you shall make on
this manner.

Take a thime Table or platte of the same matter your other was, draw a circle
upon it so great as the inward circle of the first plat, and divide it into 24.
equal parts. Then draw lines from the center to every one of those parts,
until you have so many as there be hours in the longest night in your
Country. Then cut teeth by these lines for the hours, and write the number of
them upon the teeth as you see in this figure. Let the tooth for the 12. hour
be so long from the center to the end, as is between the center A. of the other
plat and the circle of the 12. Signs. You must likewise make a hole in the
center of this wheel, of the same bigness of that, in the other plat.

The thothed wheel.
dialing diagram

This done, you must prepare a ruler, which shall be placed upon this wheel.
Take therefore a thin piece of wood or brass, and draw upon it a light line:
at y^ one end thereof in the midst of the line make a hole of the same
bigness which that is in the great plat and tothed wheel. Then draw a circle
half an inch wide or more if you will, afterward cut the ruler round at the
end, cutting off likewise the one half of the breadth of the ruler by the line.

Let the length of the ruler from the ^^ntre to the end be of such quantity,
as is from the center of the great plat to the outward edge, and an inch or
more if y(...).

dialing diagram

The foreside of your instrument being finished: the backside must have two
small holes, and a handle, which may turn and move about. Prepare them thus.

Upon your great plat on the backside, right against the fourth degree of, nigh
the edge make a small hole, wherein the little pin of the handle may be
pla^ed, when need requires: and write by this the greater Bear. Again,
right against the 28 d. 1 m. of on the backside make another hole likewise, so
that the handle being: removed to it, the pin may enter, as in the other. And
by this, write the lesser Bear. etc.

dialing diagram

Prepare for your handle a thin plate of iron, brass, or wood, about six
inches in length or more if you will. Draw in the midst of it a line: at the
one end thereof make a hole in the midst of the line, of such bigness as
the hole in the greater plat is. Upon this handle you must fasten a little short
pin right in the line, so that the handle being fastened with the pin
toward the backside of the great plat, and being moved the pin may fall
directly into the hole.

Behold the Figure following.

dialing diagram

Prepare a hollow pin of iron or brass, according to this figure above, so
great as it may easily enter into the hole of the handle, so that it may turn
upon it: but let it go close into the great plat, that it may remain
immovable. Let the Tothed wheel and the ruler move likewise upon it. Then
place the Tothed wheel and the ruler on the former side of the plat upon the
pin, and on the backside the handle with the little pin toward the back of
the plat: fasten them so together, that the handle, the Tothed wheel, and the
ruler may turn upon the plat severally, or each by themselves at your
pleasure, and as need shall require. Notwithstanding you must be careful,
that the hole in your pin may be so great, as you may perfectly see the
North Star in the night through it. Then your instrument shall be finished,
whose use follows afterward.

For better instruction behold the figure.

dialing diagram

The use of this instrument.
FIrst it shall be expedient to find out the Stars serving to this purpose,
which you may do by the figure following.

dialing diagram

You see in this figure the stars which serve to our use. The Polare Star
is a bright Star in the North, placed in the tail of the lesser bear, and
moves but a small course, as in the figure the letter A. shows. There is
also another Star of the lesser bear greater and brighter then the other,
and is noted with the letter B. and serves to this purpose also. There is
likewise in the greater bear called also Charles waine, and of country men
the plough, two great bright stars, and are placed almost in a right line
with the Polare Star; and are noted with the letters C. D. And these two
Stars have 5 other bright Stars by them, but not so great as the other be.
These Stars which you see in the figure, as al other, move equally above the
Pole, and finish their course in 24 hours.

Therefore when you would know the hour of the night by this instrument, do
thus. Place the right line of the long tooth of the 12 hour directly over the
day of the month, and turn the handle on the backside to the hole of the
greater bear, and your instrument shall be prepared.

Then lift up your instrument by the handle perpendicularly, so that it
declineth on neither sides: and beholding the Polare Star through the hole in
the center, move the ruler above, until the right line there of be directly
against, or seems to touch the two Stars of the greater bear, and under
the line you shall have the just hour of the night: which you may find out by
the number of the teeth with your finger in the night. But if you cannot see
the two Stars of the greater bear because of clouds: and yet you may see the
Polare Star, and the Star of the lesser bear, noted with the letter B.
remove the handle on the backside to the hole of the lesser bear. Then lift up
your instrument as before, and behold the Polare Star at the hole, and turn
the ruler to the foresaid Star of the lesser bear, and you shall find the
true hour of the night, as before is taught.

The making of a Dial, to know the hour by the Moon. CAP. 30.
PRepare a square piece of wood or metal 3 or 4 inches over, draw thereon a
circle so great as you can, draw also another within that. Now because the
Moon finisheth her course in 29 days, 12 hours, and 44 minutes, part the
inward into 30 parts in this manner; let 29 be equally divided, and the 30 which
is the last must not be so great by a third part: wherefore divide one of those
29 equal parts into three parts, and take two of them for the 30 and last part.

dialing diagram

Cut out that which is within the inward limb, and prepare another of the same
or like wood or metal somewhat thicker, and work it so that it may go into
the former so much of the thicknes as it may be equal on the backside, and that
which remains of the thicknes, let it hang over the foreside of the first
plate to keep it from falling through: draw a circle upon it, and divide it
into 24 equal parts: draw from these parts hour lines so many as shall
suffice for the longest night: cut that which ouerhangeth with teeth at every
hour, but especially at the 12 hour make a long tooth, fix a wier in the
center for the Style equally distant from the circle on each side. Let the
Style hang so much beneath the plat, as it is above, because you shall have as
much use on the backside as before.

dialing diagram

Cut out all that which is within the inward circle, except a little portion to
support the Style, so that this shall be but as a hoope. Draw the hour lines
on the backside of this plat, as on the foreside, so that the one may be right
against another: then draw lines on the inside from every one of these lines
on the foreside to the lines on the backside. This plat or wheel must be
moveable and turn within the former.

dialing diagram

The use of this Dial.
PLace this Dial that each side may behold one quarter of the world
precisely: the South side the South, the North side the North, etc. Moreover,
it must recline according to the elevation of the Equinoctial, so that the
Moon being in the Equinoctial circle, shall give light both above and beneath
this Dial. You may place it perfectly with your instrument.

Your Dial being thus placed, when you would know the hour of the night,
first learn the age of the Moon by an almanac, and especially the hour of
the change, then turn the great ouer-hanging tooth, to the day of the Moon on
the first limb, and to the hour of the change, accounting from 12 of the clock.

The shadow of the Style shall show the hour of the night either beneath your
Dial or else above.

This Dial will serve also for the Sun, if you turn the great tooth of the
moveable wheel to the little strick A. which is right opposite to the
beginning of the first, and end of the last day of the Moon, nere the 15. day,
and then it is fit for the Sun. For it differs nothing from y^ North
reclining direct, where the Reclination is equal to the Elevation of the Pole.

The use of the Table of the declination of the Sun.
TAke what degree you will of any sign, and by this table you may know his
declination from the Equinoctial circle. The Signs are written partly on the
head of the Table, and partly on the foot of the same. The Degrees in the
first column do serve for the Signs that be on the head of the Table, and
the Degrees in the last column do serve for the Signs in the foot of the
Table. And the common Area or angle against the Sign and the Degree which you
seek for, does contain the Degrees and Minutes of the Declination due to the
same.

Example.
I would know how much the tenth degree of Leo does decline from the
Equinoctial: I must look in the column over Leo, right against the number of
10. in the last column, where I find 17. d. 46. m. the declination thereof,
etc.

The table of the declination of the Sun, from the Equinoctial circle.
Aries. Libra. Taurus. Scorpius. Gemin^. Sagittarius. Degrees. Degrees. M. Degrees. M. Degrees.
M. Degrees. 1 0 24 11 30 20 12 29 2 0 48 12 11 20 35 28 3 1 12 12 32 20 47 27 4 1
36 12 52 20 58 26 5 1 59 13 12 21 9 25 6 2 23 13 32 21 20 24 7 2 47 13 52 21 30
23 8 3 11 14 12 21 40 22 9 3 34 14 31 21 49 21 10 3 58 14 50 21 58 20 11 4 21
15 9 22 7 19 12 4 45 15 27 22 15 18 13 5 8 15 55 22 23 17 14 5 32 16 3 22 30 16
15 5 55 16 21 22 37 15 16 6 18 16 39 22 44 14 17 6 41 16 56 22 50 13 18 7 4 17
13 22 55 12 19 7 27 17 29 23 1 11 20 7 50 17 46 23 5 10 21 8 12 18 2 23 10 9 22
8 35 18 17 23 13 8 23 8 57 18 33 23 17 7 24 9 19 18 48 23 20 6 25 9 41 19 2 23
22 5 26 10 3 19 17 23 24 4 27 10 25 19 31 23 26 3 28 10 47 19 44 23 28 2 29 11
8 19 58 23 29 1 30 11 29 20 12 23 30 0 Degrees. Degrees. M. Degrees. M. Degrees. M. Degrees. Virgo.
Pisces. Leo. Aquarius. Cancer Capricorn.

The Table of Sines. The whole Sine contains 100000. parts.
The use of the Table of Sines.
WHereas the making of some Dials, and this Table of Sines may seem obscure
and hard to them who are not acquainted with Sinicall computation, it shall be
expedient to declare the use hereof, so much as pertains to the understanding
of this book, omitting all other uses as impertinent to our present purpose.
Wherefore know that the Grades or Degrees are found in the upper head of this
Table, and the Minutes pertaining to the Degrees on the left side, and in the
Area or common meeting of them both, a number which is called the Sine,
answerable to each Degree and Minute, offers it self. Again the Sine being
found out, you may easily know the arc, that is, the Degree and Minutes
thereof, these being on the left hand, the other on the head or upper part.
Understand by the Complement that which remains of any number being taken or
subtracted from 90. Degrees. If at any time you enter the Table with just
Degrees without any Minutes, resolve one Degree into 60. Minutes, and then
seek out his Sine. And whereas you shall find some numbers imperfect, you
must remember to supply their want with those which be perfect immediately going
before.

Example.
The Elevation of the Pole at Cambr. is 52. Degrees, whose Sine I desire to
know, therefore resolving one of the Degrees into Minutes, I enter the Table
with 51. degrees, 60. Minutes, and in the common Area I find the Sine to be
78801. If then you desire to know the complement of this Elevation, substract
52. out of 90. and the remainder shall be 38. the complement thereof, and entering
the Table with 37. d. 60. m. you shall find in the Area 66. which number
because it is imperfect, you must supply the want thereof by adding the 3.
former figures in that which is next before perfect, to wit, 615. and the^ the
whole number shall be 61566. the Sine of 38. d. which is the Complement of 52. d.
the Elevation of the Pole.

These things well considered, there is nothing in the book so obscure, but
it shall seem plain and easy.

(...).

FINIS.
Note that some of the letters in the Instrument page 2. are omitted in the
printing: place A. at the uppermost corner toward the left hand, B. at the
neathermost, C. by 90. beneath, and D. at 90. above.

D 0 1 2 3 4 5 M Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 1 29 1774 3519 5262
7004 8744 2 58 1803 48 91 33 73 3 87 32 77 5320 62 8803 4 116 61 3606 49 91 31
5 45 90 35 78 7120 60 6 74 1919 64 5407 49 89 7 203 48 93 36 78 8918 8 32 77
3722 65 7207 47 9 61 2007 51 95 36 76 10 90 36 80 5524 65 9005 11 319 65 3809
53 94 34 12 49 94 38 82 7323 63 13 78 2123 67 5611 52 ^92 14 407 52 96 40 81
9121 15 36 81 3925 69 7410 50 16 65 2210 55 98 39 79 17 94 39 84 5727 68 9208
18 523 68 4013 56 97 37 19 52 97 42 85 7526 66 20 81 2326 71 5814 55 94 21 610
55 4100 43 84 9323 22 39 85 29 72 7613 52 23 69 2414 58 5901 42 81 24 98 43 87
30 71 9410 25 727 72 4216 59 7700 39 26 56 2501 45 88 29 68 27 85 30 74 6017 58
97 28 814 59 4303 46 87 9526 29 43 88 32 75 7816 55 30 73 2617 61 6104 45 84 D
0 1 2 3 4 5 M Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 31 901 2646 4391 6133
7874 9613 32 30 75 4420 62 7903 42 33 59 2704 49 91 32 71 34 89 34 78 6220 61
9700 35 1018 63 4507 50 90 29 36 47 92 36 79 8019 58 37 76 2821 65 6308 48 87
38 1105 50 94 37 77 9816 39 34 79 4622 66 8106 45 40 63 2908 52 95 35 74 41 92
37 81 6424 64 9903 42 1221 66 4710 53 93 31 43 50 95 39 82 8222 60 44 79 3034
68 6511 51 89 45 1208 53 97 40 80 10018 46 38 82 4826 69 8309 47 47 67 3112 55
98 38 76 48 96 41 84 6627 67 10105 49 1425 70 4914 56 96 34 50 54 99 43 85 8425
65 51 83 3228 72 6714 54 92 52 1512 57 5001 43 83 10221 53 41 86 30 72 8512 50
54 70 3315 59 6801 31 79 55 99 44 88 30 70 10308 56 1628 73 5117 59 99 37 57 57
3402 46 88 8628 66 58 87 31 75 6917 57 94 59 1716 60 5204 46 86 10423 60 45 89
33 75 8715 52

D 6 7 8 9 10 11 M Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 1 10481 12215
13946 15672 17393 19109 2 10510 44 74 15700 17422 38 3 39 73 14003 29 50 66 4
68 12302 32 58 97 95 5 97 31 61 87 17508 19223 6 10626 60 90 15815 36 52 7 55
89 14118 44 65 80 8 84 12417 47 73 93 19309 9 10713 46 76 15901 17622 37 10 42
75 14205 30 51 66 11 71 12504 34 59 79 94 12 99 33 62 88 17708 19423 13 10828
62 91 16016 37 51 14 57 91 14320 45 65 80 15 86 12619 49 74 94 19500 16 10915
48 78 16102 17822 37 17 44 77 14406 31 51 66 18 73 12706 35 60 80 94 19 11002
35 64 89 17908 19623 20 31 64 93 16217 37 51 21 60 93 14521 46 66 80 22 89
12821 50 75 94 19708 23 11119 50 79 16303 18023 37 24 46 79 14608 32 51 65 25
75 12908 37 61 80 95 26 11204 37 65 89 18109 19822 27 33 66 94 16418 37 51 28
62 94 14723 47 66 79 29 91 13023 52 76 94 19908 30 11320 52 80 16504 18223 36 D
6 7 8 9 10 11 M Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 31 11349 13081 14809
16533 18252 19965 32 78 13110 38 62 80 93 33 11407 39 67 90 18309 20022 34 35
67 96 16619 37 50 35 64 96 14924 48 66 79 36 93 13225 53 76 95 20107 37 11522
54 82 16705 18423 36 38 51 83 15011 34 52 64 39 80 13312 39 62 80 93 40 11609
40 68 91 18509 20221 41 38 69 97 16820 38 50 42 67 98 15126 48 66 78 43 95
13427 54 77 95 20307 44 11724 56 83 16906 18623 35 45 53 85 15212 34 52 64 46
82 13513 41 63 80 92 47 11811 42 69 92 18709 20421 48 40 71 98 17020 38 49 49
69 13600 15327 49 66 78 50 98 29 56 78 95 20506 51 11927 58 84 17106 18823 35
52 55 86 15413 35 52 63 53 84 13715 42 64 80 93 54 12013 44 71 92 18909 20620
55 42 73 99 17221 38 48 56 71 13802 15528 50 66 77 57 12100 30 57 78 95 20705
58 29 59 85 17307 19023 34 59 58 88 15614 36 52 62 60 86 13917 43 64 80 91

D 12 13 14 15 16 17 M Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 1 20819 22523
24220 25910 27591 29264 2 48 51 48 38 27619 92 3 76 80 76 66 47 29320 4 20904
22608 24305 94 75 48 5 33 36 33 26022 27703 76 6 61 65 61 50 31 29404 7 90 93
89 78 59 31 8 21018 22721 24417 26106 87 59 9 47 50 46 34 27^15 87 10 75 78 74
62 43 29515 11 21104 22806 24502 90 71 43 12 32 35 30 26218 99 70 13 60 63 58
46 27927 98 14 89 91 87 75 54 29626 15 21217 22920 24615 26303 82 54 16 46 48
43 31 28010 81 17 74 76 71 59 38 29709 18 21303 23004 99 87 66 37 19 31 33
24728 26415 94 65 20 59 61 56 43 28122 93 21 88 89 84 71 50 29820 22 21416
13118 24812 99 78 48 23 45 46 40 26527 28206 76 24 73 74 69 55 34 29904 25
21501 23203 97 83 62 31 26 30 31 24925 26611 89 59 27 58 59 53 39 38317 87 28
87 87 81 67 47 30015 29 21615 23316 25009 95 73 42 30 43 44 38 26723 28401 70 D
12 13 14 15 16 17 M Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 31 21672 23372
25066 26751 28429 30098 32 21700 23401 94 79 57 30126 33 29 29 25122 26807 85
53 34 57 57 50 35 28513 81 35 85 85 78 63 40 30209 36 21814 23514 25206 91 68
36 37 42 42 35 26920 96 64 38 71 70 63 48 28624 92 39 99 99 94 76 52 30320 40
21927 23627 25319 27004 80 47 41 56 55 47 32 28708 75 42 84 83 75 60 36 30402
43 22013 23712 25403 88 63 31 44 41 40 32 27116 91 58 45 69 68 60 44 28819 86
46 98 96 88 72 47 30514 47 22126 23825 25516 27200 75 41 48 54 53 44 28 28903
69 49 83 81 72 56 31 97 50 22211 23909 25600 84 58 30624 51 39 38 28 27311 86
52 52 68 66 57 39 29014 80 53 96 94 85 67 42 30707 54 22325 24022 25713 95 70
35 55 53 51 41 27423 98 63 56 81 79 69 51 29125 91 57 22410 24107 97 79 53
30818 58 38 35 25825 27507 81 46 59 66 63 53 35 29209 74 60 95 92 81 63 37
30901

D 18 19 20 21 22 23 M Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 1 30929 32584
34229 35863 37487 39909 2 57 32611 56 91 37514 39126 3 84 3^ 84 35918 41 53 4
31012 66 34311 45 ^8 80 5 39 94 38 72 95 39206 6 67 32721 65 99 37622 33 7 95
49 93 36026 49 60 8 31122 76 34420 53 76 87 9 50 32804 47 81 37703 39313 10 78
31 75 36108 30 40 11 31205 59 34502 35 57 67 12 33 86 29 62 84 94 13 61 32914
57 89 37811 39420 14 88 41 84 36216 37 47 15 1316 69 34611 43 64 74 16 44 96 39
70 91 39501 17 71 33023 66 98 37918 27 18 99 51 93 36325 45 54 19 31426 78
34720 52 72 81 20 54 33106 48 79 99 39607 21 82 33 75 36406 38026 34 22 31509
61 34802 33 53 61 23 37 88 29 60 80 88 24 64 33216 57 87 38107 39714 25 92 43
84 36514 33 41 26 31620 70 34911 41 60 68 27 47 98 38 68 87 94 28 75 33325 66
95 38214 39821 29 31702 53 93 36623 41 48 30 30 80 35020 50 68 74 D 18 19 20 21
22 23 M Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 31 31758 33408 35047 36677
38295 39901 32 85 35 75 36704 38322 28 33 31813 62 35102 31 48 54 34 40 90 29
58 75 81 35 68 33517 56 85 38402 40008 36 95 45 84 36812 29 34 37 31923 72
35211 39 56 61 38 51 99 38 66 83 88 39 78 33627 65 93 38510 40114 40 32006 54
93 36920 36 41 41 33 82 35320 47 63 68 42 61 33709 47 74 90 94 43 88 36 74
37001 38617 40221 44 32116 63 35401 28 44 48 45 43 91 29 55 71 74 46 71 33819
56 82 97 40301 47 99 46 83 37109 38724 27 48 32226 73 35510 36 51 54 49 54
33901 37 63 78 81 50 81 28 65 90 38805 40407 51 32309 55 92 37217 31 34 52 36
83 35619 44 58 60 53 64 34010 46 71 85 87 54 91 37 73 98 38912 40514 55 32419
65 35700 37325 39 40 56 46 92 28 52 65 67 57 74 34119 55 79 92 93 58 32501 47
82 37406 39019 40620 59 29 74 35809 33 46 47 60 56 34202 36 60 73 73

D 24 25 26 27 28 29 M Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 1 40700 42288
43863 45424 46972 48506 2 26 42314 89 50 98 31 3 53 40 43915 76 47024 57 4 79
67 41 45502 49 82 5 40806 93 67 28 75 48608 6 33 42419 93 54 47101 33 7 59 46
44020 80 26 58 8 86 72 46 45606 52 84 9 40912 98 72 32 78 48709 10 39 42525 98
58 47203 35 11 65 51 44124 83 29 60 12 92 77 50 45709 55 85 13 41018 42604 76
35 80 48811 14 45 30 44202 61 47306 36 15 71 56 28 87 31 62 16 98 83 54 45813
57 87 17 41124 42709 81 39 83 48912 18 51 35 44307 64 47408 38 19 77 62 33 90
34 63 20 41204 88 59 45916 60 88 21 30 42814 85 42 85 49014 22 57 40 44411 68
47511 39 23 83 67 37 94 36 65 24 41310 93 63 46019 62 90 25 36 42919 89 45 88
49115 26 63 46 44515 71 47613 41 27 89 72 41 97 39 66 28 41416 98 67 46123 64
91 29 42 43024 93 49 90 49217 30 69 51 44619 74 47715 42 D 24 25 26 27 28 29 M
Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 31 41495 43077 44645 46200 47741
49267 32 41522 43103 71 26 67 92 33 48 29 97 52 92 49318 34 75 56 44723 78
47818 43 35 41601 82 49 46303 43 68 36 28 4^208 75 29 69 94 37 54 34 44801 55
49 49419 38 80 61 27 81 47920 44 39 41707 87 53 46406 45 70 40 33 43313 79 32
71 95 41 60 39 44905 58 96 49520 42 86 65 31 84 48022 45 43 41^13 92 57 46509
47 71 44 39 43418 83 35 73 96 45 65 44 45009 61 98 49621 46 92 70 35 87 48124
46 47 41918 96 61 46612 49 72 48 45 43523 87 38 75 97 49 71 49 45113 64 48200
49822 50 98 75 39 90 26 47 51 42024 43601 65 46715 51 73 52 50 27 91 41 77 98
53 77 54 45317 67 48302 49823 54 42103 80 43 92 28 48 55 29 43706 69 46818 53
73 56 56 32 95 44 79 99 57 82 58 45321 70 48404 49924 58 42209 84 47 95 30 49
59 35 43810 73 46921 55 74 60 61 37 99 47 80 50000

D 30 31 32 33 34 35 M Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 1 50025 51528
53016 54488 55943 57381 2 50 53 41 54512 66 57405 3 75 78 65 37 91 29 4 50100
51603 90 61 56015 52 5 25 28 53115 85 39 76 6 51 53 39 54610 63 57500 7 76 78
64 34 87 24 8 50201 51703 89 58 56112 48 9 26 28 53213 83 36 71 10 51 52 38
54707 60 95 11 76 77 63 31 84 57619 12 50302 51802 87 56 56208 43 13 27 27
53312 80 32 67 14 52 52 36 54804 56 90 15 77 77 61 29 80 57714 16 50402 51902
86 53 56304 38 17 27 27 53410 77 28 62 18 52 51 35 54902 52 85 19 77 76 59 26
76 57809 20 50502 52001 84 50 56400 33 21 28 26 53508 75 24 56 22 53 51 33 99
48 80 23 78 76 58 55023 72 57904 24 50603 52100 82 48 96 28 25 28 25 53607 72
56520 51 26 53 50 31 96 44 75 27 78 75 56 55120 68 99 28 50703 52200 80 45 92
58022 29 28 25 53705 69 56616 46 30 53 49 29 93 40 70 D 30 31 32 33 34 35 M
Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 31 50778 52274 53754 55217 56664
58093 32 50803 99 79 42 88 58117 33 29 52324 53803 66 56712 41 34 54 49 28 90
36 64 35 79 73 52 55314 60 88 36 50904 98 77 39 84 58212 37 29 52423 53901 63
56808 35 38 54 46 26 87 32 59 39 79 72 50 55411 56 83 40 51004 97 75 36 80
58306 41 29 52522 99 60 56904 30 42 54 47 54024 84 27 54 43 79 71 48 55508 51
77 44 51104 96 72 32 75 58401 45 26 52621 97 57 99 24 46 54 46 54121 81 57023
48 47 79 70 46 55605 47 72 48 51204 95 70 29 71 95 49 29 52720 95 53 95 58519
50 54 45 54219 77 57119 42 51 79 69 44 55702 42 66 52 51304 94 68 26 66 90 53
29 52819 93 50 90 58613 54 54 43 54317 74 57214 37 55 79 68 41 98 38 60 56
51404 93 66 55822 62 84 57 28 52917 90 46 86 58707 58 53 42 54415 71 57309 31
59 78 67 39 95 33 54 60 51503 91 63 55919 57 78

D 36 37 38 39 40 41 M Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 1 58802 60204
61589 62954 64301 65627 2 25 27 61611 77 23 49 3 49 51 34 99 45 71 4 72 74 57
63022 67 93 5 96 97 80 45 90 65715 6 58919 60320 61703 67 64412 35 7 43 44 26
90 34 59 8 66 67 49 63112 56 81 9 90 90 72 35 79 65803 10 59013 60413 95 57
64501 25 11 37 36 61817 80 23 47 12 60 59 40 63202 45 68 13 84 38 63 25 67 90
14 59107 60506 86 48 90 ^5912 15 30 29 61909 70 64612 34 16 54 52 32 93 34 56
17 77 75 55 63315 56 78 18 59201 98 77 38 78 66000 19 42 60621 62000 60 64701
22 20 48 45 23 83 23 43 21 71 68 46 63405 45 65 22 95 91 69 28 67 87 23 59318
60714 91 50 89 66109 24 41 37 62114 73 64811 31 25 65 60 37 95 34 53 26 88 83
60 63518 56 74 27 59412 60806 83 40 78 96 28 35 29 62205 62 64900 66318 29 58
53 28 85 22 40 30 82 76 51 63607 44 60 D 36 37 38 39 40 41 M Parts Parts
Parts Parts Parts Parts 31 59505 60899 62274 63630 64966 66283 32 29 60922
96 52 89 66305 33 52 45 62319 75 65011 27 34 75 68 42 97 33 49 35 99 91 65
63719 55 70 36 59622 61014 87 42 77 92 37 45 37 62410 64 99 66414 38 69 60 33
87 65121 36 39 92 83 56 63809 43 57 40 59715 61106 78 32 65 79 41 39 29 62501
54 87 66510 42 62 52 24 76 65209 23 43 85 75 46 99 31 44 44 59809 98 69 63921
53 66 45 32 61221 92 43 75 88 46 55 44 62615 66 98 66609 47 79 67 37 88 65320
31 48 59902 90 60 64010 42 53 49 25 61313 83 33 64 74 50 48 36 62705 55 86 96
51 72 59 28 77 65408 66718 52 95 82 51 64100 30 39 53 60018 61405 73 22 52 61
54 42 28 96 44 74 83 55 65 51 62818 67 96 66804 56 88 74 41 89 65518 26 57
60111 97 64 64211 40 48 58 35 61520 86 34 61 69 59 58 43 62909 56 83 91 60 81
66 32 78 65605 66913

D 42 43 44 45 46 47 M Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 1 66934 68221
69486 70731 71954 73155 2 56 42 69507 51 74 75 3 77 63 28 72 94 94 4 99 84 49
92 72014 73214 5 67021 68306 70 70813 34 34 6 42 27 91 33 55 54 7 64 48 69612
54 75 74 8 85 70 33 75 95 93 9 67107 91 53 95 72115 73313 10 28 68412 74 70916
35 33 11 50 33 95 36 55 53 12 72 45 69716 57 75 72 13 93 75 37 77 96 92 14
67215 97 58 98 72216 73412 15 36 68518 79 71018 36 32 16 58 39 99 39 56 51 17
79 60 69820 59 76 71 18 67301 81 41 79 96 91 19 22 68603 62 71100 72316 73501
20 44 24 83 20 36 30 21 65 45 69903 41 56 50 22 87 66 24 61 77 70 23 67408 87
45 81 97 90 24 30 68708 66 71202 72417 73609 25 51 29 87 23 37 29 26 73 51
70007 43 57 49 27 94 72 28 63 77 68 28 67516 93 49 84 97 88 29 37 68814 70
71304 72517 73708 30 59 35 90 25 37 27 D 42 43 44 45 46 47 M Parts Parts
Parts Parts Parts Parts 31 67580 68856 70111 71345 72557 73747 32 67601 77
32 65 77 67 33 23 98 53 86 97 86 34 44 68919 73 71406 72617 73806 35 66 40 94
26 37 25 36 87 61 70215 47 57 45 37 67709 83 36 67 77 65 38 30 69004 56 87 97
84 39 51 25 77 71508 72717 73904 40 73 46 98 28 37 23 41 94 67 70318 48 57 43
42 67815 88 39 69 77 63 43 37 69109 60 89 97 82 44 58 30 80 71609 72817 74002
45 80 51 70401 30 37 21 46 67901 72 22 50 57 41 47 22 93 42 70 76 60 48 44
69214 63 91 96 80 49 65 35 84 71711 72916 74100 50 86 56 70504 31 36 19 51
68008 77 25 51 56 39 52 29 98 45 72 76 58 53 50 69319 66 92 96 78 54 73 40 87
71812 73016 97 55 94 61 70607 32 36 74217 56 68114 82 28 53 55 36 57 35 69403
48 73 75 56 58 56 23 66 93 95 75 59 78 44 90 71913 73115 95 60 99 65 70710 33
35 74314

D 48 49 50 51 52 53 M Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 1 74333 75490
76623 77732 78818 79881 2 53 75509 41 51 36 98 3 72 28 60 69 54 79916 4 92 47
79 87 72 33 5 74411 66 97 77806 90 51 6 31 85 76716 24 78908 68 7 50 75604 35
42 26 85 8 70 23 53 60 44 80003 9 89 42 72 79 61 20 10 74508 61 91 97 79 38 11
28 80 76809 77915 97 55 12 47 99 28 33 79015 73 13 66 75718 46 52 33 90 14 86
37 65 70 51 80107 15 74605 56 84 88 68 25 16 25 75 76902 78006 86 42 17 44 94
21 24 79104 60 18 63 75813 39 43 22 77 19 83 32 58 61 40 94 20 74702 51 77 79
57 80212 21 21 70 95 97 75 29 22 41 89 77014 78115 93 47 23 60 75908 32 33
79211 64 24 79 27 51 52 28 81 25 99 46 69 70 46 99 26 74818 64 88 88 64 80326
27 37 83 77106 78206 82 33 28 57 76002 25 24 99 51 29 76 21 43 42 79317 68 30
95 40 62 60 35 85 D 48 49 50 51 52 53 M Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts
Parts 31 74914 76059 77180 78278 79353 80402 32 34 78 99 97 70 20 33 53 97
77217 78315 88 37 34 72 76116 36 33 79406 54 35 91 34 54 51 23 72 36 75011 53
73 69 41 89 37 30 72 91 87 59 80506 38 49 91 77310 78405 76 23 39 68 76210 28
23 94 41 40 88 29 47 41 79512 58 41 75107 48 65 59 29 75 42 26 66 84 77 47 92
43 45 85 77402 95 64 80610 44 64 76304 20 78513 82 27 45 83 23 39 31 79600 44
46 75203 42 57 49 17 61 47 22 60 76 67 35 78 48 41 79 94 85 52 96 49 60 98
77512 78603 70 80713 50 79 76417 31 21 88 30 51 99 35 49 39 79705 47 52 75318
44 67 57 23 64 53 37 73 86 75 40 81 54 56 92 77604 93 85 98 55 75 76510 22
78711 75 80816 56 94 29 41 29 93 33 57 75413 48 59 47 79811 50 58 32 67 77 65
28 67 59 51 85 96 83 46 84 60 70 76604 77714 78801 63 80901

D 54 55 56 57 58 59 M Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 1 80918 81931
82920 83882 84820 85731 2 35 48 36 93 35 46 3 52 65 52 83914 51 61 4 70 81 68
30 66 76 5 87 98 85 46 81 91 6 81004 82015 83001 61 97 85806 7 21 31 17 77
84912 21 8 38 48 33 93 27 36 9 55 65 49 84009 43 51 10 72 81 66 25 58 66 11 89
98 82 40 73 81 12 81106 82114 98 56 89 96 13 23 31 83115 72 85004 85910 14 40
48 30 88 19 25 15 57 64 46 84103 35 40 16 74 81 63 19 50 55 17 91 97 79 35 65
70 18 81208 82214 95 51 81 85 19 25 30 83211 66 96 86000 20 42 47 27 82 85111
14 21 59 64 43 98 26 29 22 76 80 59 84213 42 44 23 93 97 76 29 57 59 24 81310
82313 92 45 72 74 25 27 30 83308 60 87 89 26 43 46 24 76 85203 86103 27 60 63
40 92 18 18 28 77 79 56 84370 33 33 29 94 95 72 23 48 48 30 81411 82412 88 39
64 62 D 54 55 56 57 58 59 M Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 31 81428
82429 83404 84354 85279 86177 32 45 45 20 70 94 92 33 62 62 36 86 85309 86207
34 79 78 52 84401 24 21 35 95 94 68 17 39 36 36 81512 82511 84 32 55 51 37 29
27 83500 48 70 66 38 46 44 16 63 85 80 39 63 60 32 79 85400 95 40 80 77 48 95
15 86310 41 96 93 64 84510 30 24 42 81613 82609 80 26 45 39 43 30 26 96 41 60
54 44 47 42 83612 57 76 68 45 64 58 28 72 91 83 46 80 75 44 88 85506 98 47 97
91 60 84603 21 86412 48 81714 82708 76 19 36 27 49 31 24 92 34 51 42 50 48 40
83708 50 66 56 51 64 57 24 65 81 71 52 81 73 40 81 96 85 53 98 89 55 96 85611
86500 54 81814 82806 71 84712 26 15 55 31 22 87 27 41 29 56 48 38 83803 43 56
44 57 65 54 19 58 71 58 58 81 71 35 73 86 73 59 98 87 51 89 85701 87 60 81915
82903 67 84804 16 86602

D 60 61 62 63 64 65 M Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 1 86617 87476
88308 89113 89892 90643 2 31 90 22 27 89904 55 3 46 87504 35 40 17 67 4 60 18
88349 53 30 79 5 75 32 62 89166 43 92 6 89 87546 76 79 89955 90704 7 86404 60
90 92 68 16 8 18 74 88403 89206 81 28 9 33 88 17 19 93 41 10 47 87602 30 32
90006 90753 11 62 16 44 45 19 65 12 76 30 88458 89258 31 77 13 91 44 71 71 44
89 14 86805 87658 85 84 90057 90802 15 19 72 98 97 69 14 16 34 86 88512 89310
82 26 17 48 87700 25 24 95 38 18 63 14 39 37 90107 90850 19 77 28 52 50 20 62
20 91 42 88566 89363 32 75 21 86906 87756 79 76 45 87 22 20 70 93 89 90158 99
23 35 84 88606 89402 70 90911 24 49 98 20 15 83 23 25 63 87812 33 28 95 35 26
78 26 47 41 90208 47 27 92 40 88660 89454 20 90959 28 87006 53 74 67 33 71 29
21 67 87 80 46 84 30 35 87881 88701 89493 90258 96 D 60 61 62 63 64 65 M Parts
Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 31 87049 87895 88714 89506 90271 91008 32 64
87909 27 19 83 20 33 78 23 41 32 96 32 34 92 37 54 45 90308 44 35 87107 51
88768 89558 21 91056 36 21 87964 81 71 33 68 37 35 78 94 84 46 80 38 49 92
88808 97 90358 92 39 64 88006 21 89609 70 91104 40 78 20 35 22 83 16 41 92 33
48 35 95 28 42 87206 47 88861 48 90408 40 43 21 88061 75 89661 20 91162 44 35
75 88 74 33 64 45 49 89 88901 87 45 76 46 63 88102 15 89700 90457 88 47 78 16
28 12 70 91200 48 92 30 41 25 82 12 49 87306 44 88954 38 95 23 50 20 88157 68
89751 90507 35 51 34 71 81 64 19 91247 52 48 85 94 77 32 59 53 63 98 89008 89
44 71 54 77 88212 21 89802 90556 83 55 91 26 34 15 69 95 56 87405 40 47 28 81
91307 57 19 53 89060 41 93 19 58 33 88267 74 89853 90606 30 59 47 81 87 66 18
42 60 61 94 89100 79 30 91354

D 66 67 68 69 70 71 M Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 1 91366 92061
92729 93368 93979 94561 2 78 73 40 78 89 70 3 90 84 51 89 99 80 4 91401 95 61
99 94009 89 5 13 92107 92772 93410 18 99 6 25 18 83 20 28 94608 7 37 29 94 30
38 17 8 91448 41 92805 41 48 27 9 60 92152 16 93451 94058 36 10 72 63 26 61 68
47 11 84 75 37 72 78 94655 12 95 86 92848 82 88 64 13 91507 97 59 92 97 74 14
19 92208 70 93503 94107 83 15 31 20 80 13 17 93 16 42 31 91 23 27 94702 17
91554 42 92902 34 37 11 18 66 92253 13 93544 47 21 19 77 65 24 54 94156 30 20
89 76 34 64 66 39 21 91601 87 92945 75 76 94748 22 12 98 56 83 86 58 23 24
92309 66 95 95 67 24 37 21 77 93605 94205 76 25 91647 32 88 16 15 86 26 59 43
99 26 25 95 27 71 92354 93009 36 34 94804 28 82 65 20 46 44 13 29 94 76 31 57
94254 23 30 91706 92387 93041 67 64 32 D 66 67 68 69 70 71 M Parts Parts
Parts Parts Parts Parts 31 91717 92399 93052 93677 94273 94841 32 29 92410
62 87 83 50 33 40 21 73 97 93 60 34 52 32 84 93707 94302 69 35 91763 43 94 18
12 94878 36 75 92454 93105 28 22 87 37 87 65 16 38 31 96 38 98 76 26 93748 41
94905 39 91810 87 37 58 94351 15 40 21 98 93147 68 60 24 41 33 92509 58 78 70
33 42 44 20 69 88 80 42 43 91856 32 79 98 89 51 44 67 43 90 93809 99 94960 45
79 92554 93200 19 94408 69 46 90 65 11 29 18 79 47 91902 76 21 39 28 88 48 13
87 32 93849 37 97 49 24 98 93242 59 47 95006 50 36 92609 53 69 94456 15 51
91947 20 63 79 66 24 52 59 30 74 89 75 33 53 70 41 84 99 86 42 54 82 92652 95
93909 94 51 55 93 63 93305 19 94504 95060 56 92004 74 16 29 13 69 57 16 85 26
39 23 78 58 27 96 37 93949 32 87 59 39 92707 47 59 42 96 60 92050 18 93358 69
94551 95105

D 72 73 74 75 76 77 M Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 1 95114 95638
96134 96600 97036 97443 2 23 47 42 07 43 50 3 32 55 50 15 50 96 4 41 64 58 22
75 63 5 50 95672 66 30 64 69 6 95159 81 74 37 97071 76 7 68 89 82 45 78 82 8 77
98 90 52 85 89 9 86 95706 98 60 92 95 10 95 15 96205 67 99 97502 11 95204 23 13
74 97106 08 12 12 31 21 82 13 14 13 21 40 29 89 20 21 14 30 95748 37 97 27 27
15 39 57 96145 96704 34 97534 16 95248 65 53 11 97141 40 17 57 73 61 19 48 47
18 66 95782 69 26 54 53 19 74 90 96277 34 61 59 20 83 98 84 96741 97168 97566
21 92 95807 92 48 75 72 22 95301 15 96300 56 82 78 23 10 23 08 63 89 85 24 19
32 16 70 96 91 25 27 40 24 96778 97202 98 26 36 95848 96331 85 09 97604 27 45
57 39 92 16 10 28 54 65 48 96800 23 16 29 62 73 55 07 30 23 30 95371 95881
96363 14 97236 97629 D 72 73 74 75 76 77 M Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts
Parts 31 95380 95890 96370 96822 97243 97635 32 89 98 78 29 50 42 33 97 95906
86 36 57 48 34 95406 14 94 43 64 54 35 15 23 96401 51 70 60 36 95424 31 09
96858 97277 67 37 32 39 17 65 84 97673 38 41 95947 24 72 91 79 39 50 56 32 79
97 85 40 95458 64 96440 87 97304 92 41 67 72 48 94 11 98 42 76 95980 55 96901
17 97704 43 84 88 63 08 24 10 44 93 96 96471 15 31 16 45 95501 96004 78 23
97337 23 46 10 13 86 30 44 29 47 19 21 94 96937 51 97735 48 27 29 96501 44 57
41 49 36 37 09 51 64 47 50 95545 96045 16 58 97371 53 51 53 53 24 65 77 60 52
62 61 96532 96973 84 97766 53 70 69 39 80 90 72 54 79 96077 47 87 97 78 55
95587 85 54 94 97404 84 56 96 94 62 97001 10 90 57 95604 96102 96599 08 17 96
58 13 10 77 15 23 97802 59 21 18 85 22 30 08 60 30 26 96592 97029 97437 14

D 78 79 80 81 82 83 M Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 1 97820 98168
98485 98773 99030 99258 2 26 73 90 77 34 61 3 32 79 95 82 38 65 4 38 84 98500
86 42 68 5 44 90 05 91 46 72 6 98850 95 10 98795 99050 99275 7 56 98201 15
98800 54 79 8 62 06 20 04 58 82 9 68 12 98525 09 62 85 10 74 17 30 13 66 89 11
97880 22 35 18 99070 99293 12 86 98228 40 98822 74 96 13 92 34 45 27 78 99300
14 98 39 98550 31 82 03 15 97904 45 55 36 86 06 16 10 50 60 40 99090 10 17 16
98255 65 98844 94 13 18 22 61 70 49 98 99317 19 28 66 98575 53 99102 20 20
97934 72 80 58 06 22 21 39 77 85 62 09 27 22 45 98282 89 98866 13 30 23 51 88
94 71 17 99333 24 57 93 99 75 99121 37 25 97963 98 98604 79 25 40 26 69 98304
09 84 29 43 27 75 90 14 98888 33 47 28 80 14 18 92 36 99350 29 86 20 23 97 40
53 30 97992 98325 98628 98901 99144 57 D 78 79 80 81 82 83 M Parts Parts
Parts Parts Parts Parts 31 97998 98330 98633 98905 99148 99360 32 98004 36
38 10 52 63 33 09 41 42 14 55 67 34 15 46 47 18 59 70 35 21 51 52 22 63 73 36
27 98357 98657 98927 99167 99376 37 98032 62 61 31 70 80 38 38 67 66 35 74 83
39 44 72 71 39 78 8^ 40 50 78 76 44 82 89 41 55 98383 98680 98948 99185 99392
42 98061 88 85 52 89 96 43 67 93 90 56 93 99 44 72 98 94 60 96 99402 45 78
89404 99 65 99200 05 46 84 09 98704 98969 04 08 47 89 14 08 73 07 11 48 95 19
13 77 11 15 49 98101 24 18 81 15 99418 50 06 98429 22 85 99218 21 51 12 34
98727 98990 22 24 52 18 40 32 94 25 27 53 23 45 36 98 29 30 54 98129 50 41
99002 33 99433 55 34 98455 45 06 99236 36 56 40 60 98750 10 40 29 57 46 65 55
14 44 43 58 51 70 59 18 47 46 59 57 75 64 22 51 99449 60 98162 98480 98768
99025 99256 52

D 84 85 86 87 88 89 M Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts Parts 1 99455 99622
99758 99864 99939 99985 2 58 24 60 65 40 85 3 61 27 62 67 41 86 4 64 29 64 68
42 86 5 67 32 66 70 43 87 6 99470 99934 99768 99871 99944 87 7 73 37 70 73 45
88 8 76 39 72 74 45 99988 9 79 41 74 76 46 88 10 82 44 76 77 47 89 11 99485
99646 99778 99878 99948 89 12 88 49 80 79 49 90 13 91 51 82 80 50 90 14 93 54
83 82 51 99991 15 96 56 85 83 52 91 16 99 99658 99787 99884 99953 91 17 99502
61 89 86 54 92 18 05 63 91 88 55 92 19 08 66 93 90 55 92 20 11 68 95 91 56
99992 21 14 99670 99797 99893 99957 93 22 99517 73 99 94 58 93 23 19 75 99800
95 59 94 24 22 77 02 97 60 94 25 25 80 04 98 61 94 26 28 99682 06 99 99961
99995 27 99531 84 08 99900 62 95 28 34 87 99809 02 63 95 29 36 89 11 03 64 65
30 39 91 13 99904 99964 96 D 84 85 86 87 88 89 M Parts Parts Parts Parts
Parts Parts 31 99542 99694 99815 99906 99965 99996 32 45 96 17 07 66 96 33 47
98 18 08 67 96 34 50 99700 20 09 67 97 35 53 03 22 11 68 97 36 99556 05 99823
99912 99969 97 37 58 07 25 13 70 99997 38 61 09 27 14 70 97 39 64 99711 29 15
71 98 40 67 14 30 17 72 98 41 99569 16 99832 99918 99672 98 42 72 18 34 19 73
98 43 75 20 35 20 74 99998 44 77 99722 37 21 74 98 45 80 25 39 22 75 99 46
99583 27 99840 99924 99976 99 47 85 29 42 25 76 99 48 88 31 44 26 77 99 49 91
99733 45 27 78 99999 50 93 35 47 28 78 99 51 99596 37 99848 99929 79 99 52 98
39 50 30 80 99 53 99601 42 52 31 81 99 54 04 99744 53 32 81 99 55 06 46 55 33
82 99999 56 09 48 99856 99934 99982 99 57 11 50 58 35 83 99 58 99614 52 59 37
83 99 59 16 54 61 38 84 100000 60 19 56 62 99939 99684 100000


