Our Heart is the Mind of God most high.
Our Being amiable as the sweet Lilly.
Our faith fullnes Love and Truth upright,
Is Gods Light, life and Cleernes bright.



A SVPPLICATION OF THE FAmily of Love (said to be presented into the Kings
royal hands, known to be dispersed among his Loyal Subjects) for grace and
favor.

Examined, and found to be derogatorie in an hie degree, unto the glory of
God, the honor of our King, and the Religion in this Realm both soundly
professed and firmly established.

Revel. 2. Ver. 14.15. I have a few things against thee, because thou have
them that mainetaine the doctrine of BALAAM etc. Even so have thou them, that
mainetaine the doctrine of the NICOLAITANES, which thing I hate.

Printed for John Legate, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1606.

TO THE KINGS most excellent Majesty JAMES the first, by the grace of God King
of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, defender of the Faith etc.
MOST gracious Sovereign Lord, The exordium.
where there is published in a book written by your Highness, as an
instruction to your most noble Son (whom Almighty God bless with much
honor, happiness, and long life) of a people that are of a vile sect among
the Anabaptists, called the Family of Love, who do hold and mainetaine many
proud, uncharitable, unchristian, and most absurd opinions; unto whom your
Highness does also give the name of Puritanes, affirming in the say de book,
that diverse of them (as Brown, Penrie, and others) do accord with them in
their foul, erroneous, heady, and fantastical opinions, which are there set
down at large by your Majesty, aduising your Royal Son (as is most meet)
to punish them if they refuse to obey the Law, and will not cease to stir up
rebellion,

The Examination.
THis is the Families Exordium; and contains an heavy and pitious complaint
unto, and of the Kings Majesty himself, for that in his book, and
Instruction unto his most noble Son, he terms the Family of Love, a vile
Sect amongst the Anabaptists; and also gives them the title of Puritans.

This goes to their very hearts, The Exordium quare some.
that they should be so ranked, and styled, and that by his Majesty, and that
in a printed book; and that divulged in a known tongue over his dominions;
and the same directed unto his royal, and deatest Son, evermore to continue.
Hence their quarrel, and contention even with their King, hidden yet under the
fair words of an humble petition. A memorable Exordium or preface.

The Family of Love.
NOw gracious Sovereign, A Propestatio^.
because it is meet that your Highness should understand by their
supplication, and declaration of the truth herein by themselves, of whom your
Majesty has been thus informed, prostrate at your Princely seete, as true,
faithful, loyal, and obedient subjects, to all your laws, and ordinances,
civil, and politic, spiritual and temporal, they with humble hearts do
beseech your Princely Majesty to understand that the people of the Family of
Love, or of God, do utterly disclaim and detest all the said absurd, and
selfe-conceited opinions, and disobedient, and erroneous Sects of the
Anabaptists, Brown, Penrie, Puritanes, and all other proude-minded Sects and
heresies whatsoever, protesting upon pain of our lives, that we are not of
consent, nor agreeing with any such brain-sicke Preachers, nor their rebellious
and disobediet Sects whatsoever; but have been, and ever will be truly
obedient to your Highness, and your laws, to the effusion of our blood, and
expenses of our goods and lands in your Majesty's service, highly lauding
Almighty God, who has so graciously, and peaceably appointed unto us such a
virtuous, wise, religious, and noble King, and so careful, and impartial a
Iusticer to govern over us, beseeching him daiely to bless your Highness
with his godly wisdom, and holy understanding, to the furtherance of his
truth, and godliness, and with all honor, happiness, peace, and long life,
and to judge rightly betwixt false hood, and truth.

The Examination.
IN this Section they protest that they are not (as the King says they are) a
vile Sect, but The Family of Love, Against their Protestation.
or of God, or Gods Family; neither that they do hold, and maintain (as his
Majesty has published) any, much less many proud, uncharitable, unchristian,
and most absurd opinions: yea they do utterly disclaim and detest all the said
absurd, and self-conceited opinions; as also the disobedient, and erroneous
Sects of the Anabaptists, Brown, Penrie, Puritanes, and all other
proud-minded Sects, and heresies whatsoever, etc. And therefore that his Highness
both misconceiueth and misreporteth of them, good men.

In which their Protestation, he that sees not his most excellent and sacred
Majesty most odiously to be traduced, as a public defamer of Gods people, is
very blind; and again, observing so much, is not grieved thereat, shows
that he neither carries sound affection unto his Souereigue, nor tendereth
the honor of his Prince.

Now for so much as both his Majesty's book is extant, and this their
supplication (but more truly infamous Libell) in many men's hands, especially of
the young ones in this Family of Love (for few else can have so much as a view
thereof, unless they be of the vulgar sort, and withal inclineable to
receive their doctrine (of all others the unfittest to read or hear such
dangerous discourses): whereby both the Familistes are confirmed in their
familiar instructions, and his Majesty by such Libels ignominiously dispersed
is not a little wounded, it is very behoouefull somewhat to examine the truth
of this their protestation.

And because they say, how the premises are published in the said book of the
Kings, it shall not be amiss here to set down his Majesty's very words, and
the occasion of them, expressed by his royal hand, to the end that it may
appear who is more abused, either the Family who are charged, as there is set
down by his Highness; or his Majesty, thus traduced, and that to his face, by
the Family.

In the second book therefore of his most Fatherly, Kingly and divine
directions unto the royal Impe of rare hope, Prince Henry, his best beloved
son, his Majesty, having at large set down the diseases of the church, and
from his own experience, declared how the Puritanes, all his reign, and some
years before, had troubled the quiet of the Scottish kingdom and Church;
opposed themselves against the throne of Majesty; labored by the peoples
favor, and assistance, the erection of a government Democraticall, by the ruin
of the royal State; and sought to bring in a parity, and equality of all
degrees, as well into the Commonweal, as Church: in the end he gives his
advise, and says:

Take heed therefore (my Son) to such Puritanes, Puritanes to beauoided.
very Pestes in the Church and Commonweal: whom no deserts can oblige;
neither oaths or promises bind; breathing nothing but sedition, and
calumnies; aspiring without measure, railing without reason; and making their
own imaginations (without any warrant of the word) the square of their
conscience. I protest before the great God, and since I am here, as upon my
Testament, it is no place for me to lie in, that ye shall never find with any
Hie-land, or border thieves greater ingratitude, and more vile lies and
periuries, then with these Phanatick spirits. And suffer not the principals of
them to brook your land, if you like to sit at rest, except ye would keep
them for trying your patience, as Socrates did an evil wife. And for
preservative against their poison, entertain, and advance the godly, learned
and modest men of the Ministry, whom of (God be praised) there lacks not a
sufficient number: and by their promotion to Bishoprics, and benefices
(annulling that vile act of Annexation, if ye find it not done to your hand)
ye shall not only bannish their conceited paritie, whereof I have spoken, and
their other imaginary grounds, which can neither stand with the order of the
Church, nor the peace of a Commonweal, and well ruled monarchy: but also
shall ye reestablish the old institution of the three Estates in parliament,
which can no otherwise be done: But in this I hope (if God spare me days) to
make you a fair entry; always where I leave, follow you my steps. And to
end my advise anent the Church estate, cherish no man more then a good Pastor,
hate no man more then a proud Puritan, etc. These and the like words
(describing the humors of Puritanes, and rash headie Preachers, which think
it their honor, as his said Majesty in his preface to the said book does
say, to contend with Kings, and perturbe whole Kingdoms) were very
offensiuely taken of the Puritan faction in Scotland, against which they were
uttered, and made them to suspect (or at least in revenge of the censure, to
call his Highness profession into question among themselves, and to make
others doubtful) whether his Majesty so sincerely favored the religion in
Scotland established as he did pretend.

And albeit the whole instruction, especially the first book thereof, and these
words of his Majesty above mentioned in the second book: Entertain and
advance the godly, learned, and modest men of the Ministry, whomof (God be
praised) there lacks not a sufficient number. And again: Cherish no man more
then a good Pastor, reuealeth sufficiently the sound, and zealous affection
that his Majesty bears unto true Religion; and may, and do satisfy all
indifferent men: yet, if possible it were, that no scruple might rest in the
mind of any men, his Highness voluntarily, and in ample words, and fully,
further explaned his very inward conceits of the faction mentioned.

First then (says his Majesty) as to the name of Puritans, Who Puritans.
I am not ignorant that the style thereof does properly belong only to that
vile sect amongst the Anchaptisus called the Family of Love, because they
think themselus only pure, and in a manner without sin, the only true
Church, and only worthy to be participant of the Sacraments: and all the rest
of the World to be but abomination in the sight of God. Of this special Sect
I principally mean where I speak of Puritanes; diverse of them, as Brown,
Penry, and others, having at sundry times come in Scotland, to sow their
popple amongst us, (and from my heart I wish they had left no scholars
behind them, who by their fruits will in the own time be manifested): and
partly indeed, I give this style to such braine-sicke, and headie Preachers
their disciples, and followers, as refusing to be called of that Sect, yet
participate too much with their humors, in maintaining the above mentioned
errors; not only agreeing with the general rule of Anabaptists, in contempt
of the civil Magistrate, and in leaning to their own dreams, and
revelations: and particularly with this Sect in accounting all men profane
that swears not to all their fantasies, in making for every particular
question of the policy of the Church, as great commotion, as if the article of
the Trinity were called in controversy; in making the Scripture to be ruled
by their conscience, and not their conscience by the Scripture; and he that
denies, the lest jot of their grounds, Sit tibi tanqua^ Ethnicus, and
Publicanus, not worthy to enjoy the benefit of breathing, much less to
participate with them of the Sacraments: and before that any of their grounds
be impugned, let King, people, law, and all be trod under foot. Such holy
wars are to be preferred to an ungodly peace: no, in such cases, Christian
Princes are not only to be resisted unto, but not to be prayed for: For Prayer
must come of Faith, and it is reueiled to their conscience, that God will hear
no prayer for such a Prince.

Judge then Christian Reader (says his Highness) if I wrong this sort of
people, in giving them the style of that Sect, whose errors they imitate: and
since they are contented to wear their liuerie, let them not be ashamed to
borrow also their name. Who^ his Masty means by Puritans in his Book.
It is only of this kind of men, that in this book I write so sharply, and
whom I wish my Son to punish in case they refuse to obey the law, and will
not cease to stir up a rebellion, whom against I have written the more bitterly
in respect of diverse famous Libels, and injurious speeches, spread by some of
them, not only dishonorably inuectiue against all Christian Princes, but even
reproachful to our profession and Religion in respect they are come out under
color thereof, etc. So and more to his Majesty which I would the Family had
fully and at large set down.

For then it would appear that his Majesty most iudiciously speaks of
Puritanes, The kinds of Puritanes.
distinguishing them into two ranks, Sects, and sorts, principal and less
principal: the principal, he says, (and properly called Puritans) are a vile
Sect of the Anabaptists, called the Family of Love, with whom in certain main
points, both Brown, Peury and others do conioyne: the less principal, are
certain brain-sicke and heady Preachers the disciples and followers of Brown,
Penry, and others, in their fantastical conceits and rebellious complottings.

I dare say and affirm, his Majesty takes not the Family of Love, to be simply
Anabaptists; nor the Brownists and such like, to be simply Familists; nor the
brain-sicke Preachers and their dependants, to be simply Brownists, but insome
respects, wherein they do all concur. It is only of this later kind of men viz.
the disciples of Brown, Penry and such like that in his book his Majesty
writes so sharply, and whom he wishes his Son to punish in case they refuse
to obey the law, and will not cease to stir up rebellion. And yet his Majesty
takes the Family of Love to be Puritanes and the chiefest Puritanes, and
properly, though not the only Puritans, and a vile Sect among the Annabaptists,
albeit happily they do utterly disclaim and detest both the rebellious actions
of the braine-sicke Preachers in Scotland, and the giddie opinions of our home
Puritanes.

The Families fault is therefore not a little in confounding that which his
Highness with great judgment has distinguished; and in taking his words
absolutely to be uttered, which are spoken but in a particular respect. That
the Familists be Puritanes in the latter sense, his Majesty says not; and yet
that the Familistes be a vile Sect of the Anabaptists, and of all other the
most odious Puritanes, his Highness does affirm, and his verdict they shall
never be able to disprove, though they do protest, vow, and swear never so
much to be contrary.

The Family of Love.
AND because your Majesty should have a perfect view, A Prochmary
or an assured persuasion of the truth of the same our protestation: if
therefore there be any indifferent man of this kingdom, that can justly touch us
with any such disobedient, and wicked handling of our selves, as seems by
your Majesty's book it has been H. N. has so informed his Highness: see the
answer.
informed unto your Highness (unless they be such our mortal enemies, the
disobedient Puritanes, and those of their headie humors before named, who are
much more zealous, religious, and precise in the tything of Mint, Annis, and
Commin, and in the preferring of such like Pharisaicall and self chosen
outward traditions, and grounds or hypocritical righteousness, then in the
performing of judgment, mercy, and faith, and such like true and inward
righteousness, which God does most chiefly require, and regard ( Math. 15.15.
etc.); and whose malices have for twenty five years past, and vpwardes, and
ever since, with very many untrue suggestions, and most foul errors, and
odious crimes (the which we could show, if need were) sought our utter
overthrow and destruction, but that we have behaved our selves, in all
orderlinesse, and peaceablenesse of life, where we dwell and with whom we have
had to deal.

The Examination.
AFter their protestation, Against their Proclamation.
now follows aproclamation, as it were, for any indifferent man to come in,
and say his worst against them, to prove them such indeed, as the King says
they are.

And yet it is to be marked that of indifferent men, they except against
diverse; as first against all strangers whatsoever, and next against all
disobedient Puritanes, their mortal one wies, and such like, whose malice they
have had experience of, these twenty five years and vpwardes. A strange thing
that men indifferent, whether Strangers or of this Common weal should be
repelled, as partial witnesses; as strange again is it that their mortal
enemies the Puritanes, and their favorers, should be acknowledged of them to
be men indifferent.

That they do except against Puritanes, I could not blame them, being as they
say, their mortal and ancient enemies (as are many mo besides) had they not
confessed them, at least some of them, to be men of good conscience, and
indifferent: but that they should except against any indifferent Strangers,
without showing probable cause of the same, does argue in my conceit, that
Strangers, especially, Hollanders, Frize-landers, and others in Base-Almaigne
would utter strange things of this Family of Love, and charge them justly with
gross wickedness, and impious misdemeanors, if they should be heard.

But his Majesty, besides Strangers, and pharisaicall Puritans, has others no
doubt in his Kingdom, which unfeignedly do perform: both judgment, mercy,
and faith, not placing religion in outward observations, who (enquired after
and called forth) can advertise his Majesty, and the State, both how
duetifully toward their Prince, orderly toward their neighbors, and
religiously in the Church of God, they have, and do behave themselves.

In the mean space, till this be known (which I cannot think is utterly
unknown to his Highness) I will set down the judgment of one (every way a
Stranger to us) against whom notwithstanding none exceptions, I am sure will be
taken by the Family of Love, or any of them. For they do beleeue^ (if they
believe his writings) he noe more can err in whatsoever he says, than
could the Prophets of God, or Apostles of Christ H.N. Prophet of the Spir. c.
13.. 8.
and that before whom, and before the eyes of whose heart and spirit, not only
all their actions, but also their very secret counsels, and cogitations are
naked and bare Ibid. c. 3.. 3.
. This man is H.N. himself, that great Prophet, or God rather among the
Familistes.

Alas (says H. N.) like as the world together with her wise and
Scripture-learned are darkened, and blinded in Heart (and deaf in
Understanding) which comprehend not the good being of the Love, nor yet
consider on any of all that which God, through the Spirit of his Love,
requires: but have always a lust to themselves, and cleave unto the
covetousness, the voluptuousness of the flesh; and the false wisdom, which
seduced them: even so I have found many of you (yea almost all, H.N. his
judgment of the Familistes his followers.
which make boast of Love, and talk much thereof; to stand in such like case:
and also advisedly marked, that ye, under the pretense or color of the House,
or service of Love, have taken to your selves the voluptuousness of the flesh
(2. Pet. 2. b. Jude. 1. b.) according to the manner of the World, to be your
Freedom, and your own Thoughts of the Good-thinking, according to the
Imagination of the Knowledge (like unto many vnilluminated Scripture learned,
and Good-thinking wise) to be your wisdom: and have no regard to the godly
life of the gracious word, nor to the Counsel of the Testimonies of the holy
spirit of Love, and her Service. And yet notwithstanding, when one asks you,
whether ye have adjoined you to the Love, or are minded to continue with a good
will, by the same; yea answer, and say expressly; O yea, we will cleave unto
the Love, and not forsake the same in any case. All this says, H. N. Proph. of
the Spir. c. 2.. 7.
and that not of a few, but of many yea almost all, of the Family of Love, who
have taken unto themselves the voluptuousness of the flesh, to be their
Freedom, or Felicity: and he cites both, 2. Pet. 2. b. and Jude. 1. b; as if
they were the persons reserved unto the day of judgment to be punished,
because they walk after the flesh in the lust of vneleanenesse, despise
rulers, and speak evil of them that are in authority, having noe regard of
godly life.

Again of his, and this Family says the same H. N. Proph. of the Spir.. 9.
: verily after such a manner ye are toward the gracious word of the Lord, and
his service of Love, even like unto an whore, which after her hearts
Good-thinking to a cloaking of her whoredom, chooses an husband, and coupleth
her self in marriage unto him, for that she might boast her as a married
wife; and under such a covering and boasting that she has a husband,
commits whoredom: Seeing that ye in like manner without Christ, and against
Christ, although ye make great boast of him, commit whoredom, and deal nor
walk not according to the doctrine or requiring of Christ.

If others think hardly and speak badly of these Familistes, which are
strangers unto them, and none of their society; and his Majesty terms them
a vile Sect; let them marvel noe more, seeing H. N. the oldest Father of that
Family, and privy to all their actions and dealinges takes them, I mean
many, even Almost all of them, to be but an whorish company, making the
voluptuousness of the flesh their freedom, or summum bonum: neither let them
blame others hence forward as injurious to their good manners. For H. N. has
taught us what they are.

The Family of Love.
OR, if we do vary, or swerve from the now established Religion in this
Land, either in Services, Ceremonies, Sermons, or Sacraments;

The Examination.
Here would I know what they mean by varying or swaruing from the now
established religion in this Land.

If by varying they understand any outward and public dissenting from the
religion established, The Familistes, Temporizers.
or from the Services, Ceremonies, Sacraments and exercises of the same, by
absenting from the Church, or not frequenting and repairing unto the sacred and
approved assemblies, then surely can they not he said to vary from our
religion, and exercises at all. For they neither altogether with the
Brownistes, nor in any Ceremonial considerations, with the half Brownists,
the Puritanes, refuse to communicate with us in the Services, Ceremonies, and
other exercises of our Religion; and so they do, or will do, lived they at
Rome, as H. N. has taught and willed them Pattern of the pres. Temps.
: The Services or Ceremonies shall not save any one (says H. N.) without the
good nature of Jesus Christ and of his service of Love, nor yet condemn any
one, in that good nature of JESUS CHRIST, nor in the service of Love 3.
Refrein.. 6.
.

Hence it is that they neither accuse nor blame any folk for their religion,
whether the Ministers of the Popish Church, or in any other ( Protestant, and
reformed Church) which minister or use the Ceremonial Services Ibid.. 2.
: provided that they hold them still, and suffer the Familists to be quiet, and
increase: neither strive they at all (wheresoever they reside) nor vary with
any one about Religion Patern^ of the pres. Temps.
. But this does not extenuate their fault, but aggrauate their offense, for
that they are pliable and conformable to all religions, Services and times, for
their own ease, and advantage, and to shun persecution and trouble, which
they will not suffer, come of religion what will.

But if by varying from the now established religion in this Land, etc. they
mean how in their judgment they condemn, and do not approve the religion,
Services, Ceremonies, and Sacraments ratified by the hie, and lawful
authority of this Church, as wherein, The Familists most capital enemies unto
sound and Christian religion.
without the Service of their Love, or ministry of H. N. his doctrine, God is
not delighted, and whereby Christians please not the divine Majesty one whit,
but rather irritate and offend him; then surely they do more vary from the
religion, Services, Ceremonies, and Sacraments of the Church of England, than
does any Brownist, or Puritan, or other adversary of the Church of England
whatsoever. For howsoever they show themselves obedient, and externally
conformable by repairing unto our Churches, frequenting of Sermons, using the
Sacraments, and the like: yet in their hearts and mind, both present and
absent, either as childish, they deride; or as impious, they condemn them all.

Witness H. N: who speaking of us, and whosoever else be not of his Family,
(whom they imagine to soiorne in the land of ignorance) They build (says he
in scoffing and odious manner) They build diverse common houses, which they
name Gods houses. And they occupy there manie-manner of foolishness, or taken
on Services, which they name Religions, or Gods services, to wave or hold forth
some thing before the ignorant people, to a stay of the consent arising out of
their spotted consciences, whereby their might set their foolish consciences at
peace H.N. Spiritland, c. 5.. 1.
.

Which our meetinges and Services, elsewhere he calls false Exercises or
vsages H.N. 1. exhort. c. 16.. 2.
, which hear a goodly show, wherewith many ignorant people, that know not
any difference between the true, and the false light, become seduced and
deceived.

And in another place: Therefore cannot the Man (whilst that he is not yet
wholly Godded, in one spirit of the godly Being with God) occupy, or use any
manner of Freedom, that is falser, wickeder, absurder, seducinger, arroganter,
nor horribler against God and his upright Service, nor yet daungerfuller, nor
distructionabler to the children of men, than this: Namely, that any man should
become so arrogant, and free, or unbound of Heart, that he, out of an appeased
Conscience or contented Heart, should dare to teach, or set forth any thing,
through the imagination of the knowledge (whether he then have taken on the
same, Out of the learnednesse of the Scriptures, or out of his good thinking
wisdom) as a Word or Commandment of the Lord: or yet to iustitute any
Services, Out of the letre of the Scripture, according to his good thinkinge,
and so to pluck or make subject the hearts of men, to destruction, thereunder.
So H. N. Ibid.. 14.
.

And further: No man (says H. N. Ibid. 16.
can rightly, according to the truth of the holy Scriptures, nor according to
the spiritual understanding of the godly wisdom, deale-in or use the true
Gods services, nor the services of the holy word (it becomes not like wise
that any man (says H. N.) should take-in hand to busy himself thereabout)
but only the illuminated Elders in the godly wisdom, which walk in the
House of Love etc. and are cue^ so Godded with God, or incorporated to God, in
all Love. With whom also God in one Being, and power of his holy spirit, is
hominified, or become Man.

And then (observe the execrable spirit of these men) Therefore it is assuredly,
all false and lies, seducing and deceitful, what the vngodded or vnilluminated
Men, out of the imagination or riches of their knowledge, and out of their
learnednesse of the Scriptures, bring-forth, institute, preach and teach. They
preach indeed the Letter, and the Imagination of their knowledge: but not the
word of the living God. All this has H. N: their prophet Ibid.. 17.18.
; which well may show that the bodies of his Familistes may be in our Churches,
and at Service, Sermons, and Sacraments, but their hearts do loath whatsoever
they do either see, or hear, though it be never so firmly grounded and
apparently derived from Gods written word, if the same either proceed not,
neither be uttered by the deified Elders of the Family, or some one of them;
yea they take not God any where to be truly served, but in their private
meetings, and among themselves.

Hence: Our God of Love is the true living God (say they) and besides him there
is no God more, and his Gods service, which we minister under the obedience of
his Love, is the true safe-making Gods service, and besides the same there is
not any Gods service more, neither in Heaven nor Earth Fid el. declar. c. 4.. 11
.

This, without producing further testimonies either foreign or from our
selves, may suffice to prove that they vary from the now established religion
in this land, both in the Services, Ceremonies, Doctrine, and Sacraments of the
same; al which in their judgments they disallow, except, which is not
credible, they condemn the judgment of H. N. and other their Illuminate
Elders, touching the same, who have published these their concepts to the open
world.

The Family of Love.
OR have publicly spoken, or inueighed either by word, or wrighting against
our late Sovereign Princes government, in cases spiritual or temporal, the
let us be rejected for sectaries, and never receive the benefit of suiects.

The Examination.
IT cannot be denied, but the Puritanes, I mean the English faction
(whatsoever the Scottish have done, whereof only his Majesty speaks) have
publicly spoken and inueighed, as well by word as writing, against our late
Princes authority in cases spiritual. Penrie said plainly that her
government was traitorous to the Majesty of our Savior Christ Penry Supplic.
and therest, not so far gone as he, took her not, as neither do they our now
King, to be any officer at all of the Church.

I find not the Family ever publicly depraved her Highness government,
either spiritual or temporal, and very bad men they, and most ungrateful if
they should; diverse of the chiefest among them receiving yearly both
countenance, and maintenance from her Princely coffers, being her household
servants. But this clears them noe whit from being Sectaries even in this
respect mentioned. For in their public writings they speak basely, and
inueigh odiously against all Princes, government, Magistracy, and eminency
whatsoever, spiritual and temporal, The Familistes condemn all Magistracy and
Eminency.
and therefore against our late Princes government in cases not only
spiritual with the Puritanes, but temporal to, with the Anabaptists.

Among the excellencies of this people, this lovely people the Family of Love
(for so do they style themselves), the least is not, that among them there is
no masterfull dominion; there reigns no man over other H. N. Spirit: land. c.
34.. 8.
; they have no heads nor Kings, which are borne of the flesh and blood of
sin Ibid. c. 38.. 1.
.

It is well pleasing (says N. H.) that the one man of God, Lordeth not over
the other, neither that the one be the others bond-seruant Ibid. c. 37.. 9.
.

And as they please God in that they exercise no superiority, but are equal
in degree among themselves; all Kings, and a kingdom of Kings Ibid. c. 38.. 4
: so they term a King, the scum of ignorance Ibid. c. 2^.. 14
; and deem it an abominable thing in the eyes of God for men to Lord over
each other, and term such persons Bond-seruants and Captiue-slaues Ibid. c.
38.. 5
. Last of all they have Prophecies, that all Majesty's, Dominions, Powers, and
governments whatsoever, shall Ibid. c. 49.. 1
, and make prayers, that they may 1. Exhort. c. 17.. 6.
, submit themselves unto the service of Love (even as the Puritanes would have
Kings to submit their Scepters, to throw down their crowns before the Church,
yea and to lick up the dust of the feet of the church T. C. 1. Reply p. 144.
, and yielde obedience unto the presbiterie Eccles. discip. p. 165.
; and also that themselves, as Kings, and only Kings shall everlastingly live
and reign H N. Prou. ca. 1.. 18. Fidel. declar. c. 4.. 5. Praph. of the Spir.
c. 19.. 1^
yea and do reign upon the earth Proph. of the Spir. c. 19.. c.
.

It is therefore apparently, and from their own books and writings sufficiently,
without other needless demonstrations, proved, that the Family is a Sect most
vile, both varying in Services, Ceremonies, Doctrine, and Sacraments, from the
Religion now established in this land; and openly inueigh against all
government of Kings, and Magistrates, spiritual, and temporal; sighers and
seekers for a paritie and commixtion of all states: and therefore whatsoever
they do, not worthy to receive the benefit, and freedom due to loyal and
good Subjects.

The Family of Love.
ONly, The ^ar^ation.
right gracious Sovereign, we have read certain books, brought forth by a
Germane, Author, under the characters of H. N.

The Examination.
HItherto their Proclimarie. Now ensues a narration. It is much to be
lamented that a promiscuous reading of all writings, hand over head, is
permitted unto all men; the lamentable effects whereof we have, and see, in
this Family of Love.

And yet I would they had but only read, and not studied, followed, and
applauded these books, as the very message and oracles of God from Heaven;
neither delighted in the dark exercises, and Conuenticles of the said Family.

The time was when the letters H. N. were thought to signify no cedrtaine man,
but either the heavenly nature, or Homo Nouus, a new, or renewed man: or which
A.O. does in the Revelation Let of the Fam.
: but now he is acknowledged here to be a Germane Auctor; and was, though they
say not so much (as, by letters unto my self from Embden, I can show) by trade
a Mercer of Amsterdam in Holland: which course of life it had been a blessed
thing for Gods Church he had still followed, and never given his mind to the
writing of books.

The Family of Love.
WHo affirms their that he is prepared, chosen, Of H. N.
and sent of god to minister, and set forth the most holy service of the love
of God, and Christ, or of the holy Ghost, unto the children of men, upon the
universal earth.

The Examination.
What they say of H. N. he affirms every whit of himself, if his own
testimony, without proose or warrant, be of any validity.

In his Proverbs: The God of heaven, H. N. a most impious and blasphemous
magnifier of himself.
as the Father himself, is come down: and brings, in the service of Love,
himself, with his Christ and holy Ghost, and withal that which with him is
Gods, unto his obedient Man, H.N. And Goding the same with him, he has Manned
him with the same H.N. Proverbs. c. 8.. 3
.

In his Prophecy of the Spirit, he terms himself: Gods elected Minister
Proph. c. 13.. 8.
.

In the foresaid book of his Proverbs, he has these words: The Lord, out of
his merciful love, raised-up the gracious word, according to his promises, and
elected H.N. thereto, for to minister the same etc. H. N, Proverbs. c. 1.. 6.
.

And in this Proverbs again: Through which gracious word, and N.N. God
revealed (says he) the appearing of the coming of Christ, and the new day of
his righteous judgment, as also the flowing forth of his holy Spirit of love
to the awaking and raising up of all his holy-ones, out of sleep, to their
glorious Lordliness with Jesus Christ, and to an everlasting fast-standing
Kingdom of the godly Majesty upon earth, according to his promises. Ibid.. 17.
.

And afterward: Thus has God declared with H.N. the eight thorough-breaking of
his true light upon the earth wherein the Lord, the God of heaven, restered the
former Kingdom with his garnishing, together with all that which God has
spoken from the beginning of the World, through the mouth of his holy Prophets
etc. Ibid.. 18.
.

In his exhortation, God has illuminated him (he says) with his light, for to
illuminate, or give light to them that dwell yet in darkness upon the earth 1.
Exhor. c. 19. 8.
.

And finally in his first Epistle: All people are called, and friendly bidden,
through H. N. to the repentance for their sin, etc. Not alone with his
calling, but also with all the Scriptures heavenly Testimonies, and spiritual
voices of the Eternal Truth which are gone forth from the holy spirit of love,
and brought to light through H. N. 1. Epist. or Cri. v^^ce. c. 1. 1.
.

And why all this? but to the end that (as himself advises) the young ones
in the Family should not distrust, nor suspect any manner of evil, or
vnwisedome by him; nor yet in any wise persuade themselves, that the Exercises,
Documents, and instructions, which are taught or set forth before them, by him
the Father of the Family of Love, or oldest elder, are too childish, or too
unwise, for the to follow after 1. Exhort. c. 13.. 11.
.

But the child of God must always have in remembrance, that many false
Prophets are gone into the world: and therefore is not to believe whatsoever is
affirmed, but try the spirits whether they are of God. Because men receive not
the love of the truth, that they may be saved, God will send them strong
delusion that they shall believe lies, that they may be damned, which believed
not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness 2. These. 2. V. 10.11.
:

The more H. N. boasts of himself that he is illuminated from above, the
less is he to be credited, the more to be suspected.

Let him prove his preparation, his election, vocation, and general
Apostleship from Gods word (which he shall never do); or let him be accursed:
yet a because he arrogateth to himself the divine nature, and most heretically
and blasphemously avouches, that whatsoever the Prophets have foretold are
fulfilled in him and the like; and all this to the end that his idle
revelations, cloaked under his Loue-seruice, may the more slily enter into the
minds of well willing and good meaning people: hold him, and all that hold
with, and applaud him, and his fanaticall speculations, evermore accursed.

The Family of Love.
O Out of which Service, or writings we be taught all dutiful obedience Untrue.
toward God, and Magistrates; The service of Love.
and to live a godly, and honest life; and to love God above all things, and
our neighbors as our selves, agreeing therein with all the holy Scriptures as
we understand them.

The Examination.
ALL this tends to the raising up of credit to H. N. and his writings: which
shows of what spirit these men are.

In their Courtly devise (inscribed unto the last Earl of Lecester) they let
not to say, that were all the books of H. N. rightly considered of with
indifferency, so should they be found Assistants in all to the Religion
established in the Church of England, and no hinderers.

Here I take which they grant, that the holy Scriptures teach all these things:
next that the religion established in the Church of England, is sound, and
every way good and true.

But that the Service of Love and the writings of H. N. truly and indeed so
teach as they would bear his Majesty in hand, I cannot think for diverse
reasons.

1. They hold: That neither before, nor without their most holy Service of
Love, etc. the true light has not been set forth, ministered, nor taught: and
that there shall likewise no other light nor cleerenes, that can be true,
appear nor yet come hereafter, but the light of love H. N. 1. ^r. doct. c.
16.. 10
: which is the new doctrine devised by H. N. and that we so condemn.

2. They teach, that, it is assuredly al false, and lies, seducing and
deceitful, that the ungodly or vnilluminated Men, out of the imagination, or
riches of their own knowledge, and out of their learnednesse of the Scriptures,
bring forth, institute, and teach Ibid.. 17.
. Then is not H. N. his doctrine and Service of Love, grounded upon the written
word of God, but upon I know not what visions, and Anabaptisticall revelations:
and therefore to be held most execrable.

Thirdly, they say There is nothing more needful to the man at the first,
where-to enter into life; then that he humble himself under the obedience of
love (meaning the instructions of H. N.) and so become taught in the Service of
Love, for to unlearn again al what he has taken on and learned to himself
Spir. land. c. 56. 7.
: which counsel of vnlearning is rife, and every where, and as it were the
first thing delivered to the Nouices in the Loves service H. N. exhort. c. 13..
9. Cri. voice c. 1.. 7.
: which manifests their religion to be new and singular; when the doctrine
in our Churches taught and embraced must all be unlearned, and abominable and
corrupt, for the entertaining of theirs, which they vaunt to be celestial.

Fourthly, because they may not talk of their secrets either yet utter their
mysteries, openly, or nakedly in the hearing of their young children and
disciples H. N. Proverbs. c. 22.. 15.
; that is (as H. N. says) til they have attained the age of 30 years, and are
come to their manly age, and have beardes Ibid. c. 21.. 1.
. They might and would talk of their secrets, might their exercises, and
mysteries abide the hearing of godly and modest persons, as Gods holy word, and
our doctrine, derived from the sacred Scriptures, will.

Last of al, because the Service of Love, and books of H. N. so and none
otherwise make to the advancement of godliness and furtherance of virtue, then
they understand the Scriptures. And indeed the make od interpretations of Gods
word, turning light into darkness; truth into falsehood; histories into
allegories; and sound religion into fancies of men.

But as others understand them, they tend to the supplanting of true religion,
and overthrow of Gods house, which is the Church of God, for the erecting of a
new Family, whereof they take their name.

The Family of Love.
AGainst which auctor, and his books, we never yet heard, nor knew any law
established in this realm by our late gracious Sovereign, but that we might
read the^ without offense: whose writings we suppose under your Highness
correction, your Majesty has yet never seen, or perused heard of by any
indifferent, nor true information.

The Examination.
IT Is well known there be laws, canons, and injunctions against erroneous
and infectious books: and that Proclamations houe come out expressly against H.
N. and his scandalous inventions.

When there be laws against Sect-masters and Heritickes, be there no laws,
shall we think, against H. N. and his books?

Scarce had I proceeded thus far in this examination, but upon search I
found a paper, which many years has lain by me in my private study,
containing a form of abiuration offered by the Lords of the late Queen
ELIZABETH'S most honorable privy Counsel, unto certain persons suspected to
favor the vile Heresies of H. N. which form was this.

Whosoever teaches that the dead which are fallen asleep in the Lord, An
abiuration tendered unto the Familistes, the tenth of October. An. 1580 by ten
of the Lords of Q. Elizabeth's privy Counsel.
rise up in this day of his judgment, and appear unto us in godly glory,
which shall henceforth live in us everlastingly with Christ, and reign upon the
earth, is a detestable Heretic.

But H. N. teaches so: Euang. c. 37. Sect. 9.

Therefore H. N. is a detestable Heretic.

Whosoever teaches that to be born of the Virgin Marie out of the seed of
David after the flesh, is to be expounded of the pure doctrine out of the seed
of Love, is a detestable Heretic.

But H. N. teaches so: Document: sent: c. 3. Sect. 5.

Therefore H. N. is a detestable Heretic.

Whosoever teaches that Jesus Christ is come again unto us according to his
promise, to the end that they all which love God, and his righteousness, and
Christ, and his perfect Being, might presently enter into the true Rest, which
God has prepared from the beginning for his his elect, and inherit the
everlasting life, is a detestable Heretic.

But H. N teaches so: Euang. c. 1. Sect. 1.

Therefore H. N. is a detestable Heretic.

Nauing examined these reasons with the books of H. N. we do find that in
truth he holds these heresies, and we think in our hearts, and of our own
knowledge affirm that H. N. is in these heresies a detestable Heretic:
Promising faithfully before God and your Honors never hereafter to have any
dealing with his books, and doctrine nor to go-about to bring any to the love,
liking, or reading of them. And that we now speak is the true meaning of our
hearts, as we look for mercy at his hands which searches the heart.

Would her Majesty's Council minister this Abiuration unto these Familistes,
even of her owen Family, had they noe law, nor authority so to do? Or would
the said Courtiers (as before their Honors they did) abjure these Heresies, if
both the said heresies had not been contained in the books of H. N. and
themselves by Law compellable either to abjure, or abide the punishment due
for obstinate Heretics? And was there Law then, viz. Anno. 1580. (for in
that year, and so long ago was this done) and is there noe Law now? Have
they not heard, nor known of these things by lawful authority performed,
which were both heard andmade known both in Court and Country; the parties
some of them, and the chiefest yet living and in Court, which so abiured; and
their Children in right ancient place about his Majesty, before whom they
abiured?

But have they not heard, nor known (as they pretend) of any Law established
in this Realm against H. N. and his books, by our late gracious Sovereign?
Then pray we unto God, that they may both hear, and know some law to be
established against them by our now reigning, and gracious Sovereign the King.

The rest of this section, that his Highness (as they fear not to say) never
yet has seen, or perused the writings of H. N. nor so much as heard of them by
any indifferent, or true information, are words derogatorie in an high degree
to his Majesty's honor; because both his Highness has affirmed upon his
knowledge the Familistes to be a vile sect of Anabaptists (yielding invincible
reasons of his certain knowledge, which are above specified), and they say his
Majesty never yet saw nor perused, nor so much as heard of H. N. his
writings, by any indifferent and true information; in the which the points
wherewith he charge them, are most truly contained.

The Family of Love.
FOr the said H. N. in all his doctrine and writings (being as we are
credibly informed, as much matter in volum, if they were all compiled
together, as the whole Bible contains) does Untrue.
neither take part with, nor write against any particular party, or company
whatsoever, as naming them by their names, nor yet praise or dispraise any of
themy by name Untrue: He magnifieth the Church of Rome.
.

The Examination.
THis vain boasting of the bulk of H. N. his writings is very usual among
the Familistes. About thirty years ago, mine ears heard his disciples much
brag of the multitude of H. N. his books: as if his great pains in writing
were argument strong enough to induce men to the liking of his opinions.

Which if it beeso, then have the Papists a strong reason that the truth is
with them on their side: the monks and Friars of whose Religion having
bestowed infinite pains in writing, and composing of books.

Then have we (whose doctrine and religion, derived and drawn from Gods word,
as Scripture learning the Familistes (labor to supplant) the truth; and not
the Familistes, to whom for multitude of writings, they are not comparable:
some one of us (as Calvin) having written so much as noe one man eitherin
these, or our Fathers days has done the like Beza. in vit. Call.
; Musculus, and Luther, and Erasmus, and every of these, has written more
then any man can read in many score of years Bodin. in method. hist. c. 5.
: which Erasmus composed so many Epistles and Letters, as gathered together
would near load two Carts or Wagons Eras. catal. Luc^b.
. And therefore equal many Bibles in bulk and bigness.

And could not the heretics in all ages say as much for their founders, as
the Familistes here do of H.N. viz. that their books were many, and
themselves, as studious and painful in writing of discourses, for the
propagating of their inventions, as ever the true and faithful servants of God
were, or be, for the implanting of the truth?

Manes, that Arch-hereticke and great grand Father to H. N. his errors, was the
Father of sundry and diverse books Epiphan.
.

Photius, that pestilent Apostata, wrote very many dscourses both in the
Greek and Latin tongue Vnicent. Lir. aduers. haeres.
, for the propagation of his damnable doctrine.

Basilides, that hell-hound compiled more then 24. volumes Eale mist. of
iniquity.
.

Appollinaris, filled the whole world with his blasphemous pamphlettes Basil.
magn.
.

And Tatianus (not inferior to any of the rest, not to any else, except perhaps
to H. N. for impiety) his books were infinite and innumerable Eusebius. eccles.
hist. l. 4. c. 29.
.

Which writings notwithstanding were not so applauded by some, as they were
abhorred of others: nor so famous in times past among a few, as they are odious
now among all men; neither were so read, and used erst, as they are at this
time both out of sight, and out of request, yea and out of mind, and gone, as if
they never had been either devised, or used in former days. And so we doubt
not shall happen to the writings of H. N. though together they world seem
never so great a volume, and in several be very many.

Again, they here commend not their H. N. only for his pains, and bringing
forth such a volume of theological speculations: but also for the manner of
his writings. For he neither took part with (say they) nor writ against any
particular party, or company whatsoever, as naming them by their names: nor
yet praised or dispraised any of them by name: as if to take part, or write
against any particular party, or ocmpanie of Heretics, Schismatikes, or other
ungodly persons, and especially in confuting, to name them, were an heinous
fault.

Little think these Familiars by thus, and this commending their H. N. whom
they touch as faulty, that have both taken part in a world of dissentions, set
themselves against Sectaries; and in their writings, as to all posterities
eternally horrible, named the authors, and spreaders abroad of hellish errors,
by their proper names. Our Savior Christ opposed himself professedly against
the Pharisees and Sadduces; so did the Apostle Peter against the high Priests
and Rulers of Jerusalem; so Paul against Alexander, Demas, Hymeneus, Philetus
and such like; so the Evangelist John against the Nicolaitans; and so the true
against the false Apostles, Ministers and wicked persons from time to time in
all ages, whose both errors they have oppugned, and registered their names for
an everlasting remembrance.

And though this H. H. neither took part with, nor writ against any particular
party or company whatsoever (which ye is untrue, as afterward shall be shown)
as naming them by their names (a thing which lawfully, and after the example
even of the best, he might have done): yet (which he cannot justify, nor
answer before God) he opposes himself generally against all men, which be
not of his fect H.N. 1. Exhor. c. 16,. 2. etc.
: whence it is that all men, especially the true Church and servants of God,
are against him, and his Family.

Again, these Familists (still over familiar with his Majesty) would bear
his Highness in hand, that the said H.N. in his writings does neither praise
nor dispraise any party or company by name: which is most untrue. For he
commends the Church of Rome, with all the orders and officers thereof;
tearming it: The Communion of all Christians; the Pope, the chief anointed;
the most holy Father; the Cardinals, most holy, and famous, and next the most
auncientest, and holy Father, the Pope in most holy Religion, and understanding
Euang. cap. 31.. 1.2. etc.
: and prophecieth of an entire, and perfect restoration of the papal
Hierarchy Ibid.. 23.
.

And on the other side, he condemns as many as out of the knowledge which
they took out of the Scriptures (as all the protestant and reformed Churches
through-out the world have done) brought in certain services, and ceremonies
in any other wise, or order than the Church of Rome Appointed Ibid. c. 32. 4
.

He raileth on Gods Preachers; and calls them vnilluminated, unregenerated,
unrenewed, vngodded, unsent, and I wot not what besides Ibid. c. 4.. 4
, to bring their persons, ministry, and profession into utter hatred and
contempt Ibid. c. 28.. 4. Document. sent. c. 2.. 2.
.

And though in his writings, he had neither so praised, as he has done, the
Pope and his partakers on the one side; nor dispraised, and to the pit of hell
condemned all Ministers and Preachers (whom in scorn every where he terms
Scripture-learned): 1. Exhort. c. 15.. 17.19.
): yet that makes him not a commendable writer and regardable. For he is
aprayser, and magnifier of himself every where in his writings which is the
greatest fault that can be in a man, whether he write, or speak; and be his
praises either true, or false; but elspecially if they be proudly arrogated,
and not deservedly.

Would you hear a vaunting Bragadine? Listen then unto H. N.

The Lord, the God of Heaven moved Me in his Mind or Spirit (says H. N.) his
power encompassed Me, with a Rushing noise:and the glory of the same God of
Heaven became great in my spirit of his Love, in such wise, that the great
clearenesse of God wholly innironed Me, and shoane round about Me,
where-through the sight of mine Eyes became clearer than Crystal, and mine
understanding brighter than the Sun H. N. Prophet: of the Spir. c. 1.. 2.
; the Lord his Being and Essence spoke unto Me: for the Being of God
gaue-forth his sound and voice; and spoke unto Me, H. N. through his spirit of
Love, all these words, and said etc. Ibid.. 5.
. Here the Essence and Being of God spoke unto him.

Again, I lament(says H. N.) and bewail very much your unfaithfulness, and
all your fainednesse, wherewith ye think to cover you, before Me, yet are
nevertheless all the Counsels and falshoodes of your Hearts manifested before
Me, and so much the more naked and bare before the Eyes of my Heart, and Spirit
Ibid. c. 3.. 1.2.3.
. Here he braggeth that the Counsels, and secrets of man's heart (known only
unto God) are not hidden from him.

Many (says H. N.) could much rather judge Moses, the Prophets of God,
together with the Apostles of Christ, and God his elected Minister H. N. to
err or miss the right, than that they would by any means confess and
acknowledge, that they in the Imagination of their knowledge, concerning the
godly matters, are ignorant, and lying Ibid. c. 13.. 8.
.

He vaunteth here that he could no more err, than could the Prophets and
Apostles; yea he prefers himself, if his words be well observed, before
the Apostles and Prophets.

In his Proverbs: The God of Heaven (says, H.N.) Chap. 8.. 3
as the Father himself, is come down, and He brings, in the Service of his
Love, Himself, with his Christ, and Holy Ghost, and with all that which with
Him is Gods, unto his obedient Man: H. N. And Godding the same with Him, He
has manned him with the same: and his will is, that now in the last time,
through the service of Love, all people or generations of Men, which are
good-Willing to his Righteousness, should assemble them unto Him, and his
godded Man; and even so likewise with them, all that is manly; To the end that
they all should become of one Being with him, and his Godded man: and so be
all named Gods and Children of the most-highest. Here is he deified, and made
a God. Is this fellow, and his writings to be commended, and that unto a most
religious King: or not rather to be abhorred, and all that praise him, both of
Prince and people?

The Family of Love.
But does The conte^ts H. N. his writings.
only show in particular in his said wrightings (as says he, the impartial
Service of Love requires) what is good or evil for every one, and wherein the
man has right or wrong in any point, whether it be in the state of his soul
toward God, Most false. Vide responsum.
or in the state of his body toward the Magistrates of the world, and
toward one another.

The Examination.
AS erst for the manner: so here have we H. N. extolled for the doctrine, and
matter by him delivered.

But as before, Against the doctrine of H. N.
speaking to the purpose which here they do, they say the service and writings
of H. N. taught them all dutiful obedience toward God, and Magistrates etc.
agreeing therein with the holy Scriptures as they understand the^, that is in
that sense, and meaning, and none otherwise, which they give of the Scriptures:
so in this place they say of H. N. that he does only show in general in his
writings, what is good or evil for every one, and wherein the man has right
or wrong in any point etc. but it is not as the holy Scripture (in the native
sense thereof, without the Families partial interpretations and glosses) but
as the impartial (than which nothing is more partial) service of Love,
requires.

We cannot therefore well understand, what is the godliness and justice,
which H. N. in his writings does promote, unless we first know, what this
their Service of Love, here mentioned, is.

The impartial Service of Love in this place mentioned is the religion,
principles, and spiritual exercises of H. N. or his illuminate Elders, in the
Family of Love. For the right conceiving whereof we are to observe how
according to H. N. his doctrine, there be eight thorough-breakings ( which is
H. N. his word) or Revelations of Goods true light unto mankindes; H.N.
Proverbs Ch.. 3.12.
the first was to Adam, and held till Noe; the second from Noe till Abraham,
the third from Abraham till Moses; the fourth from Moses till Samuel, David,
and Solomon; the first form them till Zorobabel; the sixth from Zorobabel till
CHRIST; the seventh from CHRIST till H. N. in whose days the Lord, out of his
merciful love, raised up the gracious word, according to his promises, and
elected H. N. thereto (if you will beliue him) for to minister the same under
the obedience of his love, to the erecting or restoring of his true sanctuary,
and of the true offering, and God service in the same.

Through which gracious word and H. N. God revealed (says H. N.) the appearing
of the coming of his Christ, and the new day of his righteous judgment,
as also the Flowing forth of his holy Spirit of love, to the awaking and
Rising up of all his Holy-ones, out of the sleep to the glorious Lordlinesse
with Jesus Christ, and to an everlasting faststanding kingdom of the godly
Majesty, upon the ea^^, according to his promises.

Even thus has God declared ( says H. N.) with H. N. the eight
thorough-breaking of his true light, upon the earth, wheein the Lord, the God
of Heaven, restored the former kingdom with his garnishing, together with all
that which God has spoken from the beginning of the world through the mouth of
his holy Prophets,
and of the Evangelists of his Christ: and the same eight thorough-breaking of
the true light of God upon the earth, is the new day; to therenewing of the
life, which God has tofore appointed to reueile the same in the last time, for
to judge in the same the universal Earth with righteousness, to the
condemnation of all the enemies of God and Christ, together with all the
enemies of the godly life, and blasphemers of his holy Spirit, and service of
Love; and to the erecting of his upright Sanctuary, the seat of his Majesty,
and the upright government of his holy ones, under the obedience of his love,
upon the earth, and also for to declare even so upon the earth, in the same
true light of the new or eight day, the mysteries of God and Christ, even from
the beginning of the world, till unto the end. All these be the very words of
H. N. touching his mysteries Ibid.. 16.17.18.
: the revelation whereof by him unto the elders, and by them unto the young ones
in the Family, is by him called The service or ministration of the Love.

Of which light and service, wonderful things are believed by the Family: I
will only cite a place, showing their conceit of the service here mentioned.

I foretell you assuredly ( says Fidelitas) that the abominations of the
wicked world (have therefore a circumspect consideration hereon, O ye children
of men) shall break in among you, and ye shall likewise be vehemently assaulted
therewith. Nevertheless if you hold you firmly to the requiring of the
gracious word, and his Service of Love: ye shall then be delivered from the
wicked assaultings which come against you, out of the Abominations of the
wicked world, and out of the falsehood of our Resisters, and inherit the Crown
of the eternal life, and the true anointing of the ioifull oil of the holy
Spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ: and even so find by experience that our God
of Love is the true God; and that we his obedient Co^munaltie of the Love, are
his acceptable people, and that they also which bide estranged from the same
God, as also remain without us and our Co^munaltie, and without the requiring
of the gracious word and his Serurce of Love, or withdraw themselves therefrom,
have no living God, nor yet true God service: but are without God, and without
God service in this world. For our God of Love (...) the true living God, and
besides him there is no God more, and his God service of Love, which we
minister, under the obedience of his Love; is the true safe-making God service,
and besides the same there is not any God service more, neither in heaven nor
yet in earth, Hitherto Fidelitas Distinct. declar. 1 c. 11.
.

From which place of H. N. and Fidelitas, note, Christian Reader, that their
words unto his Marestie viz. that the writings of H. N. or service of Love,
further true religion and godliness, are most false, and uttered either by
some ignorants which know not what the Service of Love means; or of policy
to bleare his Highness eyes, that he should not perceive the danger of this
pretended Love Service.

Observe, next, their opinion of this their Service of Love, as that it is the
true safe-making Gods service, besides which there is not any God service more,
neither in heaven, nor yet in earth; and that whosoever have not this service, or
withdraw themselves therefrom, have no living God: and hence conjecture what
their thoughts be, not only of the Service of the Church of England, and all
other Christian Churches, but of the doctrine also in them professed, with all
professors of Christianity, ignorant, and Adversaries to H. N. and his new
Service.

Besides, it is not to be neglected, that the doctrine in the Service of Love
delivered, by H. N. in these places is called, The new day: The day of the
general Resurrection: The day of judgment, of the second coming of Christ;
of the restoring of all things: of the fulfilling of all that which God has
spoken from the beginning of the world through the mouth of his holy Prophets,
and the Evangelists of his Christ. All which plainly demonstrate H. N. his
doctrine touching the general resurrection; the day of judgment: the second
coming of Christ: everlasting life; and finally the accomplishing of GODS
promises, made unto the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Church from everlasting
(encluded in the writings of H.N. and so in the Service of Love) to be most
heretical and damnable.

This considered, impudent, and shameless are these Familistes, that would
bear the most religious Prince in hand, that the writings of H. N. and Service
of Love, make for the advancement of godliness, and honesty: when rightly
examined, it overthrows the very grounds and principles of true Religion,
without which there can be no sound practice of honesty and justice among
men.

The Family of Love.
TO the end that all people (when they hear, or read his writings, and do
thereby perceive their sins, The end of his writings.
and estranging from GOD, and Christ, might endeavor them to bring forth the
due fruictes of Repentance, which is reformation, and newenesse of life,
according as all the holy Scriptures do likewise require the same of every
one; and that they might in that sort, become saved through Jesus CHRIST, the
only Savior of all the world.

The Examination.
Here read we the end indeed of H. N. his wrightings, Against the end of
H. N. his wrightings.
viz. to inuit all men unto repentance, and newenesse of life: and yet
deserves he no praise at all ( as the Familistes would make his Highness
believe he does) for this exhortation of his. For what means he by
Repentance, but that all men, not yet of his Family, should forsake or abjure
the Religion, which they have been brought up in, and unlearn again
whatsoever they have taken on, and learned to themselves, out of the
Scriptures, in the Christian assemblies, where GODS word is read, preached, and
heard? What by newenesse of life? But that we become young ones in the
Family, or house of Love? What by salvation? but the state of a Familist;
which is all pure; or of an Elder in the lovely being?

All people ( says H. N.) are called, and friendly bidden, through H. N. to
the repentance for their sins, and to the house of the love of Jesus Christ;
the Rest of all the Saints or children of God; H.N. Cri voice c. 1.. 1.


Let every one leave now his own word, doctrine, and taken on knowledge, and
also the word, the doctrine, and knowledge of al unsent Preachers, and
good-thinking wise, where-through ye are seduced etc. and come now all to this
same Sanctuary of GOD Ibid. c. 2.. 5.
meaning the house of Love, called before, the Rest of all the Saints or
children of God.

Come also now all, which, through your ignorant knowledge, or
misunderstanding, have withdrawn your selves ( says H. N.) from this same
stool of grace, and lovely house of the Love of Jesus Christ; and, from our
Communalty, taken occasion of offense at our littleness or simplenes, and at
the godly Testimonies of our sayings; and even so made up your selves, as
Resisters, against us, and our good doctrine, and exercises, or orders,
separated your selves from us, and grown to be bitter minded or displeased
toward us, together with all ye that have mistrusted us, also not believed the
holy word of the eternal truth, which, we through Gods grace, administer under
the obedience of the Love, but doubted thereof etc. and repent you of your
sins, to your sanctification, and to the health of your souls Ibid.. 7.
.

On the other side ( says H. N.), All those which love rather the darkness,
that the Light; cleave more unto the world, and the worldly things, than unto
the gracious Word in the Service of Love; hear, believe, and follow rather
their good thinking, than the Testimonies of the holy Spirit of Love, which are
set forth and offered unto them, by the Elders in the holy Communaltie of Love,
out of the heavenly truth; and even so wax offended thereat, or hold them
back therefrom, and resist the Service of Love, Those shall all, if they turn
them not to the Service of the Love, nor repent them of their sins, become
broken in pieces, and justly bear their blame, or be punished, with the
everlasting destruction, and bide captiued, for ever and ever, with the death
and mortality H. N. Exhort. c. 14.. 10.
.

Unto this Repentance does H. N. exhort.

This is the opinion, which H. N. had, and his disciples and scholars have of
themselves, and their favorers; they are all forsooth in the state of
salvation, and cannot perish: but they who neither be Familistes, nor
wel-willers to their doctrine, exercises and orders, are all under the curse of
God, like eternally to be damned, unless they alter their minds, and
renounce their faith and religion (though grounded upon the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles), because with H. N. the Devil is their Father Spirit.
Land pres.. 9.
, and they are the children of wrath, a cursed people coheires of the
everlasting fire Ibid.. 10.
, and shall be cast into the bottom-lesse pit, into the fire of Hell H. N.
Proverbs. c. 5.. 15.
: Then which conclusions nothing is more Heretical, and accursed: and this was
it, among other things, why his Majesty termed these Familistes, Puritanes,
and a most vile Sect, viz. even because they deem all the world besides
themselves, to be but abomination in the sight of God.

Their H. N. speaks much of Jesus Christ in his books: but in no one place
that I could yet meet withal, does he acknowledge Christ to be either
true GOD, or very man, at least not GOD and man in one person; but commonly
with him he is an allegorical CHRIST, meant either by the Sabbath day, which
the Lord commanded to be always had in remembrance H. N. Enang. cap. 13.. 2.
2 Document-sent. c. 3.. 4.
; or by the Service or doctrine of H. N. which also is CHRIST after the flesh
Exhort. c. 14.. 1.
, as he understands the Scriptures; or by the virtuous qualities, and Being
in godly men Enang. c. 13.. 16. 1. Exhort. c. 1. 24.25. ca. 20.. 5.
; or by the oldest Elder in the Family, which sometimes was H. N. and is now
one man, now another. Euang. c. 31.. 12.14.16.


An obedient, and godly life, is Christ Jesus, says the Exile Pattern of
pres. Temps.
.

And so are men saved, by the doctrine of this Family, either by their own
works or virtues; or by their Oldest Elders; or by the doctrine of H: N: or
Service of Love, or by the holy Rest; but never by our Christ, acknowledged in
the Church of England.

Thus have ye the end of H. N. his writings; suitable certes unto his method
and doctrine, for which he is so renowned (but to their small comfort, and
credit) among the Familistes.

The Family of Love.
NOtwithstanding, dear Sovereign, yet has the said Author, and his doctrine
a lone time, and stillis, The Families complaint.
most shamefully, and falsely slandered, by our foresaid adversaries both in
this Land, and in diverse others, as to be replenished with all manner of
damnable errors, and filthy liberty of the flesh.

The Examination.
AFter a long, and loathsome narration, they come now to a new complaint, and
that still on the behalf of their H. N. and his disciples.

It is not yet an hundred years, since the said author was borne; nor 60.
years since his doctrine came first to light, and was broched; nor 50. years
yet, since it arrived in this realm (a blessed thing had it been for many a
Christian soul, had either H. N. never breathed, or his doctrine never been
hatched).

But how many years soever have passed since his opinions and mysteries came
to light (if hitherto they be all known); through the goodness of God yet,
there is not one, of all the Churches Protestant, and reformed, that favors,
but all bid open and utter defiance to H. N. his books, and errors.

H. N. himself in his life time much complained, that all degrees in all Lands
abhorred his writings H.N. 1. refrein.. 4.
.

In this Land both H.N. and his loathsome (which he calls Lovely) Family of
Love, have been displaied once, confuted often, resisted always: but
shamefully, and falsely slandered, either by foreign, or homewriters, it was
never that hitherto I could hear; and so must I think, till I see the extant
writings against them, convicted of untruths, and disproued as slanderous.

That H.N. his books are replenished with damnable errors, it will be
justified; and has already in this examination, and else where been
manifested.

The Family of Love.
AND we his wel-willers, and favorers, in the upright drift of his doctrine
(as aforesaid) have also been by them complained on, and accused unto our late
gracious Sovereign, and the Magistrates of this Land, both long time past, and
now lately again, as to be a people so infected, and stained with all manner
of detestable wickedness, and errors, that are not worthy to live upon the
earth (but yet would never present any of his books unto his Majesty to
peruse, nor yet set them forth in any indifferent, or true manner to the view
of the world; least their malicious and slanderous reports and accusations
against the same, and us, should thereby have been revealed, and disproued to
their great shame.

The Examniation.
NOw complain they of injuries offered to themselves.

The very drift of H.N. is to thwart, or discredit rather whatsoever is taught
in the Church of England, and elsewhere, from the letter of the holy
Scriptures; and to bring in another Gospel, viz. after H. N.

Such as are the wil-willers and favorers of H.N. in the said his drift (as
the Familists here confess themselves to be) not only deserve to be
complained upon, and accused unto authority, but to be accursed of God and
man (if they persist in their wicked course) as a people infected with most
detestable wickedness, and errors; and the very plague, and bane of sound
religion. And those men which have acquainted authority with their errors, and
impieties, have done good service therein, and their bounden duties, both unto
God, his Church, and the State.

Whether any of H. H. his books have been presented unto our late most
gracious Sovereign (of aie blessed memory) I cannot say; but I surely
conjecture, that she could not be ignorant of the contents of his writings:
when the Lords of her Counsel (as before has been declared) censured some of
her household servants for abbetting H. N. and his detestable heresies.

They which again do say that their adversaries would never present any of H.
N. his books unto her Majesty to peruse, say more then they can affirm, yea
which is palpably untrue. For, who abhors H. N. and his books or H.N.
rather for his heretical blasphemies, but ever were desirous that his said
errors, contained in his books, might in his said books be read of her
Majesty; that by her authority the better they, and al such as favor those
books, containing such errors, might condignely be censured?

When these Familistes dare tell his Majesty, that their adversaries would
never present H. N. his books, nor any of them unto her Highness, it
appears (they herein saying true) that she had always about her some
Familistes, or favorers of that Sect, who always related, or bare tidinges
what was done, or intended against them.

It is wished, that his now Majesty's Court were purged from such well willers
and favorers of H. N. in the maine drift of his hellish, and heretical
doctrine, wherewith her Majesty's was but too-much replenished.

How H. N. his books by their adversaries, have been set-forth, the world
may judge. 26. years have they been extant: a sufficient time for the Family
both to justify their H. N. and to discover the malice and slanderous reports
of their accusers, if there were just cause. Hitherto have the Familistes been
silent, and yet are both confident in their wicked courses; and not ashamed to
express so much before his most-Christian, and royal Majesty.

The Family of Love.
THrough which their most-odious and false complaints against us, the
Magistrates did then, A new and odious narration.
and also have now lately cast diverse of us into prison, to our great
hinderance, and discredit: but yet have never proved against us, by sufficient
and true testimony, any one of their many foul accusations (as the records in
such cases and the magistrates that have dealt therein can testific) but are so
utterly void of due, and lawful proof thereof, that they have framed diverse
subtle Articles for us (being plain, and unlearned men) to answer upon our
oath, whereby to urge, and gather some things from our selves, so to approve
their false, and unchristian accusations to be true, or else will force us to
renounce, recant, and condemn that which we do not wilfully maintain, nor
justify (much like as it was practiced in the Primitive Church, against the
Christians): yea they are not ashamed to lay their own, and all other men's
disobedient, and wicked acts (of what profession soever they be) upon our
backs, to the end cunningly to purchase favor, and credit to themselves,
and to make us seem monstrous and detestable before the Magistrates, and the
common people every where; for that we, and the doctrine of H. N. might
(without any indifferent trial, and lawful, or orderly proceeding, as
heretofore has been used in the Christian Church in such cases, for
confutinge and condemning of heresies) be utterly rooted out of the Land: with
diverse other most cruel practices, proceeding out of they bitter and envious
hearts toward us, tending to the same unchristian, and merciless purpose, the
which we will here omit to speak of, because we have already been
ouertedious unto your Highness; most humbly craving your most gracious
pardon, and patience therein, in respect that we speak to clear our selves
of such matter as may touch our lives and liberties (which are two of the
chiefest jewels that GOD has given to mankind in this world) and also for
that we have few friends, or any other means then this to acquaint your
Highness with the truth, and state of our cause (whereof we think your
Majesty is altogether ignorant) but have very many enemies whom we do
greatly suspect will not be slack to prosecute their false, and malicious
purpose against us unto your Highness, even like as they have accustomed to
do in times past unto our late Sovereign Queen: through which prevailing in
their slanderous defacing of us, and our cause, diverse of us (for want of
friends to make it rightly known unto her Majesty) have sundry times been
constrained to endure their injurious dealinges toward us, to our great
vexation, and hinderance.

The Examination.
HEre have we an intricate, and long perplexed period deuoide of charity,
discretion, and truth; but full of gaul, odious comparisons, and unjust
complainings; and that not only of private persons, their accusers whosoever,
but even of public Magistrates, and their proceedings, first and last, against
this Family, and all for their favoring and wel-wishing to H. N. and his
doctrine: which because it is fitter for the said Magistrates, her odiously
traduced, to censure, and answer (whose doings against the Familists I am
ignorant of, and yet am persuaded have always been both mild toward them and
just) I omit, and commend the further consideration of this their heinous
complaint unto the supreme authority, and his Assistants, and delegats.

The Family of Love.
WHerefore, most gracious Sovereign this is now, Their 1. Petition.
our humble suite unto your Highness, that when your Kingly affairs of
importance, which your Majesty has now in hand shall be well ouer-past, and
finished (for the prosperous performance whereof, we will, as duty binds us,
daiely pray unto Almighty God) that then your Highness will be pleased
(because we have always taken the same authors work aforesaid to proceed out
of the great grace, and love of God, and Christ's, extended toward all Kings,
Princes, Rulers, and people upon the universal earth (as he himself in many
of his works does witness no less) to their salvation, unity, peace, and
concord in the same godly Love) to grant us that favor, at your Majesty's
fit, and convenient time, to peruse the books your self, with an impartial
eye, conferring the^ with the holy Scriptures, wherein it seems by the books
that are set-foorth under your Highness name that you have had great travail,
and are therefore the better able to judge betwixt truth and falsehoode: and
we will whenever it shall please your Highness to appoint the time, and to
command, and license us thereto) do our best endeavor to procure so many of
the books as we can out of Germany (where they be printed) to be delivered
unto your Majesty, or such godly learned, and indifferent men, as it shall
please your Majesty to appoint.

And we will also (under your Highness lawful license, and commandment in
that behalf) do our like endeavor to procure some of the learned men of that
Country (if there be any yet remaininge alive, that were well acquainted with
the author and his works in his life time, and which likewise have exercised
his works ever since) to come over, and attend upon your Majesty, at your
appointed time convenient, who can much more sufficiently instruct, and resolve
your Highness in any unusual words, phraze, or matter that may happily
seem dark, and doubtful unto your Majesty, than any of us in this your land
are able to do.

The Examination.
Now are we come, at the length, unto their Petition. The ground whereof is
a deep, and heavenly conceit which they have of their H. N. and the work by
him undertaken, for the salvation of mankind.

Many are H.N. his prophecies of his good success and future prevailing
through out the world.

This same kingdom of peace, and of Love (says the said H. N. speaking of
this Family) shall, through the administration of the gracious word of the
Lord, spread abroad and bid all people, to their preservation, thereunto; to the
intent that all Kingdoms of the world should assemble them to this one
Kingdom of peace and of Love, and that etc. to the joy and salvation of all
the children of men H. N. 1. exhort. c. 12.. 40.
.

Again: This same God service, this love and lovely being, and the sound or
fame of the same shall break in among all nations of people, and let it self
to be heard over all lands Ibid. c. 14. 9.


Of all Provinces, the first that received the Christian faith by public
allowance, was Britany Sabel. Aeneiad. 7. lib. 5.
. The first king christened, that we read of was Lucius K. of Britanie. And
among Kings christened, if not the first, yet with the first, he that expelled
the Pope, and his courts, was Henry the viij; and that rooted out all his
detestable enormities out of his dominions, was Edward the vi. Kings of
England. Oh what a cordial joy, and comfort would it be unto this Family, that
of all Provinces, which shall favor their Love Service, Britanie would be the
first, and to the glory of his noble ancestors, that it might be added, how
our most illustrious King JAMES was the first that supplanted the Scripture
learning (brought in by King Lucius, and reestablished by great Henry and
Edward last mentioned) for the implanting of the Service of Love, and H. N. his
illusions, I should say illuminations! which that all Kings one day will
implant, they have no doubt; and that our King JAMES may of al be the first, is
their hearty desire, and end of their instant perition.

Hence they humbly beseech his Majesty to peruse the books of their H. N,
himself, with an impartial eye, as the principal means to make him a
Familist, and a Master of that household of Love, especially within his own
Realms, and Dominions: which he vouchsafing to do, they promise by their best
endeavor to procure his Majesty so many of H. N. his books, as they can; and
of such their illuminats, as they can hear of, ever inward with H. N. and his
doctrine, and well exercised in his works, and perfect in his tongue, words and
phrases, and all out of Germany. Which is a bold offer of theirs; and the more
audacious and graceless, because they confess here his Ma. to be
Scripture-learned, and we know him among Christian Princes, the chiefest
Patron of all men studious, and conversant in the Scriptures of God (which
kind of men, of all others, these Familistes (cannot brook): which Scriptures,
and Scripture-learned men, are most opposite, and ever have been, to H. N. his
doctrine; and his doctrine, Service of Love or secrets contrary, nothing more,
unto the said Scriptures, and such learned men. For says H. N. (as has before
been alleged, and is never by me mentioned, but in detestation of the
speech:) It is assuredly all false and lies, seducing, and deceitful, that the
vngodded, or vnilluminated Men, out of the imagination or riches of their own
knowledge, and of their learnednesse of the Scriptures, bring forth,
institute, preach, and teach.

Besides, what a mockery is it, to bear his Highness in hand, that H. N. his
works and wrightings, rightly, and with an impartial eye considered, are
nothing dissonant from the Scriptures of God? knowing (unless they credit him
not herein) their oldest Elder, and chiefest Illuminate, H. N. utterly, as
false, and lies, seducing and deceitful, to condemn whatsoever is grounded
upon the same Scriptures of God.

The Family of Love.
ANd so upon such your Highness godly, advised consultation, and censure
thereupon (finding the same works heretical, or sedicious, and not agreeable
to Gods holy word, and testimonies of all the Scriptures) to leave them to take
them, as your Majesty's laws shall therein appoint us; having no intent, nor
meaning to contend, or resist there-against, howsoever it be, but dutifully to
obey thereunto, according to the counsel of the Scriptures, and also of the
said Authors works.

The Examination.
Upon his Majesty's censuring of H. N. his doctrine, and vvrightinges, they
promise obedience unto his laws, and proceedinges: which is conscionably they
do perform, then shall they show themselves to be honest and good men. But
the doctrine of dissimulation and temporizing is so often dispersed, and rise
in H. N. his wrightinges; and the said works of H. N. in all this their
supplication, so magnified; and even in this their very petition, so expressly
acknowledged to proceed even out of the great grace, and love of God, and
Christ, extended toward all Kings, Princes, Rulers, and people upon the
universal earth to their salvation, etc. as it is to be feared, that what
obedience soever they pretend outwardly to his Majesty's laws, injunctions,
and constitutions, their heart yet dissenteth from his, and all Religions else
in the world differing from theirs; to which notwithstanding for quietness
sake, they will not stick perhaps outwardly to conform themselves,
wheresoever they reside, in Great Britanie, and Ireland to the Kings
profession; in Spain, at Rome, or elsewhere to the Roman superstition and
idolatry Pattern of the pres. Te^ps.
in external matters always following the stronger part, reserving their
hearts unto their H. N. and his Service of Love: as many Papists do unto the
Pope, according to the iniunction in like cases, where they are too weak, Da
mihi cor Fili, and sufficit. For our Familistes are Free men, and can walk in
all freedom among all people H. N. Spir. Land. c. 41. 6.
.

What the religion is which his Majesty does profess, and will resolutely,
as Gods holy and only truth, protect, is well known to his Highness
Subjects, yea to the whole World Proclam. at Wilt. 27. October. At Westminster. 22.
Feb. 5. March. At the parliam. 19. March. 163.
. A Religion grounded upon the Scriptures; aduersant to all humane inventions,
and spiritual, or diabolical revelations, and visions whatsoever. Now
put-case his Majesty will not vouchsafe (as good hope is he will not) from his
most serious and weighty affairs of his kingdom, to steal opportunity to
suruaie the wrightings of H. N. yea, will neither read them himself, nor yet,
like Constantine the great Tripart. hist. lib. 2. c. 15.
, suffer his well meaning Subjects, of weak capacities, to read, yea nor to
deteine such wrightings by them, as are opposite, contrary, or differing from
the religion by himself professed, by Law established, and which truly
embraced will bring men to salvation: will not our Family give over their Love
Service, to serve God, as the King and his lawful subjects do, according to
Gods word?

Their words before, that they never heard, nor knew any law established in
this Realm against H. N. and his books: and their secret, and parlour
meetings, and administration of their H. N. his Services, even from the
beginning almost of that blessed Queens reign (ELIZABETH of fresh, and
honorable remembrance) does plainly intimate, how it is neither the Kings own
writings, Proclamations, Acts, Statutes, Ecclesiastical Canons, and
Constitutions, nor whatsoever else he decrees for the ratification of one,
and the same Religion (and condemnation of all others, contrary, or crossing
the same) in his Realms, and Dominions, that they regard, or will yielde
unto, until his Highness, with good discretion has read, and upon sound
advise, disallowed and censured, as heretical, seditious, or dissonant from
Gods holy word, the works, and writings of their H. N.

For upon such his Highness godly, advised, and grave consultation and
Censures, they promise to yielde, and leave the works, books, and wrightings
of their doctor, H.N. but not before.

The Family of Love.
ANd our further humble suit unto your Highness is, Their second Petition.
that of your gracious favor and clemency, you will grant, and give order
unto your Majesty's Officers in that behalf, that all of us, your faithful
loving Subjects, which are now in prison in any part of this your Realm for
the same cause, may be released upon such bail, or bond, as we are able to
give; and that neither we, nor any of that company (behauing our selves orderly
(and obediently under your Highness Laws) may be any further persecuted, or
troubled therein, until such time as your Majesty, and such godly, learned,
and indifferent men of your clergy, as your Highness shall appoint thereto)
shall have advisedly consuited, and determined of the matter, whereby that we
may not be utterly wasted by the great charge of imprisonment and persecution,
and by the hard dealing of our adversaries. For we are a people but few in
number, and yet most of us very poor in worldly wealth.

The Examination.
HIs Majesty by good advise, and counsel, has ratified the Religion of his
immediate Predecessor, comprised in 39. Articles, agreed upon by the whole
Clergy of this Realm in a lawful assembly or Convocation, holden Anno. 1562.
He has also published his directions Eccles. constitut. and can. an. 1604.
how all, and every his Subjects of England, publicly shall carry themselves,
according to their religion in all places: If these Familistes therefore will
profess the same religion with him, and his truly good Subjects; if they also
will frequent orderly the sacred Assemblies and Sacraments; if they will
demean themselves as it becomes sober Christians, and lay aside all H. N.
his erroneous and detestable writings; if they will approve the Service of
the Church of England; and finally forsake their conuenticling, chair
preachinges, and Services, administered among them by their illuminated, and
codeified Elders, they need fear no persecution, or trouble: otherwise why
should they not fear the sword, when they will not be ordered by the word of
God?

They say they are in number but few. But herein they abuse his Majesty's
royal ears and eyes.

It is well known how twenty five years ago the number of them was great,
and they dispersed in diverse parts; as Surrey; Sussex; Middlesex, Bark-shire;
Hamshire; Essex; I Will of Eley; Cambridge-shire; Suffolk, Norfolk; in the North
parts; and finally in most shires of this Realm. In those days they did
abound, and were grown to such a number, as the displayer of the Sect
delivered how his heart did rue to speak that which one of the same society
did avouch to him for truth Display pref.
, Not a few Ministers of the simple sort were with H. N. his fancies
entangled: nor the chiefest place of the Realm free from these men Ibid. E. 4.
a.
. Since, that they are diminished, I hear not; but them to be hugely
increased, through rufull conniuence, I have arguments to think: but that
their increase may be hindered, I hope authority will take order.

They say they are also poor, or the most of them: but if the book of their
names, called of them The book of Life, could be seen, it would then appear,
I doubt not, that both the number of them is great, and most of them very rich.

It is further observed, that those poor ones which suffer imprisonment any
where for H. N. and his Service, are well maintained while they are in durance:
which argues that good contributions among them are made for the supportation
of their Sect, which cannot be performed without good store of wealth.

The Family of Love.
OSacred Prince, we humbly pray, Their Conclusion.
that the Almighty will move your Princely heart with true judgment to
discern betwixt the right and wrong of our cause, according to that most
certain, and Christian rule set down by our Savior Christ unto his disciples
(Math. 7.12) Ye shall know the tree by his fruits; and in our obedience,
peaceable, and honest lives, and conversation to protect us, and in our
disobedience, and misdemeanor to punish us as resisters of Gods ordinance, or
the kingly authority, and most high office of justice committed unto your
Majesty to that purpose toward your subjects. Romans 13.

The Examination.
THey would insinuate into his Majesty's heart how they are The good trees.

In their Courtly device, they say, that the only difference betwixt them, and
the learned Preachers (whom they take of all others to be their most capital
enemies) is, That what the said Preachers do say, The Familists desire to do:
as if they only and none besides, had a desire to do the will of God.

But what speak I of desiring to do Gods will? They do it indeed, and really
perform it. For they cannot bring-foorth any thing else, but all good, and Love
Docum. sent. c. 2.. 1.
; nothing is able to pluck them from the Word, nor to make them consent to any
evil, or vanity Ibid. c. 13.. 5.
.

That which they know not in the death, is now appeared unto them in
everlasting Life. The death is now among them swallowed up in the death; the
everlasting Life is come unto them in the Renewing of their Life. The Hell is
judged or condemned to the pit of Hell: The Heaven is showed unto them in the
heavenly Being or form Spir. Land. c. 44.. 10.12.
.

They are come to the Rest of all the Holy ones and children of God; and even
so they eat of the wood of life which stands in the midst of the pleasant
garden, and live eternally Ibid. c. 55.. 9.
.

They are subject to no Gods, nor laws, or Ceremonies, but only to the Lord
their God, and to his most-holy Service of Love. They are not likewise subject
in bondage unto the Creatures, neither yet to any created thing, but only to
the Creator etc. All their Life, Mind, and delight only is in God, and God
himself likewise, with his mind, Life, or Spirit, is in them: and they are
even so of one Conformity or substance with each other (namely God, and his
people of peace Ibid. c. 40.. 1.2.18.
.

There is no wickedness, nor malicious Imaginations among them, neither yet
vision of evil Ibid. c. 33.. 9.
. Holy, and good, are pure are all their works and thoughts Ibid. c. 34.. 11.
.

They are Gods habitation 1. Exhort. c. 12.. 38. c. 20.. 7.
, the seal of Gods Majesty Proph. of the Spir. c. 7.. 15.
; God his Saints Ibid. c. 19.. 14.
; his acceptable people Fidel. decl. c. 4.. 11.
; the children of the kingdom Spir. land. pres.. 7.
; the holy City of peace, the new Jerusalem descended from Heaven Ibid.. 17.
; the rest of all the Saints or children of GOD Cri. voice. cap. 1.. 1.3.
; the body of Christ Ibid. c. 3.. 2.
; one with GOD, and GOD one with them Spir land c. 36.. 1.
; they are risen from the death, with the Resurrection of the Righteous, in the
everlasting Life, and live eternally Ibid. c. 37.. 2.
.

Infinite such words, and places from themselves, and their H. N. might be
alleged, or show the heavenly condition of these, above all other men:
justifying his Majesty's words altogether, that they are a vile Sect, thinking
themselves only pure, and in a manner (yea altogether many of them) without
sin, the only true Church, and only worthy to be participant of the
Sacraments; and all the rest of the world, to be but abomination in the sight
of God: and so rightly, properly, and principally the most odious Puritans
under the coape of Heaven.

The Almighty, and all-prouident God, which has inspired his Majesty with
the blessed gift of discerning spirits, enhable his Majesty with spirit and
virtue from above, that he may remove these stumbling blocks, and causes of
division if they will not repent, and both in heart and hand join with his
Church and people. For, he bears not the sword in vain. Romans 13.

The Family of Love.
AND gracious Sovereign, we humbly beseech your Highness, with Princely
regard in equity and favor to powder and grant the humble suit contained in
this most lowely supplication of your loyal, true hearted, faithful, and
afflicted subjects; and to remember that your Majesty, in your book of
Princely, grave, and fatherly advise to the happy Prince, your Royal Son,
does conclude, that Principis est parcere subiectis, and debellare superbos;
and then to doubt, God will bless your Highness, and all your noble
offspring with peace, long life, and all honors and happiness, long to
continue, and reign over us. For the which we will ever pray with incessant
prayers to the Almighty.

The Examination.
HITHERTO in their Supplication, the Familistes have quarrelled with his
Majesty for calling them Puritanes; they have callenged his Highness of
untruth, as uttering that in a public writing against them, which neither
himself is able to justify, nor any indifferent man, dare avouch; they
confess further they have by them, and have read certain books which the
royal and supreme authority of this Realm has prohibited them either to
read, or have; they have commended to the Stars that monster among men H.N.
both for his heavenly vocation, calling, Office, books, and writings, which
not only all the learned and godly Prelates and Preachers, but the whole
Church of England, yea all Churches Christian (as most impious and
Antichristian) utterly condemn; they have intimated that neither his Majesty,
nor his people, unless they submit themselves unto the Service of Love,
devised by H. N. shall be saved; they have enticed his Highness to read and
peruse books both poysonfull and dangerous, they have condemned all other men
in this Realm, not siding with them, as cursed, and unfruitful trees; and
all this willingly and studiously, professedly, and apparently they have done,
the least of these crimes deserving royal indignation in an hie degree. Now
what does our Family? Crave they pardon meekly, at his Majesty's hands for
these their offenses, audaciously committed? Noe such thing; yea they proceed
in their disloyal course, boldly crauinge, though with humble words, yet
with proud hearts, what they have sued for, may readily be granted them.

Yea as erst, so here they both set out themselves, as submisse, and duetifull
subjects, condemning all others, especially their adversaries as proud, and
wishing punishment unto them, and advancement with favor unto themselves; yea
they let not to say how his Majesty may fear great plagues to light upon him,
if he punish them; but shall be sure both he and his posterity, of long
life, much prosperity, and eternal happiness, if he show favor to the
Family of Love, and their cause.

A graceless, and audacious company.

The Family of Love.
MOst-gratious Sovereign, Their Postscript.
here follows the brief rehersall, and Confession of the Christian Belief
and religion of the company that are named the Family of Love. Which (for the
causes therein specified) was by them set out in print about that time when
they were first persecuted and imprisoned in this Realm for the same
profession, by their aforesaid adversaries, and by means of their false
accusations and complaints unto the Magistrates against them: the which we have
thought necessary to present here with unto your Majesty, for that you may
thereby the better understand of our innocent intent and profession whatsoever
you shall hear reported to the contrary by our enemies, or by any that be
ignorant thereof: humbly beseeching your Highness to vouchsafe to read the
same, and with your impartial and godly wisdom to consider, and judge of us
and our cause in equity, and favor accordingly, till your Majesty shall
have further true intelligence thereof.

The Examination.
THe confession here mentioned, and tendered, (as they say) I never saw: yet
have I heard well thereof. It was published in the year of our Lord. 1575.

That so long ago, or since, the Family of Love, were persecuted, and
imprisoned for the same Confession, or professing the same, is both an
egregious untruth, a slander of the State, and a false information.

It is observed concerning H. N. that, for the propagating of his Love Service,
he has books of sundry natures, and sorts; some for Nouices, and wel-willing
ones, and some for the elder sort, grown into the manly understanding of the
Family mysteries.

Of the former be N. N. his Instructions of the upright Faith, and christian
Baptism; his Crying voice; his First exhortation, and such like, which may be
confessed among the adulterous, and sinful generation, and the false hearts
of the Scripture learned H. N. 1. Exhort. c. 6.. 5.7.8.9.
.

The latter sort contain the Love secrets or privy mysteries communicable
only with such as are come unto the manly age, and have Beards H. N. Prou. c.
21. 1.
, and sit upon the seats of the Elders, or wise, and daiely hear the secret
mysteries of all matters Ibid.. 2.
.

Ye shall not talk of your Secrets (either yet utter your mysteries) openly,
or nakedly (says H. N. unto these Familists) in the hearing of your young
children, and disciples; but spare them not (says he) in the Ears, or
hearing of the Elders, which can understand the same, and are able to bear, or
away with the sound thereof. For it is given to the Elders to understand the
privy mysteries of the wise, and to expound their parables Ibid. c. 22.. 15.
.

So these Companions, this Family of Love, they have among them good books
after the Scripture learning, common with us, and agreeable to the religion
professed by his Majesty, and ratified by the laws of this Realm; and they
have also the works, and books of H. N. Elidad, Fidelitas, and other Family
Elders, undermining the found and Christian doctrine comprised in the
Confession mentioned. This Confession of theirs, or ours rather, they waus
about (which word H. N. uses, in scorn of our Confessions and religion)
Spirit. land. cap. 5.. 5.
, as Children do their Banners, when they are at play; but H. N. and their
Family Elders books are they which they only study, read at their meetings,
delight in, and practice.

Besides which both Confession of ours, and books of H. N. and such
Illuminates: they have their Conuenticles, verbal traditions, unwritten or
unprinted verities, and private exercices, through which they grow up in the
Love, according to the Requiring of her Service Elidads exhort. 5.
, where all things needful to be known, or declared, are always, according
to the capacity of their understanding, brought and declared unto the^ Ibid..
17.
; viz. unto the young or newborn Children, according to their yongnesse; unto
the weak, according to their weakness; unto the strong vp-growing Men,
according to their ability or strength; and unto the Elders, according to
their Dayednes, or old age Ibid.. 18.
where neither some heart All, nor all hear some secrets or privy mysteries
of their Sect.

It is not for the confession here spoken of: it is for H. N. and other Family
books which they detain by them, and study, and for their unlawful Love
exercises and meetinges, that they are troubled: let them leave, burn, or
deface these books of H. N. and cleave unto this Confession, and then without
farther molestation, imprisonment, or persecution, they may enjoy the
benefits, and liberties of his Majesty's good subjects: which that they may
do, is mine hearty desire and prayer unto Almighty GOD.

FINIS.

