THE SAINTS LEGACIES, OR A COLLECTION OF CERTAIN PROMISES OVT OF THE WORD OF
GOD.

Collected for private use, but published for the comfort of Gods people.

Whereunto is now added the Saints Support in times of trouble.

THE 6. EDITION.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, for Richard Royston, in Ivy Lane. An.
Dom. 1640.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE and happy Society of all true Believers militant in
ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND.

A Friend to you, and the Author, wishes fullness of Grace, Peace, and
heavenly comfort, certain assurance sealed evidence, and seasonable entrance
into, and possession of the celestial, promised, incorruptible, undefiled and
never fading inheritance.
BEloved Believers, both you and I, are infinitely beholden to our ever living
Father, who has made his will and given all us his children great wealth, rich
portions, and large Legacies, now in present possession; graces, and comforts,
in unshaken expectation and assured reversion, perfection and eternal glory.
We are greatly beholding to Iehova, for his will directory, hortatory,
correctory, but most of all for his will consolatory, in which, he salves all
our sores; physics all our sicknesses, medecines all our maladies, Psalm.
103.4. Heales all our diseases, and crowns us with loving kindness and tender
mercies. And surely we are all of us much beholding to the holy Author of
this sweet (though little) Book, who has so piously, painfully, and profitably
perused the holy will of our heavenly Father, and wisely sought and found out
and put into our hands, the spiritual portion, and Soule-Legacies, given and
bequeathed unto us by our best friend, many of which, most of scarce knew of,
few sought and sued for them, and very few comfortable enjoyed and wisely and
diligently used to the donors glory and their own good. Careless children,
come oftentimes to be beholden unto their more careful brethren and thriving
friends, who save all they have, sue for all that is promised, and seek for all
they hear of: so is it here, we careless, negligent, poor and ill thriven
Christians, must be beholding to this careful, diligent, rich and well thriven
Author, who obeyes Paul's counsel, 1. Cor. 12.31. Covets earnestly the best
gifts and will not suffer the heavenly Father, to purse and keep a penny that
is due, to withold grace or comfort (which he has promised) in whole, or
degree, but he shall hear of his promise, and if he do not presently fulfill
according to covenant, a petition is speedily drawn, to be preferred in the
Court of heaven, and an Advocate prepared Jesus Christ the righteous. 1. John
2.1. Suite (by prayer) begun, and in an eager pursuit continued, till the thing
promised be performed.

This little Book, and private practice of the Author (who has sued for all
these Legacies, and in some good measure has attained the same, and thereby is
become spiritual rich) will sufficiently prove what I have spoken. We are
much beholden to this Author, for letting us see our Portions and Legacies in
our Fathers will, and setting us a work both by pen and practice to sue for
the same.

The volume is little, but the virtue contained in the same is great. The book
is extraordinary, being altogether for application and practice. The scope and
drift of it is, to furnish Believers with abundance of good; to free them from
all sins inward, outward, secret, and open; To fill them with all graces in
life, power, and exercise; To bring them comfort in, and seasonable deliverance
from all their troubles; To draw down upon their fowls and bodies abundance of
blessings of all sorts and natures: to give them full assurance of certain and
seasonable entrance into glory, and to give them fast hold of heaven.

There are many, I know, that will little regard it: the Profane person will
not like it, for it is full of holiness: the carnal Protestant will not
discern of it, nor relish it, for it is spiritual: the dissembling hypocrite
will not well approve of it, for it will rob him of his Rimmon, slay his Mris,
his Dalilah, his Herodias, his darling sin, it will tell him, if he applies
promises, he must keep the conditions, obey precept, and put every iniquty,
though never so pleasurable or profitable, far away from his Tabernacles. But
the honest hearted and sincere Believer will approve of it, prize it, use it,
and profit by it.

And not to overcommend my commodity, as one desirous to make it more vendible
and saleable (for neither I, nor its Author, God is witness, aim at any such
thing, but at the spiritual good of their souls unto whom it shall come) this
little Book, like a well filled lttle Apothecaries shop, contains within it
heavenly receipts of all sorts, wholesome physic of every kind for expelling
and curing all sorts of diseases and sicknesses incident to Saints, and for the
corroborating and strengthening of new nature, and for keeping the spiritual
man in good health, lusty and strong able for Gods service, Phil. 2.12. and for
working out his own salvation with fear and trembling. What here J speak
unto one Believer, I intend for all.

Has sin that deadly poison infected thee? Lo here in this little Book an
Antidote, a preservative which will extract and expel this poison. Has this
serpent so fiery stung thee? Number. 21.8. Lo here the Brazen Serpent upon the
pole. Has it beggered and undone thee? John 3.14, 15. Behold a way in this
Book, how thou may become rich. Does it daily trouble thee; will it needs
tirannize and domineere over thee? This little Book will learn thee to depose
this tyrant, Romans 6.14. and tell thee he shall not have dominion and Lordship
over thee Has it stricken thee dead? Lo here is means of reviving and inliving
thee, to an happy life of grace. Does it threaten thy ruin? Lo here Physic
for thy fears, Cor. 15.35. death has lost its sting, sin is destroyed, death
shall fully and finally free thee from it. Art thou hunted like a poor Lamb
by the hellish devouring Lion, Satan, and chased before this infernal dog,
like a silly Dear, in temptations? Lo here a thicket, a shelter, a
shepherd, under which thou may repose and rest thy self in safety. Art thou
overcome with his wily stratagems? Lo here wisdom. Art thou beaten down
with his power? Lo here strength. Fear thou the fiery darts of this evil
one? Lo here a little house full of targets, shields, and bucklers, Ephesians.
6.16. (promises applied by faith) which will repel and quench them. Job 6.4.
Do Gods terrors set themselves in array against thee? are Gods arrows in
thee? does his slaming wrath burn in thy bosom, and is likely to consume
thee? Lo streams of mercy and grace from a refreshing fountain, fluent in the
pipes of the promises, by thy hand of faith turn the cock, and the cool water
of Gods grace and mercy shall flow forth upon thy soul, and allay its burning
heat, and inflammations. Does the wily world endeavor to entangle and inveagle
thee by its lures and snares? Lo here liberty, freedom, better things
propounded, and promised, which Believers do for the present in some measure
enjoy, and shall have a most certain and full possession of afterward.
Want thou Grace, comfort, deliverance, blessing, or any good thing? Behold,
here thou may have them, to the great joy of thine heart, and content of thy
Spirit.

Set faith a work to draw out what thou want, and thou shall have it. Suck
these sweet and heavenly breasts of God by the mouth of thy faith; open these
pipes and veins of the promises, which run so full of mercy, grace, truth,
comfort, joy and peace, for every Believer, by faith; and thou shall be
satiate with every good thing.

Lest I should make too great a porch for this little house, and too great
gates for this little City, I will conclude, with an exhortation to all my
beloved brethren and sisters which are Believers, to perfect their faith by
application of the promises, both of these in this sweet little Book, and of
all others, contained in the Old and New Testament.

Suffer not Gods promises (as J may so say) to milk themselves, do you draw
them, let not good rest with God, which you may have by believing and begging,
to your great comfort and enriching, but take Gods commodities off his hand,
trade with that wealthy Merchant in the far Country, the Lord Jesus in
heaven, for his rich commodities of graces and comforts, and glorious hopes,
until you be rich and wealthy; and for this purpose cause those two good
factours, Faith and Prayer, founded upon and quickened and confirmed by the
precious promises, always to trade for you in heaven, until you come thither
your selves. I would desire all Believers to make this their pocket book that
it may solicit and woe them to prayer, make solid and firm their faith,
increase their graces, comforts, and heavenly hopes, prepare them for enduring
the storms of trouble and tempests of temptations, and may encourage them in
holy well-doing and Christian perseverance unto the end. Heb. 6.12. Now
brethren, my hearts desire is, that ye be not slothful, but followers of them
who through faith and patience inherit the Promises.

That you may be inheritours of them, it shall be my daily prayer unto the
Lord my God, to bestow upon your hearts to use all good means, for the
attaining of the good, in these and other promises of God unto his people. That
he would teach and enable you to meditate upon them diligently day and night,
to believe them firmly; to apply them severally, particularly, personally, to
sue for them earnestly by prayer constant and fervent, to wait for their
promised accomplishment by patience, that so you may enjoy the good of them
here and hereafter, which God in mercy grant unto me, and also you. AMEN.

To the Reader.
MAN which at the beginning was created happy, Genesis 1.26. Ephesians. 2.10. having
now lost God and his Image, is of all earthly creatures become most miserable,
no less then a slave of the Devil, a child of wrath, and an heir of eternal
damnation. Ephesians. 2.2, 3. This is not the estate of a few only, but of all
mankind out of Christ; for we are all by nature under the curse. 2. Cor. 4.4.
Romans 5.19. Gal. 3.10. The best, before their conversion, were by nature
children of wrath, even as others: Ephesians. 2.3. Romans 5.12. for every woman's child
did fall equally in Adam: hence it comes to pass, that no man by nature is now
in better esteem with God then other. Cain and Abel as children of the first
Adam only were equally miserable; the like may be said of us all, for both
Jews and Gentiles are come under sin. Romans 3.9. And as the Psalmist says, We
all are gone out of the way, we are altogether become filthy, there is none
righteous, no not one. Psalm. 14.3. O that men and women had their eyes
enlightened, and judgments convinced of that woeful plight in which naturally
they are! Oh! were their hearts thoroughly laden therewith, surely they would
not long content themselves therein. The truth is, most in the world are
spiritually blind, and cannot discern their own misery; and spiritually dead
too, 1. John 5.19. Ephesians. 2.1.5. and cannot be affected with it: The Holy Ghost
says thus of them, Ephesians. 4.18, 19. They walk in the vanity of their mind
having their understanding darkened, and are strangers from the life of God,
through the ignorance which is in them, because of the hardness of their
hearts: who being past feeling, have given themselves unto wantonness, to
work all uncleanesse with greediness. Such as these, are so far from having
any right to Gods promises, that for the present they are under the curse, and
consequently in the ^^nt of all the plagues and threatenings in Gods Book. Deuteronomy.
27. ult. Deuteronomy. 28.56.63. Wherefore let not such as yet challenge any comfort
from the Promises, but let them after labor to the uttermost of their power,
in using all good means to be made capable and fit subjects for mercy
revealed in the Promises. Is it not pity so many sweet Promises of life should
be made, and yet thou dye and be damned notwithstanding? Pray fervently to
God that he would touch thy heart with grief for all thy sins, and work in
thee a clear apprehension of thine own unworthiness, Acts 2.37. Luke 15.19.
and that he would bestow faith on thee, that by it thou may be able to go
wholly out of thy self to God, through Jesus Christ for salvation.

We having departed from him who is the God of all grace and consolation, are
fallen into an estate of all baseness, desolation, and misery; and cannot be
recovered again into the former estate of spiritual life and happiness,
unless we be brought again to him who is the foundation of life and
happiness, even the living God: and brought to him we can never be, but by
Faith, Heb. 11.6. which is nothing else but the going out of the soul to God
through Christ, to fetch a new principle of spiritual life and grace, which
once in Adam we lost, and now need. The which work of faith is not wrought but
by the promises; and being wrought in our hearts, gives us a most sure right
and interest unto all the promises of Grace. Romans 10.8.17. Heb. 6.12.17. Thus
we through faith and patience are said to inherit the promises, therefore we
are called the heirs of the promise: the promises are as well ours, who truly
believe, as heaven it self is. Now by these heavenly Promises, God our Father
has engaged himself as a debtour to us his poor children for all things
needful to life and godliness, 2. Pet. 1.3. until that blessed time comes
when we shall be put into full possession of all things which we have now
only in promise: at that time Faith shall end in fruition, and Promises in
performance. As the soul is the life of the body, and faith the life of the
soul, so are Gods promises the life of faith. For from whence has faith his
efficacy, but because it lays hold on the free promises? but from whence have
the promises their strength? even from the constant nature of Jehovah, 2. Cor.
1.20. who always gives a being to his word. Desire thou faith? then take
notice of Gods promises: would thou have thy faith like the light in the
Lords Sanctuary never to go out? then acquaint thy self with Gods Promises,
know them well, meditate on them, confer about them: let them be continually
in thy mind, memory, heart and tongue. Satan labors in nothing more then to
keep us in unbelief, especially of particular promises, for he knows if we
believe them, we shall in all things have the victory, come before God with
boldness, carry peace in our own bosoms to our graves, and do, and suffer
any thing for God. 1. John 5. Ephesians. 2. Romans 15. Heb. 11. Oh the abundance of
sweet cordial comfort which all humble believers draw by faith out of every
promise! Now beloved, these precious Promises (our breasts of consolation)
whereupon our happiness so much depends, lie hid in the holy Scripture, as
veins of gold in the earth. Isa. 66.11.12. Surely, those that search those
mines to bring to light these treasures, are worthy of great comme^dation.
Wherefore I doubt not but the good pains of this blessed and faithful servant
of God will find good entertainment of all the children of the promises, that
hope to entertain them, who has with great care and good evidence of
spiritual understanding discovered and compiled the variety and use of all the
promises in matters temporal, spiritual, and eternal. So that here is a
medicine for every disease, and a salve for every sore. Read them carefully and
ponder them seriously, and apply them faithfully. And I beseech the good Lord,
who is the Author of them, that by his holy Spirit he would make them
powerful, and effectual in us. Consider what is said, and the Lord give us
understanding in all things. 2. Tim. 2.7.

RVLES TO BE OBSERVED IN READING OF PROMISES.
WHatsoever Promise is made in general to all the faithful, every one must
particularly apply it to themselves, as Genesis 3.14. the Messiah is promised to
all, every one must apply him to themselves.

2. Whatsoever promise is made to any one of the faithful (if there be not
some particular reason which ties it to his person, as was to Abraham for a
son, and his seed to inherit the land of Canaan) every child of God has
right to it: as you may see, Ioshuah 1.5. I will not fail thee, nor forsake
thee. This every one may apply to themselves, as we know the Holy Ghost
applies it, Heb. 13.5. For he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake
thee. Which teaches us to do the like in all the rest of the promises.

3. Under temporal promise to the Jews, are set forth the excellent promised
graces, which God will give to his people after the coming of Christ, Ezekiel.
34.25, 26, 27.

4. When we read the conditions of the promises, they are not like to the
duties of the Law, made to the perfect fulfillers of them; the promises are
Evangelicall, made to those which endeavor to keep them, and the maine
conditions of them are says.

5. In all the promises for increase of grace, or means of grace, or for any
earthly things, we must know we shall have them so far performed to us, as
the Lord sees good for us.

6. In our weak endeavourings to keep the promises, we must believe the
performance to us, in, by, and through Christ; In whom all the promises of God
are yea, and Amen, that is, as I conceive, confirmed and made good to us in
him, 2. Cor. 1.20. when we can see nothing in our selves why they should be
performed to us, even then we are to claim them for Christ's sake; if thou be
in Christ: for if thou be not in him, no promise belongs to thee: but that
threatenings and judgments are thy portion, and nothing else can we claim as
our due. Sorrow, weeping, and bowling is that which God requires of us, and
not laying hand upon the comfortable promises, till we hunger after Christ;
which God grant we may do more and more, till we come to be satisfied with
his image in the life to come. Psalm. 17.15.

THE FIRST LEGACY.
These promises I have observed for spiritual things.
FIRST ABOUT SIN. If we find nothing in our selves that may move God.
WHen we find nothing in our selves that might move the Lord to have mercy,
then apply these promises, Isai. 43.25. I, even I am be, that blotteth out thy
transgression for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins, Isai 44.22.
I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy
sins: return unto me, for I have redeemed thee.

Ier. 31.34. I will forgive their iniquity, and remember their sin no more.

Ezekiel. 36.25. I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean
from all your filthiness.

Isai. 57.18. I have seen his ways, and will heal him, I will lead him also,
and restore comforts unto him, and to his mourners.

These promises are free, made by the Lord, not for any thing that is in man,
as you may see, in Isaiah 43. from the 22. verse, to the 25. for the Lord
says, They had not called upon him, but wearied the Lord, brought him no
offering, yea wearied him with their sins; and yet in the 25. verse he
says, for his own sake he would forgive their sins.

These promises we shall have always need of, as at our conversion, so
afterward many times we shall in our own feeling find nothing in our selves
to persuade us of the pardon of our sins, then we must fly to these free
promises. When thou see nothing in thy self why the Lord should pardon thy
sins, and therefore doubt'st of the pardon of them, apply, I am he that puts
away thy sins for mine own sake.

When thy sins rise up as a cloud, that thou can see nothing but them,
apply, I have put away thy sins as a cloud.

When thou fear the multitude of thy sins, apply, You shall be clean from
all your sins.

THE II. LEGACY. If we fear, God will remember our sins to punish them.
When we fear, God will remember our sins before committed, to punish us for
them, apply Ier. 31.34. I will remember his sin no more Ezekiel. 18.22. His
transgressions which he has committed shall not be mentioned to him, but in
the righteousness which he has done, shall he live.

Ezekiel. 33.16. None of his sins that he has committed shall be mentioned to
him.

THE III. LEGACY. If often sinning cause thee doubt of pardon.
WHen thine often sinning causes thee to fear that God will not pardon thee,
apply, Job. 33.27.28.29. He looks upon men, and if any say I have sinned, and
perverted that which was right, and it profits me not: he will deliver his
soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the light. Lo all these
things works God, oftentimes with man. Wherefore believe not Satan that
persuades the contrary, nor let thy corruptions make thee bold to presume of
pardon; for though God promise pardon, yet it is to the penitent, not to the
presumptuous, as verse. 27.

THE IV. LEGACY. If thou despair.
WHen thou art at the pits brinke of despair, and art dried up with sorrow,
then go to some faithful Preacher that is able to preach Christ unto thee,
and apply these promises: Job. 33.24, 25, 26. Then he is gracious unto him, and
says, deliver him from going down to the pit, I have found a ransom. His
flesh shall be fresher then a child's, he shall return to the days of his
youth. He shall pray unto God, and he shall be favorable unto him, and he
shall see his face with joy: for he will render unto man his righteousness.

Isai. 57.19. I create the fruit of the lips, peace, peace, to him that is
far off, and to him that is near, says the Lord, and I will heal him.

When thou come to the uttermost extremity for sin, apply, I will have
mercy on him, and deliver him, that he go not down to the pit.

When thou fear that God or his Ministers will not speak peace unto thee,
apply, I have received a reconciliation. I create the fruit of the lips to be
peace, to them that are far off, and to them that are near.

When thy sorrows have withered thee up, apply, He shall return as in the
days of his youth, and his fiesh shall be as the flesh of a child.

If in this estate thou fear, God will not hear prayers for thee, apply, He
shall pray to God, and he will be favorable to him.

When thou fear thou shall not be able to look upon the Lord with joy,
apply, He shall see his face with joy.

When thou see not any thing in thy self, that should cause thee not to
believe this, apply, He will render to man his righteousness; which is (I
think) Christ's righteousness, for whose sake he will do it.

THE V. LEGACY. If thou find sin an heavy burden, and Satan pursuing.
When thou feel sin an heavy burden, and Satan pursuing thee with many
fears, by reason of the same, fly to Christ, and apply, Matthew. 11.28, 29.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.
Mat. 1.21. He shall save his people from their sins.

Romans 16.20. And the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.

Isai. 32.2. And a man shall be as a hiding place from the wind, and a covert
from the tempest, as rivers of waters in a dry place, as the shadow of a great
rock in a weary land. Thus does Christ to the soul that flies to him.

If Satan pursue thee, apply, He is an hiding place.

If storms of temptations and afflictions do arise, apply, He is a refuge
against the tempest.

If thy soul be ready to faint through weakness, apply, He is a river of
water in a dry place, to revive thy spirits, and as the shadow of a great
rock, under which thou may safely repose thy self. When thou find thy
sins very heavy, apply, I will ease you.

When thou have no rest in thy foul because of sin, apply, You shall find
rest to your souls. He shall save his people from their sins, both from the
punishment and the power.

If thou fear length of time in temptations, apply, The God of peace shall
bruise Satan under your feet shortly.

THE VI. LEGACY. If thou turn from sin, and yet doubt of pardon.
WHen thou turnest from sin, and doubtest of the pardon of it, apply, Isai.
1.18. Though your sins be as sckarlet, they shall be as white as snow, though
they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.

Isai. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy on him, and
to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

Micah. 7.18, 19. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and
passes by the transgression of the remnant of his beritage? he retains not
his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy. He will turn again, he
will have compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast
all their sins into the depths of the sea. Prove. 21.13. He that confesses
and forsakes his sins, shall find mercy. 1. Ioh. 1.9. If we confess our
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness.

When thou see thy soul of a sinful color, apply, Though they be red like
crimson, they shall be as white as wool.

If thou fear God will hardly be entreated, apply, He will have mercy, for
he is ready to forgive.

If we fear that our sins have taken such strong hold upon us, as we shall
never get from them, apply, He will cleanse us from all our unrighteousness.
Seeing God promises to be the cleanser, fear not the hardness of the work.

THE VII. LEGACY. If thou would have thy manifold rebellions subdued.
When thou feel many rebellions in thine heart and life, and would have
them not only pardoned, but subdued, apply, Hos. 14.5. I will heal their
backe-sliding. Which promise (as I think) contains thus much, that God will
not only pardon, but heal us, and instead of rebellious hearts and lives, will
give us obedient hearts and lives; for as healing follows the curing of
sickness: so obedience does the curing of rebellion. Micah. 7.19. He will
subdue our iniquities.

When thou feel sin very strong, fly to this promise, and apply the
strength of him that promises, against then strength of sin: it is the Lord
that has promised to subdue it; what though Sin and Satan join their force
together, yet the Lord is stronger then all their force, we need not doubt.

THE VIII. LEGACY. If thy heart be hard and full of corruption.
When thou feel thine heart hard, and full of corruption, apply, Ezekiel.
36.26. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within
you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give
you an heart of flesh.

Deuteronomy. 30.6. And the Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of
thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul, that thou may live.

When thou feel thine heart worldly carnal, apply, I will circumcise thy
heart. A new heart will I give thee.

When nothing will break thine heart, apply the power of Jehovah, that has
promised to cure thee, in taking away thy stony heart.

THE IX. LEGACY. If unbridled nature break out into passion.
When thou can not bridle nature, but it breaks forth into violent
passions, to contention, apply, Isai. 11.6. The Wolf also shall dwell with the
Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and the Calfe, and the
young Lion, and the fatling together, and a little child shall lead them. Such
shall be the power of the Gospel, that those which are by nature like Wolves
and devouring beasts, shall dwell very peaceably: and if we find our nature
such, we must apply, the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb.

Micah. 7.19. He will subdue our iniquities, and will cast all our sins into
the depth of the sea: that which is cast into the Sea, as it appears not in
sight, so we cannot get it again, though we would: so will God do by your
sins, cast them out of his sight, so as we shall not return to them any
more: press him with his promise, and you shall find more then you think.

THE X. LEGACY. If thou be in bondage to some sin.
When thou feel thy self in bondage to some sin, apply, John 8.32. You
shall know the Truth, and the truth shall make you free.

Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion you.

When thou feel thy bondage that thou can not do good, or keep thy self
from evil; apply. The truth shall make you free.

If thy sins often prevail against thee, apply, Sin shall not have
dominion over you.

Psalm. 130.8. He shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.

THE XI. LEGACY. If thou fear the breaking out of strong sins.
When thou feel some sin so strong in thee, that thou fear it will
break out to Gods dishonor, and the blemishing of Religion, apply, 1 Thessalonians.
5.23.24. That your whole spirit, soul and body may be preserved blameless
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Faithful is he that calls you,
who also will do it. That God which has called thee, will keep thee
blameless unto the coming of Christ: therefore use the means, and rest upon
the Lords faithfulness which never fails them which trust in him.

2. These. 3.3. But the Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you and keep you
from evil.

1. Ioh. 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. By cleansing (as I
think) is meant not only from the guilt of sin, but the the power of it,
that the filthiness of it shall not appear in our lives and conversations.
When sin pursues thee hard to make thee fall, do thou pursue the Lord with
prayers, for performance of this promise, and doubt not of the issue.

Micah 7.19. He will subdue our iniquities. And to these add the prayer of
Christ, John 17.15. I pray not that thou should take them out of the world,
but that thou should keep them from the evil. Now what greater evil than
sin? therefore though thy prayers be but weak against it, yet he has
prayed that was always heard, therefore fight and be sure of victory.

THE XII LEGACY. When thou art stayed from sin by admonition.
WHen thou art stayed from sin by admonition, appy, Ezekiel. 3.21. If thou warn
the righteous man, that the righteous sin not, and he does not sin, he shall
surely live because he is warned.

When any admonish thee, obey, and it shall be life to thy soul, therefore
receive the admonition, and apply, He shall live, because he is admonished.

THE XIII. LEGACY. If thou fear God will destroy thee for sin.
IF thou fear, God will destroy thee for thy sins, apply, Ezekiel. 18.30.
Turn your selves from all your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your
ruin.

Matthew. 1.21. He shall save his people from their sins.

When thou fear the greatness or multitude of thy sins will be thy
destruction, apply, Iniquity shall not be your ruin.

When thou see no means of safety, apply, He (that is, Christ) shall save
his people from their sins.

THE XIV LEGACY. If thou be tempted to uncleannes.
IF thou be tempted to uncleanness, apply, Prove. 2.16. He shall deliver thee
from the strange woman.

1. These. 5.24. Thy body shall be kept blameless until the coming of Christ.

THE XV. LEGACY. If thou can not find out thy sin, for which God corrects
thee.
IF thou can not find out thy sin, for which God corrects thee, apply,
Job. 39.9. If they be tied with the cords of affliction, then will I show them
their work, and their sins.

A wise Father will not correct his child, but he will show him wherefore, how
else should he amend his fault? much more will the Lord. But we enjoy not many
promises, because we sue not for them.

Thus far about Sin, the next about Grace.

THE XVI. LEGACY. If thou doubt of salvation.
In doubt of salvation, apply, God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life, John 3.16.

John 5.24. He that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from
death unto life.

John 8.51. If any many keep my saying, he shall never see death.

John 11.25. He that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he
live. And whosoever believes in me shall never see death.

If thou doubt that thou shall perish, and not be saved, apply, He that
believes in Christ, shall not perish, but shall have everlasting life, and
shall not come into condemnation. Labor to believe these Promises, for that is
required of thee, for the obtaining of what is promised.

THE XVII. LEGACY. If thine heart be as a wilderness, barren of good.
WHen thou find thine heart as a wilderness barren of good, apply, Esai.
35.1, 2. The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them: and
the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the Rose, It shall blossom
abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing.

This promise is made to the Church, and every member of it may apply it to
themselves: therefore when thou feel thine heart as a desert wilderness,
and wast ground, void of good, full of briars and thorns of sin, then know,
thou shall not only bring forth sweet smelling graces. like Roses, but also all
abundance of them.

Pro. 11.28. The righteous shall flourish as a branch. Prove. 13.4. The soul of
the diligent shall be made fat.

Hos. 14.5.6. I will be as the dew to Israel, he shall grow as the Lilly, and
cast forth his roots like Lebanon. His branches shall spread, and his beauty
shall be as the Olive tree and his smell as Lebanon.

When we want means to make us fruitful, apply, The Lord will be a dew to
Israel.

When we desire to flourish and grow up in grace, apply, He shall grow as the
Lilly, his branches shall spread.

If thou would shine forth in the beauty of holiness, apply, His beauty shall
be as the Olive Tree, and as the Lillies, whose glory is greater then Solomon's
in all his Royalty.

If thou would have thy graces send forth a sweet, smell, apply, His smell
shall be as Lebanon.

If thou fear the continuance of this estate, apply, He shall fasten his
roots, as ahe trees of Lebanon.

It matters not how great our barrenness be, when God will be a dew to us: it
will quickly make us fruitful, we shall bring forth fruits glorious to the
sight as the Lilly, and as the Olive tree, and the sent of our graces shall be
a sweet smelling savor, as the trees of Lebanon. Therefore though thou feel
thy heart yet barre^, and thou have used means long, and yet art not fruitful,
still use the means, and believe, for therein did Abraham glorify God that
he believed above hope, that Sarah should have a Son, whose womb was barren,
and by years past childbearing: so though thine heart remain barren in thine
own feeling, after long use of means, yet still follow seeking in the means,
and believe, for we have as sure promises, and as faithful a performer, as
Abraham had, Jesus Christ, yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever.

John 7.38. He that believes on me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of
water of life.

THE XVIII. LEGACY. If thou want holiness.
WHen thou art troubled for want of holiness, apply, Exodus 19.6. You shall be
an haly nation.

Deuteronomy. 28.9. And the Lord shall establish thee an holy people unto himself.

The Lord will make thee holy; therefore Sin, nor Satan, nor wicked men
cannot hinder thy holiness: for he that makes thee holy, is stronger then all,
and does what he will.

1 Thessalonians. 5.23.24. The God of peace shall sanctify you throughout, in spirit,
soul, and body. Faithful is he which calls you, which will also do it.

THE XIX. LEGACY. When thou can not offer up any sacrifice.
WHen thou can not offer up any sacrifice to God of prayer or praise, or thy
self in sacrifice, apply, Exodus 19.6. Ye shall be unto me a Kingdom of
Priests. God promises that we shall be Priests, that is, such as shall offer
up sacrifice unto him, for that was the Priests office. Therefore when thou
find thy self unable to pray, or praise the Lord, or to offer up thy self
to God, soul and body, strive in faith grounded on the promises, that he which
commanded, has also promised to make us able to do it, for he has said, We
shall be Priests, Malac. 1.11. In every place incense shall be off ered to my
name, and a pure offering, which is spoken of the believing Gentiles, therefore
thou being one of the^, shall be able to offer up pure offerings.

THE XX. LEGACY. When thou feel but little grace.
WHen thou feel little grace, knowledge, faith, love, repentance, all very
little, apply, Job. 8.7. Though thy beginning be small, yet thy later end shall
greatly increase.

Matthew. 13.12. Whosoever has, to him shall be given; and he shall have
abundance.

Therefore let not thy small beginnings discourage thee; but if thou can
prove thou have some grace, then join faith and diligence together, and they
will quickly make thee rich.

THE XXI. LEGACY. When all thy graces are weak.
WHen thou find all thy graces very weak, and no strength to perform any
spiritual duty, either prayer, or fasting, or any other duty, then apply,
Psalm. 29.11. The Lord will give strength unto his people. Isai. 40.29.31. He
gives power to the faint, and to them which have no might he increases
strength. They that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength, they shall
mount up with wings as Eagles they shall run and not be weary, they shall
walk and not faint.

When thou feel by self faint, stay thy self with this promise, He gives
strength to him that faints.

When thou feel no power, apply, to him that has no strength, he increases
power. If thou have lost thy power, then stay thy self with this, they shall
renew their strength.

If thou art ready to give over through weariness, then gather strength from
this, They shall run, and not be weary, and walk, and not be faint.

And if thou find not these promises performed unto thee, either thou
endeavourest not to keep the conditions, or else thou art negligent in
searching out the promises, or cold in suing for them: the Lord will be sought
to for the performance.

Isai. 41.10. I am thy God, I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea
I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness. Isa. 26.4. Trust
thou in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.

To know there is strength in the Lord is no comfort, unless we know it shall
be for us. Therefore since it is given for a comfort, it must include this
promise, Thus the Lords strength for evermore shall be employed for our good.
Therefore when we want for either soul or body, we must fix our confidence in
him, who will not fail us, if we seek unto him.

THE XXII. LEGACY. When thy heart is dried for want of Grace.
WHen thou feel thy heart dried up for want of grace that thou can not
send forth any water of grace in thy thoughts, words, and works, apply, Isa.
44.3. I will power water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry
ground.

Isai. 58.11. The Lord shall satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy
bones, and thou halt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of waters,
whose waters fail not.

Ier. 17.8. He shall be as a tree planted by the waters, that spreads out her
roots by the river, and shall not see when heat comes: but her leaf shall
be green, and shall not be careful in the year of drought, neither shall
cease from yiedling fruit.

Ier. 31.12. Their soul shall beee as a watered garden.

Iam. 4.6. God gives grace unto the humble.

Isa. 35.6, 7. In the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the
desert. And the parched ground shall be. come a poole and the thirsty land
springs of waters. That is, the most barren heart shall abound with grace,
according to that promise. Ioh. 7.38. Out of their bellies shall flow rivers of
the waters of Life.

Isa. 41.17, 18. When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and
their tongues fail for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel
will not forsake them: I will open rivers in high places: and fountains in the
midst of the valleys: I will make the wilderness a poole of water, and the
dry land springs of water. I will plant in the wilderness the Cedar, the
Shittah-tree, and the Myrtle, and the O live tree: I will set in the desert the
Firre-tree, and the Pine, and the Box tree together. So now though thou feel
thy heart barren, know that God will be thy Gardener to thy barren heart, to
make pooles, and plant pleasant grapes of graces; therefore seeing he takes
upon himself the work, fear not the badnesse of the ground, for he will
make it good as a fruitful garden.

THE XXIII. LEGACY. If thou want the spirit.
IF thou feel thou want the spirit of God, apply, Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put
my spirit within you.

Luke 11.13. If ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your
children: how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them
that ask him.

Joel 2.28.29. I will power out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and
your daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams, and your
young men shall see visions, And also upon the servants, and upon th ehandmaids
in those days will I power out my spirit.

Ioh. 14.16.17. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever: even the Spirit of truth, he
dwells in you, and shall be in you, I will not leave you comfortless, I will
come to you.

When thou can not pray thy self, stay thy self on these prayers, that
Christ has prayed, to the Father to give the Spirit, and he was heard in all
he prayed for, therefore thou may laime it, though thy prayers be but
weak.

THE XXIV. LEGACY. If looking on Gods love, thou can not love God again.
WHen thou look upon the great love of God unto thee, and can not find
thine heart enlarged in loving God again, apply this promise, Deuteronomy. 30.9. I
will circumcise thine heart, that thou may love the Lord thy God with all
thine heart, and with all thy soul.

THE XXV. LEGACY. If thou can not bring thine heart to delight in the Lord.
WHen thou can not bring thine heart to delight in the Lord, apply, Isai.
41.16. Thou shall rejoice in the Lord, and glory in the holy one of Israel.

Psalm. 89.16. In thy name shall they rejoice all the day: and in thy
righteousness shall they be exalted.

Job. 22.26. For then shall thou have thy delight in the Almighty. Psalm. 33.21.
For our heart shall rejoice in him, because we have trusted in his holy name.

When thou see cause of rejoicing in the Lord, and yet can not move thine
affections, apply, They shall rejoice in him.

If through many troubles and temptations, thou find thy joys often
interrupted, apply, they shall rejoice continually in thy name.

THE XXVI. LEGACY. If thou feel not Gods fear in thine heart.
WHen we feel not the fear of God, in our hearts, apply, Ier. 33.40. I will
put my fear in their hearts.

If we would have a reverent fear of God, when we perform any holy duty, or
at other times, as thou feel thy need, so urge the Lord with this his
promise, for he delights to be sued to, upon his promise, by his servants,
Ezekiel. 36.37. I will yet for this be inquired of by the house of Israel to do
it for them.

THE XXVII. LEGACY. If thine heart will not praise the Lord.
When thou can not bring thine heart to praise the Lord, apply Isa. 43.21.
This people have I formed for my self, they shall show forth my praise.

Joel 2.26. Ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and praise the name of
the Lord your God.

Psalm. 22.29. They shall praise the Lord that seek him.

When thou see what great things God has done for thee, and find not thy
self able to set forth his praise, apply, They shall set forth my praise.

When thou find thy ungrateful heart not affected with the mercies thou
enjoyest, so as they stir thee not up to praise the Lord, apply, He shall
eat and be satisfied, and praise the name of the Lord.

THE XXVIII. LEGACY. If thou want wisdom.
WHen thou see thy want of wisdom makes thee not walk like a Christian, so
unblameably as thou ought, apply, Iam. 1.5. If any of you lack wisdom, let
him ask of God that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it
shall be given him.

When thou find thou want wisdom to improve thine afflictions to the
best advantage, or for the ordering of thy actions, occafions and course of
life, to Gods glory and the good of others, and thy self, then fail not to
ask wisdom, and doubt not of the obtaining of it.

THE XXIX. LEGACY. If thou can not understand Gods voice.
When thou can not understand the voice of God in his word, or works, not
knowing what to learn by them, apply, Isa. 35.5. The ears of the deaf shall
be unstopped. That is, those that were deaf, not understanding any thing,
shall be made to hear, that is, to understand.

Ioh. 10.16. Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold, them also I must
bring, and they shall hear my voice. Which is a promise to the Gentiles, that
they shall understand the voice of God.

THE XXX. LEGACY. If thou caust not see into the mysteries of the Gospel.
IF thou can not see into the divine my steries of the Gospel, apply, Isa.
35.5. The eyes of the blind shall be opened. Isa. 42.7. He shall open thee
eyes of the blind. Luke 4.18. He has sent me to recover sight to the blind.

These places are what Christ will do to his people, therefore we need not
fear our disease, seeing Christ is our Physician. If every creature that, for
which it was ordained, then he will surely do that which he was sent to do
of the Father, to give sight to the blind.

THE XXXI. LEGACY. If thou see a good way and have no power to walk in it.
WHen thou see a good way, and have no power to walk in it, or art to
perform any duty, ordinary or extraordinary, and feel no strength to walk
in that way, apply, Ezekiel. 36.72. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause
you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.

When thou look at the greatness of the duty which God commands, look also
at the largeness of his promises for the keeping of them, and then thou will
not be discouraged at it. What matters it what he commands, seeing we have his
promise?

If thou fear the strictness of thy ways that thou shall not be able to
walk in them, though thou step into them sometimes, strengthen thy faith in
this promise, I will give thee my Spirit to cause thee to walk in my ways.
Can Sin or Satan then resist Nay surely the Spirit is stronger, and greater
is he that is in us, then those that are against us. And when we see great
duties which God commands, and fear we shall want strength to do them,
apply, He has said, You shall keep my judgments and do them.

Isai. 40.31. They shall run, and not be weary, they shall walk and not be
faint. That is, Those which of themselves could not step one step, shall be
able to run swiftly in the ways of God.

THE XXXII. LEGACY. If thou want memory.
When thou want memory to remember the Word of God, apply, Ioh. 14.26. But
the Comforter which is the holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name,
he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you.

THE XXXIII. LEGACY. When thou see thine ignorance.
When thou see thine ignorance, and fear thou shall not be able to
glorify God as thou might, if thou had more knowledge, stir up thy
self to desire and apply, Ier. 31.33.34. Thus says the Lord, I will put my
Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and they shall all
know me, says the Lord, from the greatest to the least. Hosea 2.20. Thou shall
know the Lord. Prove. 1.23. I will power out my Spirit unto you, I will make
known my words unto you.

Psalm. 25.9.12.14. The meek will he guide in Judgment: and the meek will he
teach his way. What man is he that seareth the Lord? him shall he teach in the
way that he shall choose. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him:
and he will show them his covenant.

Prove. 2.4.9.11, 12, 13. If thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her
as for treasures: Then shall thou understand righteousness, and judgment, and
equity, yea every good path. Discretion shall preserve thee, understanding
shall keep thee, to deliver thee from the way of the evil man, from the man
that speaks froward things: who leave the paths of uprightness, to walk in
the ways of darkness. Isai. 11.9. The earth shall be full of the knowledge of
the Lord. Prove. 8.17. Those that seek me early shall find me. Isai. 35.8. The
fool shall not err. John. 7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall know
of the doctrine whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself. Isai.
32.3, 4. The eyes of them that see shall not be dim, and the ears of them
that hear shall hearken The heart also of the rash, shall understand knowledge.

When thou think of the great mystery of God manifest in the flesh, and of
one divine essence, and three persons, and see thy own inability to conceive
of this great God, apply, They shall all know the Lord. The heart of the soole
shall understand.

When we fear, God will not reveal his will to us, apply, I will power out
my mind to you. He will teach the humble his ways. He will teach him the way
he shall choose.

If thou fear that though God reveal his will, yet thy ignorance is such,
as thou shall not be able to understand it, apply, I will cause you to
understand. Thou shall understand judgment, righteousness, equity, and every
good path.

If thou fear, men will draw thee away to error, apply, Counsel shall
preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee, and deliver thee from the
evil way, and from the man that speaks froward things, and from them that
leave the ways of righteousness, to walk in the ways of darkness. The
fools shall not err. He shall know the doctrine whether it be of God.

THE XXXIV. LEGACY. If thou desire grace and art not satisfied.
IF thou desire Grace, and thy desires are not satisfied, apply, Psame 35.7.
Delight thy self also in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thy
heart.

Psalm. 145.19. He will fulfill the desires of them that fear him.

Ps. 81.10. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.

Matthew. 5.6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness,
for they shall be filled.

Prove. 10.24. The desire of the righteous shall be granted.

Do thou desire grace? fear thou God will not grant thy desires? apply, He
shall give thee thy hearts desire, he will fulfill thy desire.

Fear thou that if he give grace, it will be but a little, apply, open thy
mouth wide, and I will fill it. Thou shall be filled.

Isai. 30.18. Blessed are all they which wait for him. He will certainly have
mercy upon thee at the voice of thy cry, when he hears he will answer.

When thou beginnest to faint with waiting, apply, He will certainly have mercy
upon thee.

THE XXXV. LEGACY. If thine heart be dead.
WHen thou feel thy heart dead, that it will not stir to God or goodness,
apply, Psalm. 22.26. Your heart shall live for ever.

Prove. 3.21.22. Keep sound wisdom and discretion, so shall they be life unto
thy soul.

Isai. 57.15. I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a
contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive
the heart of contrite ones.

Amos 5.4. Seek the Lord and ye shall live.

When thou fear thou shall never overcome the deadness of thy heart, apply,
Your heart shall live. Seek the Lord and ye shall live.

When thou have got some life, and fear the loosing of it, apply, Your
hearts shall live for ever.

THE XXXVI. LEGACY. Jf thou fear falling away.
WHen thou fear thou shall fall away, and beginnest to decline, apply, 1.
Cor. 1.8. Christ shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be
blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. Psalm. 16.8. I have set the Lord
always before me: because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved. Psalm.
145.14. The Lord upholdeth all that fall: and raises up all those that be
bowed down. Psalm. 91.12.14. The righteous shall flourish like the Palmetree.
He shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon. They shall still bring forth fruit in
old age: they shall be fat and flourishing. Psalm. 1.13. And he shall be like a
tree planted by the rivers of water, that brings forth his fruit in his
season: his leaf also shall not wither. Ps. 31.24. He shall stablish thine
heart. Job. 11.15.27. Thou shall be steadfast, thine age shall be clearer then
the noone day, thou shall shine forth, thou shall be as the morning. Judge.
5.31. They that love the lord shall be as the Sun, when it goes forth in
his might. Now we see that nothing can hinder the Sun in his might, but it
chaseth away the darkness and clouds before it, and cease not till it has
run his race: so shall the child of God, for the Lord has said it, we need
not doubt of it. If thou fear thine own weakness, and the power of
temptation, with the subtilty of Satan, apply, That God whose power and wisdom
over-reacheth all other, has said, He will confirm you to the end. He shall
stablish thine heart, thy leaf shall not fade. Art thou hard pursued by sin
and Satan, apply, that God whose power and wisdom over-reacheth all, he has
said, He will stablish thee. If thou be ready to fall and faint, apply, The
Lord upholdeth all them that fall, and lifts up all them that are ready to
fall: thou shall not slide. If thou fear that thou be kept from sin, yet
thy graces shall decay, apply, The righteous shall flourish as a Palm tree,
and shall grow as a Cedar in Lebanon. They shall bring forth fruit in their
age, they shall be fat and flourishing; thou shall bring forth fruit in sea
son: thou shall be stable, thine age shall appear more clear than noone day.
Thou shall shine as the morning.

THE XXXVII. LEGACY. If thou art fallen.
When we are fallen and fear the Lord will leave us so, then apply, Psalm.
55.22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee: he shall
never suffer the righteous to be moved. Psalm. 37.24.28. Though he fall, he
shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand. For
the Lord loves judgment, and forsakes not his Saints, they are preserved for
ever.

Ier. 32.40. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart
from me. When thou art fallen, and feel a great load of sin or misery upon
thee, and no power to unloade thy self, thy graces so weak, that they will not
help thee, and therefore thou think thy state desperate, apply, Though he
fall, he shall not be cast off, for the Lord puts under his hand. Therefore
though sin and misery be never so heavy to press thee down, yet that
powerful hand of God, when thou art at the lowest, being under thee, shall
easily lift thee up, thou have his promise, he will not suffer thee to fall
for ever.

THE XXXVIII. LEGACY. When the Lord has forsaken thee.
WHen the Lord has forsaken thee in thine own feeling, and thou fear he
will not return again, apply, Isa. 54.7, 8, 9, 10. For a small moment have I
forsaken thee: but with great mercies will I gather thee. In a little wrath I
hid my face from thee for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have
mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer. For this is as the waters of Noah
unto me; for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah shall no more go over
the earth: so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke
thee. For the Mountains shall depart, and the Hills shall be removed: but my
kindness shall not depart from thee; neither shall the covenant of my peace
be removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee.

Genesis 17.7. I will establish my covenant betwixt thee and me, an everlasting
covenant to be a God unto thee.

Deuteronomy. 31.8. I will be with thee, I will not fail thee, neither forsake thee,
fear not, neither be dismayed.

1. Kings 6.13. I will not forsake my people.

2. Chron. 15.2. The Lord is with you while you be with him.

Job. 8.20. Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man.

Job 36.5. Behold, God is mighty, and despises not any.

Hos. 2.19, 20. I will betroth thee unto me for ever; yea I will betroth thee
unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in
mercies. I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness.

THE XXXIX LEGACY. When thou feel thy vileness.
When thou feel thy vileness, and fear, the Lord will loath thee for
it, apply, Levit. 26.11. My soul shall not abhor you.

Hosea 14.4. I will love them freely, for mine anger is turned away from them.

Deuteronomy. 7.13. I will love thee.

John 14.21.23. He that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love
him, and will manifest my self to him, my Father will love him, and we will
come unto him, and make our abode with him.

Ier. 32.41. I will rejoice over them to do them good.

When thou see a multitude of sins, so that thou seem most loathsome,
apply, My soul shall not loath you.

When thou see nothing in thy self that should move him to love thee, but
all to the contrary, apply,

I will love them freely.

If thou fear thy many sins will cause the Lord not to delight in thee,
apply, I will delight in thee.

If thou fear, thy sin will cause the Lord to hide himself from thee,
apply, I will show mine own self unto him.

THE XL. LEGACY. When thou feel thy spiritual poverty.
When thou feel thy spiritual poverty, apply, Matthew. 5.3. Blessed are the
poor in spirit; for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Isa. 66.2. To him will I look, says the Lord, that is poor and of a contrite
spirit, and trembles at my words.

When thou feel thy sins many, and thy graces very little, and therefore
fear that such a miserable creature as thou art, shall not inherit heaven,
apply, Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

If thou feareh the Lord will not look upon thee, apply, To him will I look,
says the Lord, that is of a contrite spirit.

THE XLI. LEGACY. When thou art in a strait.
WHen thou art in a strait, and know not what to choose, either in some
truth, or in something that is to be done, that thou know not what to choose,
apply, Psalm. 25.22. Him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose. verse.
13. His soul shall dwell at ease.

Prove. 3.6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.

Prove. 16.3. Commit thy works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be
esiablished.

Isai. 30.21. And thine ear shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is
the way walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to
the left.

Isai. 58.11. The Lord shall guide thee continually.

Isai. 61.8. I will cause their work in truth.

Ier. 31.9. I will cause them to walk by the rivers of waters, in a straight
way wherein they shall not stumble.

When thou doubt'st of some truth, apply, He shall teach him the way that he
shall choose, his soul shall dwell at ease, Thine ears shall hear a voice
behind thee, saying, this is the way walk in it. I will direct thy way in
truth.

When thou art thinking what course to take, and fear thou shall not know
what the Lord would have thee to do, apply, Thy thoughts shall be derected, he
shall direct thy ways.

When thou fear thy weakness will at some times carry thee astray, apply,
The Lord will guide thee continually. The Lord will lead thee in a straight
way, that thou shall not stumble.

THE XLII. LEGACY. If thou fear Satan will cause thee to fall.
WHen thou fear that Satan by his power and subtilty will cause thee to
fall, and art troubled with his temptations, apply, Genesis 3.15. He shall bruise
his head, Therefore fear not, for Christ has overthrown all his power and
subtilty, that he cannot do us any harm. Psalm. 19.3, 4. Surely he shall
deliver thee from the snare of the fowler. He shall cover thee with his
feathers: and under his wings shall thou trust: his truth shall be thy Shield
and Buckler.

Romans 16.20. The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.

Does Satan press thee with strong temptations, and fear thou his power?
apply, He shall bruise his head. He will cover thee under his wings, and thou
shall be safe under his feathers, his strength shall be thy Buckler.

Fear thou his subtilty? apply, He shall deliver thee from the snare of the
Fowler, and bruise his head, wherein lies all his power and plots.

THE XLIII. LEGACY. If thou can not profit by the word God.
WHen thou can not profit by the word of God, or his works of mercy, or
afflictions, apply, Isai. 48.17. I am the Lord thy God which teaches thee to
profit, which leads thee by the way that thou should go.

Mat. 21.41. The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation
bringing forth fruits thereof.

This is a promise, that the Gentiles shall bring forth the fruits of the
Gospel, therefore every believing Gentile may apply it.

THE XLIV. LEGACY. If thou find thy self unlike Gods people.
WHen thou find thy self not like the people of God, either in heart or
life, apply, Ier. 32.39. I will give them one heart, and one way.

When thou see thine heart not like the people of God, either in their
affection to God, or his people, or ordinances, or in their sorrowing for
sin, apply, I will give them one heart.

When thou see thy life and conversation not so holy as the people of God,
apply, I will give them one way.

THE XLV. LEGACY. If thou would have Gods blessing rest upon thee.
IF thou would have the blessing of the Lord to rest upon thee, apply, Psalm
5.12. The Lord will bless the righteous.

Deuteronomy. 7.13. I will bless thee.

Psalm 3.8. Thy blessing is upon thy people.

Psalm. 24.5. He shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness
from the God of his salvation.

Psalm. 115.12.13. The Lord will bless us, be will bless the house of Israel,
he will bless the house of Aaron. He will bless them that fear the Lord,
both small and great.

THE XLVI. LEGACY. If thou would be a blessing in thy place.
IF thou would be a blessing in thy place, apply, Genesis 12.2. I will bless
thee, and thou shall be a blessing.

Ezekiel. 34.26. I will make them about my hill a blessing.

THE XLVII. LEGACY. If thou separatest from the wicked in their corrupt worship.
WHen thou separatest thy self from the wicked in their corrupt worship and
manners, apply, 2. Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. I will dwell in them, and walk in them,
and I will be their God, and they shall be my people: Wherefore come out from
among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord; and touch not the unclean
thing, and I will receive you; and will be a Father unto you; and ye shall be
my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty.

Thus far of Grace; the next Promises are about the means of Grace, either
ordinary, or extraordinary.

THE XLVIII. LEGACY A promise to be applied in every ordinance.
IN every Ordinance thou may apply this promise, Isai. 12.3. With joy shall
you draw water out of the wels of salvation. Now in that it is said, out of the
Wels of salvation, and not Well, I think we ought to apply it to every
ordinance of God, so as we are to use them with a comfortable persuasion, that
we shall receive abundance of grace from them. As the Lord promises we shall
draw waters from out of them, we shall not only use them, but draw from them
with joy. Therefore when we pray, meditate, hear, confer, fast, in every
duty, apply this promise, and you shall find him faithful which promises.

THE XLIX. LEGACY. When thou prayest.
WHen thou prayest apply these promises for the strengthening of thy faith, and
for thy hearing. Mat. 7.7. Ask, and it shall be given you, seek and you shall
find, knock and it shall be opened unto you.

Mat. 6.6. Pray to the Father which sees in secret, and thy Father which sees
in secret, shall reward the openly.

Mat. 21, 22. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing ye
shall receive it.

John 14.13, 14. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name I will do it.

Ioh. 16.24. Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full.

John 15.7. Ask what you will, and it shall done unto you.

Isai. 65.24. Before they call, I will answer, and while they are yet speaking,
I will hear.

Job 22.7. Thou shall make thy prayers unto him, and he shall hear thee, and
if thou seek him, he will be found.

THE L. LEGACY. WHen thou meditatest.
WHen thou meditatest, apply these promises, Prove. 14.22. Mercy and truth shall
be to them that devise good.

Psalm. 103.17, 18. The loving kindness of the Lord endures for ever, to them
which think upon his commandments to doethem.

Philip. 4.8, 9. Think on these things, which ye have both learned, and
received, and heard, and seen in me, and the God of peace shall be with you.

If thou desire mercy, or the truth of God to be forthy good, or the loving
kindesse of the Lord to be for ever toward thee, and that God which brings
peace with him, to be with thee, then meditate on good things, and with such a
meditation, as may stir thee up to practice, and the^ all these promises
shall surely be performed to thee. And because meditation is an hard duty,
therefore encourage thy self to it by the benefit it brings, and it being a
way of God, he will give thee his Spirit to cause thee to walk in it.

THE LI. LEGACY. In meditating, conferring, and reading Gods word.
IN meditating, conferring, and reading of the word of God, apply, Josh. 1.8.
Let not this book of the Law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day
and night, that thou may observe to do according to all that is written
therein: for then thou shall make thy way prosperous, and then thou shall have
good success.

THE. LII. LEGACY. In reading of the word of thou understandest not.
IN reading of the word, if we understand not, apply these promises, Prove.
1.23. I will power out my Spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you.

Prove. 1.4. It gives subtilty to the simple: to the young men knowledge and
discretion.

Psalm. 19.8. The Commandment of the Lord is pure, inlightning the eyes.

THE LIII. LEGACY. If thou can not confer.
WHen thou can not speak in conference to edification, but feel thine
heart shut up, then apply, John 7.38. He that believes on me, out of his belly
shall flow rivers of living water.

Prove. 10.31. The mouth of the just brings forth wisdom.

Prove. 12.14. A man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of his mouth.

Isai. 32.4. The tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to speak plainly.

Isai. 35.6. The dumb man's tongue shall sing.

When thou art with the people of God, that thou may receive good from them,
and do them good, apply, Prove. 13.20. He that walks with wise men shall be
wise. So apply, Prove. 12.14. John. 7.38. Ezekiel. 47.12. His fruit shall be meat,
and his leaves medicine.

If thou find thy soul stand in need of wisdom, keep company with the
people of God which are the only wise people, and then thou have the only sure
promises of the Lord, thou shall be wise. If thou hungrest after good, resort
to the righteous, and thou shall be satisfied with good things. If thou feel
thy self dead, apply, out of him shall flow rivers of water of life, for thy
quickening. If thy soul be faint or sick, apply, His fruit shall be meant and
his leave medicine. Let all this good which is gotten by their fellowship cause
thee to delight in them, and take heed of forsaking the fellowship of the
Saints.

When thou go into company, apply these promises to thy self, that thou
may be so to others, and hinder not thy self, by unbelief.

THE LIVE. LEGACY. When thou art to go to the assemblies.
WHen thou art to go to the assemblies, to participate in the ordinances,
apply, In places where I record my name, I will come to thee and bless thee.
If thou want the Lord, or his blessing, go to his house, and thou shall
find him Psalm 36.8, 9. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness
of thine house, and thou shall make them drink of the river of thy pleasures.
For with thee is the fountain of life, and in thy light shall we see light.
Ps. 65.4. We shall be satisfied with the geodnesse of thy house, even of thine
holy Temple. Psalm 83.11. The Lord God is a Sun and shield, the Lord will give
grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold. Psalm 92.13.14. Those
that he planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of our
God. They shall still bring forth fruit in their old age: they shall be fat
and flourishing. Psalm 128.5. The Lord shall bless thee out of Sion. Isai.
25.6, 7, 8. In this mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make unto all people a
feast of fat things, a feast of wine on the lees, of fat things full of marrow,
of wines on the lees, well refined. Therefore when his ordinances are corrupted
with men's inventions, then thou may press him with this promise, that he
will give us wine fined and purified, even his purest ordinances, and most
comfortable to our hearts, as wine is. And when there is little nourishment,
because their gifts are weak, urge him with this, that he has promised to
make us a feast of fat things full of marrow; for I take this promise to be
meant of the Churches after Christ, verse. 7. And he will destroy in this
mountain the face of the covering cast over all people, and the the veil that
is spread over all nations. Thy sins that are too strong for thee, bring them
to the Lord in his ordinances, and he will destroy them, though thou seem to
be covered with them, and they spread as a veil upon thee, yet believe his
promises, and all things shall be possible unto thee. Isai. 57.7. I will make
them joyful in mine house of prayer, their sacrifices shall be accepted at mine
Altar. God will both give to them and accept from their sacrifices, as pleasing
to him. 2. Chro. 20.20. Believe his Prophets, so shall ye prosper.

Prove. 1.5. A wise man will hear, and will increase learning, and a man of
understanding shall attain unto wise counsels. Prove. 4.10.12. Hear and
receive my sayings, and the years of thy life shall be many, when thou go,
thy steps shall not be strait, and when thou runnest, thou shall not stumble.
Mark. 4.24. Unto you that have, shall more be given. Isai. 55.3.11, 12. Incline
your ears and come unto me, hear and your souls shall live; and I will make
an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. My words
shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto
I sent it. Therefore ye shall go forth with joy, and be led forth with peace;
the mountains and the hills shall bread forth before you into singing, and all
the trees of the field shall clap their hands. verse. 13. Instead of the thorn
shall come up the Fur tree, and instead of the bryer shall come up the Myrtle
tree: this force shall the word have in thine heart for planting of Grace, and
destroying of sin.

Hos. 14.7. They that dwell under his shadow shall return, they shall revive
as the corn, and grow as the vine, the sent thereof shall be as the vine in
Lebanon. If thou would return, apply this, he shall return. If thou be
decayed, apply this; They shall revive as the corn. If thou would flourish
in grace, apply, They shall flourish as the Vine. If thou would be a sweet
smelling savor in all places, apply, The sent thereof shall be as the Vine of
Lebanon. Seeing all these good things come from the powerful ordinances of the
Lord, let us give him no rest, till he bestow these blessings upon us; when the
Pastor of the people pronounces the blessing, apply this promise, Number. 6.27.
I will bless thee.

THE LV. LEGACY. Would thou enjoy the ordinances of God, and a blessing upon
them.
Would thou enjoy the ordinances of God, and a blessing upon them, apply,
Ier. 31.14. I will satiate the souls of the Priests with fatness, and my
people shall be satisfied with goodness.

Ier. 3.15. I will give you Pastors according to mine heart, which shall feed
you with knowledge and understanding.

Ezekiel. 34.26, 27. And I will make them and the places round about my hill a
blessing, and I will cause the shower to come down in his season: there shall
be showers of blessing. And the tree of the field shall yield her increase,
and the earth shall yield her fruit.

The promises are both for Pastor and people, the Pastor shall be able to teach
with knowledge and understanding, his soul shall be replenished with
fatness, his teaching shall be as seasonable showers of blessing, that shall
make the people fruitful. The people must apply these promises, first that God
would give them able Teachers, and that they may find their ministry blessed
unto them, according to these promises. That they may be fed with knowledge
and understanding, that they may be satisfied with goodness, and that their
teaching may be seasonable showers of blessing to make them fruitful, as it
is promised, that the trees shall yield their fruit. How much are Gods
ordinances to be desired, by which he does convey so many blessings unto his
people? Let us give him no rest, till he furnish Jerusalem with all her
ordinances and officers.

THE LVI. LEGACY. Jf thou enjoyest grace or means of Grace.
IF thou enjoyest glorious graces, or means of grace, and fear the loosing
of them, apply, Isai, 4.5.6. Upon all the glory shall be a defense. And there
shall be a Tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat, and for a
place of refuge, and for a covert from storm, and from rain.

Isai. 27.3. I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment: least any
hurt it, I will keep it night and day.

Isai. 33.16. His place of defense shall be the munition of Rocks, bread shall
be given him, his waters shall be sure.

Have thou any glorious grace or means of grace? Arm thy self with the power
of God in his promises, for the Devil will ue all his fores and subtilty, to
deprive thee of them; have thou a glorious Minister, and pure ordinance, or
glorious graces begin to spring in thine heart, and see no means to defend
them? apply, Upon all thy glory he shall be a defense. His defense shall be a
munition of Rocks. See thou an heart of sin in thy self, or the rage of
the wicked, that causes thee to fear the loss of them? apply, There shall be
a covering for a shadow in the day for the heat. Does the Devil raise up
storms? inwardly persecutions? apply, The defense and covering shall be a
place of refuge, and covert for the storm, and for the rain. Fear thou the
subtilty of thine enemies, that unawares when thou think not on them, they
will surprise thee, and steal thy blessing from thee? apply, I the Lord do
keep it night and day. If thou fear God will not continue thus to thee,
apply. I will water it every moment; not one moment, but he will be adding and
nourishing: Bread shall be given him, and his waters shall be sure.

THE LVII. LEGACY. When thou art banished from Gods ordinances.
WHen thou art banished from Gods ordinances, apply these promises for thy
return, Isai. 35.10. The ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Sion
with songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. Ier. 3.14. I will take you
two of a family, and one of a City, and will bring you to Sion. Deuteronomy. 30.4. If
any of thine be driven out to the utmost parts of heaven, from thence will the
Lord thy God gather thee, and from thence will he fetch thee. Ezekiel. 34.11, 12,
13.14, 15, 16. Behold I, even I will both search my sheep and seek them out. As
a Shepherd seeks out his flock in the day that he is among his Sheep that
are scattered: so will I seek out my Sheep, and will deliver them out of all
places, where they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day. And I will
bring them out from the people, and gather them from the people, and gather
them from the countries, and will bring them to their own land, and feed them
upon the mountains of Israel, by the rivers, and in all the inhabited places
of the Countre^* I will feed them in a good pasture, and upon the high
mountains of Israel shall their fold he: there shall they lie in a good fold,
and in a fat pasture shall they feed upon the mountains of Israel. I will seed
my flock, and I will cause them to lie down, says the Lord God. I will seek
that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and will bind
up that which was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick.

If thou mournest for Gods ordinances, apply, Thou shall not only return to
Sion, but return with joy, and sorrow shall fly away. If thou be but one
amongst many which desire it, and fear thou shall be left among them,
apply, I will take you, one of a city, and two of a Tribe: though thou be
but one of a City that returns to the Lord, he will bring thee to Sion from
all the rest. If thou art far removed from all means, and that the Lord has
done it for thy sin, apply, Though thou were cast into the out most part of the
Heaven, thence will the Lord gather thee, and from thence will the Lord gather
thee, and from thence will he take thee; he will deliver them from all places
where they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day, and will feed them
in good pastures, and will bring them to rest.

THE LVIII. LEGACY. Whilst thou art banished from Gods house.
WHilst thou art banished from Gods house, apply, Ezekiel. 11.16. I will be unto
them as a little Sanctuary in the countries where they shall come. Isai. 40.11.
He shall feed his flock like a shepherd he shall gather the Lambs with his
arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with
young.

In thy banishment, at those hours when thy soul was wont to be refreshed in
the Sanctuary of God on the Sabbath, and at other times when thou find thy
self to stand in need either of defense, or nourishment, apply, I will be a
Sanctuary unto you. He shall feed his flock as a shepherd. If in this time
thou feel thy self very weak, apply. He shall gather his Lambs in his
arms, and carry them in his bosom, and guide them with young: they cannot
miscarry that are shut up in the bosom of God, nor fear, who are guided by
him. Therefore though we be never so weak in our selves, yet here is our
comfort, we are safe in our God: O happy people, saved by the Lord.

THE LIX. LEGACY. When wicked sheepheards are over us.
WHen wicked sheepheards are over us, then apply, Eze. 34.10. Thus says the
Lord God, Behold, I am against the sheepheards, and I will require my flock at
their hands, and cause them to cease from feeding the flock: neither shall the
sheepheards feed themselves any more. for I will deliver my flock from their
mouth, that they may not be meat for them. verse. 21.22. Because ye have thrust
with side, and with shoulder, and pusht all the diseased with your horns, till
ye have scattered them abroad: Therefore will I save my flock, and they shall
no more be a prey, and I will cause the wild beasts to cease out of the land.

When the sheepheards feed themselves, and are ready to devour us, apply, The
sheepheards shall not feed themselves any more. I will deliver my sheep from
their mouths, they shall no more devour them.

When through their greatness and our weakness, they push us so with their
horns, that we are scattered, both shepherd from people, and one from
another, apply, I will help my sheep, and they shall no more be spoiled; I will
cause the wild beasts to cease out of the land.

THE LX. LEGACY. When through wicked sheepheards thou art come to great misery.
WHen through evil sheepheards we are come to great misery, apply, Ezekiel.
34.16. I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven
away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen that which
was sick. Isai. 30.20. Though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the
water of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any
more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers. When through evil sheepheards
thou art come to such an estate as thou feel thy self to have lost God and
goodness, and art driven away from all things that might help thee, apply, I
will seek that which was lost, I will bring again that which was driven away.
When thou art even broken with misery, and grown very weak, apply, I will bind
up that which was broken, and strengthen that which was weak. When thy
Teachers which should help thee in this estate, are forced to fly and hide
themselves for fear of wicked sheepheards, apply, Thy teachers shall not be
removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy Teachers.

Thus far of the ordinances of God, which are ordinary; Now for the duty of
Fasting, which is extraordinary.

THE LXI. LEGACY. When thou set thy self to fast.
WHen thou set thy self to fast, apply, Matthew. 6.18. If thou fast in
secret, thy Father which sees in secret will reward thee openly.

Iam. 4.8.10. Draw nigh unto God, and he will draw nigh unto you. Humble your
selves in the sight of the Lord and he shall lift you up.

Thus far of the means of Grace. The next promises are when we suffer
persecution for well-doing, for all that will live godly must suffer
persecution: therefore strengthen thy self with these promises.

THE LXII. LEGACY. If thou art railed upon for well-doing.
IF thou art railed upon for well-doing, apply, 1. Pet. 4.14. If ye be
reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye, for the Spirit of God, and of
glory rests upon you.

Mat. 5.11, 12. Blessed are ye, when men revile you, and persecute you, and
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be
exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven, for so persecuted they the
Prophets which were before you.

THE LXIII. LEGACY. If thou are persecuted.
WHen they persecute thee any other ways even unto death, apply, Mat. 10.39.
He that loses his life for my sake, shall find it. Matthew. 5.10. Blessed are
they which are persecuted for righteousness sake: for theirs is the Kingdom
of Heaven. When we loose any earthly blessing for Gods cause, apply, Matthew.
19.24. Every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father,
or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my names sake, shall receive an
hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life.

This is the greatest (and yet lawful) usury of all others, to part with one
outward blessing, and to receive an hundred for it; to loose a miserable life,
and to enjoy eternal life; to suffer a short time, and to have a great reward
in heaven; to be disgraced, and to have the Spirit of glory rest upon us.
Therefore when thou art railed upon, apply, Blessed am I, the Spirit of glory
rests upon me, therefore they cannot make me vile. Art thou any way persecuted?
apply, Theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven; great is your reward in Heaven. Take
they thy life? apply, He that loses his life for my sake shall find it. Take
they away any earthly blessing? thou shall receive an hundredth fold at this
present; therefore if Usurers gladly let out their money, that hope to receive
but eight in the hundredth, be ashamed of thy self, that thou should not
give one for an hundredth, when thou have the promise of him that never failed
to perform.

THE LXIV. LEGACY. Jn partaking with Gods people in suffering.
IN partaking with Gods people in suffering, that thou may be partaker of
their comforts, apply, 1. Cor. 1.6. As you are partakers of the sufferings: so
shall ye be also of the consolation.

THE LXV. LEGACY. When thou art called to defend the truth.
WHen thou art called forth to defend the truth, apply, Matthew. 10.19. When they
deliver you up, take no thought, how, or what ye shall speak, for it shall be
given you in that same hour what ye shall speak.

Luke 21.15. I will give you a mouth and wisdom which all your adversaries
shall not be able to gainesay nor resist. Math. 10.32. Whosoever confesses me
before men, him will I confess before my Father which is in heaven. When thou
fear thou shall not be able to speak in defense of the truth, apply, It
shall be given thee, though thou have it not before, in that hour, what thou
shall say. If thou fear the learning of thine adversaries, and thine own
simpleness, apply, I will give the not only a mouth, but also wisdom,
where-against they shall not be able to speak. If thou want courage, embolden
thy self with this, Christ will confess thee before his father.

THE LXVI. LEGACY. If thou would bring forth seasonable fruit for every
estate.
IF thou would bring forth seasonable fruit for every estate, and for every
duty, apply, Psalm. 1.3. Thou shall as a tree which brings forth his fruit in
season. Ezekiel. 47.12. He shall bring forth fruit according to his months. If
thou art to speak or pray, or do any duty, that thou may do it seasonably,
and have fitting words and thoughts, apply, Thou shall bring forth fruit in
season. So in every estate, prosperity or adversity, that thou may bring
forth the fruits of it, apply, They shall bring forth fruit in season according
to their months.

Thus far about spiritual things. The next promises, are about earthly
things: and because Children are the most excellent, therefore I will begin
with them.

THE LXVII. LEGACY.
IF thou have children, apply, Ps. 112.2. His seed shall be mighty upon earth:
the generation of the just shall be blessed.

Deuteronomy. 7.13. He will bless the fruit of thy womb. Genesis 17.7. I will establish
my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations
for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.
Isai. 44.3.4. I will power out my Spirit upon on thy seed, and my blessing upon
thine off spring: and they shall spring up as among the grass, as willowes by
the watercourse. If thou desire grace and Gods blessing for thy children,
apply, I will power my spirit and blessing upon thy seed. If thou would have
them grow up in it, apply, They shall grow as among the grass, and as the
willowes by the water courses. If thou would have them in covenant with thy
self, thy God to be theirs, apply, I will make an everlasting covenant with
thee, to be God to thee, and to thy seed after thee. Desire thou outward
things for them? apply, His seed shall be mighty upon earth.

THE LXVIII. LEGACY. If thou want children.
IF thou want children, apply, Deuteronomy. 7.14. Thou shall be blessed above all
people, there shall neither be male nor female barren among you. Deuteronomy. 28.11.
The Lord shall make thee plentiful in the fruit of thy body. Psalm. 128.3. Thy
wife shall be as a fruitful Vine by the sides of thine house, thy children
like Olive plants, round about thy table. verse. 4.6. Lo thus shall the man be
blessed that fears the Lord. Thou shall see thy childrens children.

If thou have conceived, apply this promise for keeping of it, Exodus 23.26.
There shall none cast their young, nor be barren in thy land. This, and
allother promises of earthly things, are to to be applied so far as is good
for us: we are not to doubt of them.

THE LXIX. LEGACY. If the Lord deny thee children.
IF the Lord deny thee children, apply, Isai. 56.5. To them will I give mine
house, and within my walls a place and a name better then of Sons and of
Daughters, I will give them an everlasting name that shall not be cut off.

THE LXX. LEGACY. If thou would have a comfortable and holy use of thy
habitation.
IF thou would have the comfortable and holy use of thine habitation, apply,
Job. 5.24. Thou shall know that thy Tabernacle shall be in peace, and thou
shall visit thine habitation, and not sin.

Psalm 91.10. There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come
nighthy dwelling. Prove. 14.11. The Tabernacle of the upright shall flourish.
Prove. 12.7. The house of the righteous shall stand.

If thou would prosper in thine house, apply, Peace shall be in it. No plague
shall come near it. It shall flourish. If thou would have it continue so,
apply, It shall stand. That they may not be a snare to thee, but that thou
may use thy blessing, and not sin, apply, Thou shall visit thy habitation,
and not sin.

THE LXXI. LEGACY. If thou would have thy going out, and coming in blessed.
IF thou would have thy coming in and going out blessed, apply, Deuteronomy. 28.6.
Blessed shall thou be when thou come in, and blessed shall thou be when
thou go out, Psalm 121.8. The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy
coming in, from this time forth, and even for evermore.

When thou go out, if thou would have heavens and earth, and all creatures
blessed to thee, and be made able to make the spiritual use of them, apply,
Blessed shall thou be when thou go out, and when thou come in. The Lord
shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in. If thou would have the
continuance of it, apply, from this time forth for evermore.

THE LXXII. LEGACY. When thou eatest or enjoyest any blessing, that it may
satisfy, and be sanctified.
WHen thou eatest or enjoyest any blessing, that it may satisfy, thee and thou
may have the sanctified use of it, apply, Joel 2.26. Ye shall eat in plenty
and be satisfied, and praise the name of the Lord our God.

That thy meat and outward blessings may give thee content, and satisfy thee,
apply, Thou shall eat and be satisfied.

That thou may have the sanctified use of it, apply, Thou shall praise the
Lord.

THE LXXIII. LEGACY. When thou take thy rest at night, etc.
WHen thou take thy rest at night, apply, Prove. 3.24. When thou lie down
thou shall not be afraid: yea thou shall lie down, and thy sleep shall be
sweet.

Job 11.19. Also thou shall lie down, and none shall make thee afraid.

If thou art troubled with fears of the night, apply, Thou shall not be afraid.

When thou take thy rest, apply, None shall make thee afraid.

If thou art troubled with any thing that breaks thy rest, apply, Thy rest
shall be sweet.

THE LXXIV. LEGACY. When thou put thy hand to any works.
WHen thou put thine hand to any work, that it may be blessed, apply,
Deuteronomy. 28.12. The Lord shall bless all the workof thine hand. Deuteronomy. 30.9. The
Lord thy God will make thee plentuous in every work of thine hand. The Lord
will not only bless some of thy works, but every one; therefore in every work
send up short prayers for the claiming of them, and so at our going out, and
coming in, or sleeping, renew these promises upon thy self, by faith applying
them, and by prayer suing for them.

THE LEXXV. LEGACY. If thou would have thine outward blessings blessed.
IF thou would have thy outward blessings blessed of God, apply, Deuteronomy. 28.4,
5. Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, and the
fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep.
Blessed shall be thy basket and thy store. Deuteronomy. 7.13.14. The Lord will also
bless the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy land, thy corn, and thy
wine, and thine oil, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep.
There shall be neither male nor female barren among you, or among your cattle.
That thy goods and thine house may be blessed, apply, Blessed shall be thy
basket and thy store. If thou be in debt, apply, Deuteronomy. 28.12. Thou shall
lend unto many, and shall not borrow.

THE LXXVI. LEGACY. If thou desire to enjoy the labors of thine hands.
IF thou desire to enjoy the labors of thine hands, apply, Isai. 65.21, 22,
23. They shall build houses and inhabit them, they shall plant vineyards and
eat the fruit of them. They shall not build, and another inhabit; they shall
not plant and another eat: for as the days of a tree are the days of my
people, and mine elect shall long enjoy the works of their hands. They shall
not labor in vain, nor bring forth for trouble. Psalm. 128.2. Thou shall eat
the labor of thine hands.

THE LXXVII. LEGACY. If thou art diligent in thy calling.
WHen thou art diligent in thy calling, apply, Prove. 12.14.24. The recompense
of a man's hands shall be rendered unto him. The hand of the diligent shall
bear rule. When thou enjoyest that thou have labored for, apply, Psalm
128.2. Thou shall eat the labor of thine hands: happy shall thou be, and it
shall be well with thee.

THE LXXVIII. LEGACY. When thou see wicked men follow unsatisfying things
with restless desires and thou desire content.
WHen thou see the wicked to be carried with restless desires, hungrying
and thirsting after those things which satisfy them not, and thou desire
content, apply, Isai. 65.13, 14. Thus says the Lord, behold my servants shall
eat, but ye shall be hungry; behold my servants shall drink, but ye shall be
thirsty, be hold my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed: Behold my
servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart,
and shall howl for vexation of spirit.

THE LXXIX. LEGACY. If thou fear thou shall loose by following the Lord.
IF thou fear thou shall loose by following the Lord, apply Psalm
37.9.11.18, 19. Those that wait upon the Lord shall inherit the earth, their
inheritance shall be for ever: they shall not be ashamed in the evil time.
They shall inherit the earth, and delight themselves in the abundance of peace.
Psalm. 112.3. Wealth and riches shall be in his house. Job. 22, 23, 24. Thou
shall be built up, thou shall lay up gold as dust, and the gold of Ophir as the
stones of of the brooks verse. 25. Yea, the Almighty shall be thy defense, and
thou shall have plenty of silver.

Genesis 15.1. I am thy exceeding great reward. Fear thou the loss of thy
land, apply, Thou shall inherit the earth, their inheritance shall be for ever.
Thou shall possess the earth. Do others trouble thee? apply, They shall have
their delight in the multitude of peace. Art thou poor, or fear the loss
of thy goods? apply, Riches and treasure shall be in his house. Art thou
oppressed by the wicked? apply, The Almighty shall be thy defense.

THE LXXX. LEGACY. When thou have lost blessings by sin.
WHen thou have lost blessings by sin, apply these promises for their
recovery, Joel. 2.24, 25, 26. The floores shall be full of Wheat, and he fats
shall overflow with wine and oil, and I will restore to you the years that
the Locust has eaten, the canker-worme, the caterpiller, and the palme-worme:
and ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and praise the Lord. Deuteronomy. 30.5.
I will multiply you above your fathers.

THE LXXXI. LEGACY. If thou fear loss of thy good name.
IF thou fear the loss of thy good name, apply, Job. 5.21. Thou shall be
hid from the scourge of the tongue. Job. 11.15. Thou shall lift up thy face
without spot. Psalm. 37.6. He shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light,
and thy judgment as the noone day. Prove. 10.7. The memory of the just is
blessed.

Fear thou the wicked will take away thy good name, apply, Thou shall be
hid from the scourge of the tongue. Cast they blots upon thee? apply, Thou
shall lift up thy face without spot. Seek they to darken the light of thy holy
life? apply, He shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy
judgment as the noone day.

THE LXXXII. LEGACY. If the world despise thee, etc.
IF the World despise thee, comfort thy self with these promises, Exo. 19.5.
Ye shall be Gods peculiar treasure above all people. 1. Sam. 3.30. Those that
honor me will I honor, says the Lord. Ps. 91.14. I will set him on him,
because he has known my name. Psalm. 112.9. His horn shall be exalted with
honor. John 12.26. If any man serve me, him will my Father honor. Prove. 4.7,
8, 9. Get wisdom, exalt her, and She shall promote thee, She shall bring
thee to honor when thou do embrace her; She shall give to thine head an
ornament of grace, a crown of glory shall She deliver to thee.

WHen the world counts thee as the offscouring of the world, vile,
nought-worth: apply, He shall be Gods chief treasure above all people. Does
the world debase thee? apply, The Lord will exalt thee. The Father will honor
him.

THE LXXXIII. LEGACY. When thou art in want for soul or body.
WHen thou art in any want for soul or body, apply, Psalm 34.9.10. There is
no want to them that fear him. The young Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but
they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. Psalm 84.11. No good
thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. Mat. 6.33. Seek ye
first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be
added unto you. Art thou troubled with distracting cares for outward things?
apply, Seek the Kingdom of Heaven and his righteousness, and all other things
shall be cast upon you. Fear thou that thou shall be overpressed with
want? apply, Those that seek the Lord, shall want no good thing. No good thing
will be withhold from them that walk uprightly.

THE LXXXIV. LEGACY. In liberal giveing.
IN liberal giving apply these promises, Prove. 11.25. The liberal soul shall
be made fat, and he that watreth shall be watered also himself.

Prove. 19.17. He that has pity on the poor, lends to the Lord: and that
which he has given will he pay him again.

Matthew. 6.4. Give in secret, and thy Father himself shall reward thee openly.
2. Cor. 9.6.10.11. He which sows bountifully shall reap bountifully. He that
ministers seed to the sewer, does minister bread for-your food, and multiply
your seed sown, and increase the fruits of your righteousness, being enriched
in every thing to all bountifulness.

Isai. 58.10.11. If thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the
afflicted soul: then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be
as the noone day.

And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought,
and make fat thy bones, and thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a
spring of waters, whose waters fail not.

When thou give to the people of God, and entreatest them kindly, apply,
Matthew. 10, 41.42. He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall
receive a Prophets reward: and he that receives arighteous man, in the name of
a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward. And whosoever shall
give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold water only in the
name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise loose hiw reward.

THE LXXXV. LEGACY. If sickness be among us.
IF sickness be amongst us, apply, Exodus 23.52. I will take sickness away
from the midst of thee.

Psalm 43.3. The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing: 'thou
wilt make all his bed in his sick nesse.

Deuteronomy. 7.15. And the Lord will take away from thee all sickness, and will put
none of the evil diseases of Egypt upon thee.

If the plague be among us, apply, Psalm 91.3.6.7. Surely he shall deliver
thee from the noisome pestilence. Thou shall not be afraid of the pestilence
that walks in darkness, nor for the destruction that wastes at noone day, A
thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand: but it
shall not come nigh theee.

Art thou sick? apply, The Lord will strengthen him upn the bed of sorrow: thou will make all his bed in his sickness.

Art thou there where the sick are? apply, I will take away all sickness from
the midst of thee.

Fear thou the pestilence? apply, I will deliver thee from the noisome
pestilence.

THE LXXXVI. LEGACY. If thou fear death.
IF thou fear death, apply, Isai. 57.2. He shall enter into peace, they
shall rest in their beds. None fears to go to bed, when they know they shall
rest being weary. This resting is more sure and lasting for ever. Romans 8.11. He
that raised up Christ from the dead, shall quicken our mortal bodies.
Therefore we must not think of it but as a better life given by the spirit of
God.

THE LXXXVII. LEGACY. If thou fear untimely death.
IF thou fear untimely death, apply, Job. 5.26. Thou shall come to thy grave
in a full age, like as a shock of corn comes in, in his season. Exo. 23.26.
The number of thy days will I fulfill. Psalm. 91.16. With long life will I
satisfy him, and show him my salvation. Psalm. 41.2. The Lord will preserve him
and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon the earth.

Have thou many enemies, and fear the loss of thy life by them? apply, the
number of thy days will I fulfill: the Lord will preserve him and keep him
alive, therefore man cannot shorten it one day.

Fear thou that thou shall either live too long, or dye too soon? apply,
Thou shall go to thy gave in a full age, as a rick of corn comes in due
season into the barn.

THE LXXXVIII. LEGACY. If thon fear hurt by any of the creatures.
IF thou fear hurt by any of the creatures, apply, Genesis 9.2. The fear of
you and the dread of you shall beupon every beast of the earth, and upon every
foul of the air, upon all that mooveth upon the earth, upon all the fishes of
the sea, into your hand are they delivered, Job. 5.23. Thou shall be in league
with the stones of the field: and the beast of the field shall be at peace with
thee.

THE LXXXIX. LEGACY. When thou have a troubled heart?
WHen thine heart is troubled either for soul or body, apply, Phil. 4.7. The
peace of God which passes all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds.
Psalm. 29.11. The Lord will bless his people with peace.

Is thine heart troubled with many temptations of Satan, or with fears of
sin and misery? apply, The peace of God shall preserve your hearts. Have thou
many troubles outwardly? apply, The Lord shall bless his people with peace.

THE XC. LEGACY. If thou would have thy purpose to prosper.
IF thou would have thy purposes to prosper, apply, Job. 22.28. Thou shall
also decree a thing, and it shall be established unto thee: and the light shall
shine upon thy ways.

Psalm. 1.3. Whatsoever he does shall prosper. Psalm. 37.5. Commit thy way unto
the Lord: trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass.

When thou often purposest to do good both for thy soul and body, and yet
find thy purposes broken, apply, Thou shall decree a thing, and the Lord
shall stablish it unto thee. He shall bring it to pass. When thou art in doing
of any thing, apply, Whatsoever he does shall prosper.

THE XCI. LEGACY. When thou art called to a great work.
WHen thou art called to a great work, wherein thou shall have great
opposition, apply, Deuteronomy. 31.8. The Lord he it is that doty go before thee, he
will be with thee, he will not fail thee, neither forsake thee: fear not,
neither be dismayed, 2. Chro. 16.9. The Lord will show himself strong in the
behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him: Psalm. 91.11, 12, 13. He
shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways: They
shall bear thee up in their hands, least thou dash thy foot against a stone.
Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder: the young Lion and Dragon shall thou
trample under feet.

It matters not what be that lets oppose us, when the Lord goes before us, he
will easily beat them down: nor what strength resists such, as he has
promised to show his strength for: nor how many be our dangers, when his
Angels have charge over us to keep us. Therefore go on in the work, and fear
not the issue, being strengthened by the promises of him, that never fails
his.

THE XCII. LEGACY. In times of danger.
IN the time of danger, apply, 1. Sam. 2.9. The Lord will keep the feet of his
Saints. Prove. 1.33. Who so harkeneth unto me shall dwell sasely, and shall be
quiet from fear of evil. Job. 11.18.19 Thou shall be seeure, because there is
hope, yea thou shall dig about thee, and thou shall take thy rest in safety,
also thou shall lie down, and none shall make the afraid. Psalm. 125.1, 2. They
which trust in the Lord, shall be as mount Sion which cannot be removed, but
abides for ever. As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is
round about his people from henceforth, even for ever.

Psalm. 121.3, 4, 5. He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: he that keeps
thee will not slumber. Behold, he that keeps Israel will neither slumber nor
sleep. The Lord is thy keeper, the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand.
Seeing the Lord is our keeper, we need not fear the danger.

THE XCIII. LEGACY. When thou art in great trouble etc.
WHen thou art in great trouble, apply, Isai. 43.2. When thou passest through
the waters I will be with thee, and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow
thee: when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither
shall the flame kindle upon thee. verse. 20. I will give waters in the
wilderness, and Rivers in the desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen.
Psalm. 32.6, 7. Surely in the floods of great waters they shall not come nigh
unto him. Thou art my hiding place, thou shall preserve me from trouble; thou
shall compass me about with songs of deliverance.

When thou see thy felse compassed with many troubles, and beginnest to
fear, apply, I will be with thee, they shall not overflow thee. In the fire of
affliction, thou shall not only not be burnt, but the flame shall not kindle
upon thee, the greatest trouble shall do thee the least harm, for God being
with thee, will bring thee out, as he did Israel through the sea, and the three
children out of the fire, with not so much as the savor of fire about them: so
shall not so much as the savor of evil be upon his, but he will compass
them about with songs of deliverance.

THE XCIV. LEGACY. When thou seem to be forgotten in affliction.
WHen thou seem to be forgotten in affliction, apply, Psalm. 9.9.18. The Lord
also will be a resnge for the oppressed: a refuge in times of trouble. For the
needy shall not always be forgotten: the expectation of the poor shall not
perish for ever.

Isai. 48.50. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have
compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will not I
forget thee. Psalm. 103.9. He will not always chide, neither will he keep his
anger for ever. Lam. 3.31, 32. The Lord will not cast off for ever. But though
he cause grief, yet will he have compassion, according to the multitude of his
mercies.

THE XCV. LEGACY. When thou fear to dye in misery.
When thou fear thou shall end thy days in misery, apply, Job. 36.11. They
shall spend their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasures.

THE XCVI. LEGACY. When thy sorrows grow great.
WHen thy sorrows grow great, apply, Job. 11.16. Thou shall forget thy misery,
and remember it as waters that pass away. Job. 8.20.21. Behold, God will not
cast away a perfect man, till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and thy lips
with rejoicing, Psalm. 27.14. Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thy
heart, Psalm. 112.4. Unto the upright there arises light in the darkness,
Psalm. 126.5.6. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. He that goes forth
and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with
rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.

Prove. 10.28. The hope of the righteous shall be gladness.

Matthew. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.

John 16.62. Ye now have sorrow: but I will see you again, and your hearts
shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you.

Has sorrow taken deep root in thy soul, that thou fear thou shall never
find hearty joy? apply, He shall comfort thine heart. Is such a cross upon
thee, that thou fear thou shall never forget it? apply, Thou shall forget
thy misery, as waters that pass away.

THE XCVII. LEGACY. When thou know no way out of misery for soul or body.
WHen thou art in such an estate, as thou know no way out of misery, either
for soul or body, or both, apply, Ier. 33.3. Call unto me, and I will answer
thee, and show thee great and mighty things which thou know not.

THE XCVIII. LEGACY. If thou would have deliverance out of trouble.
IF thou would have deliverance out of trouble apply, Psalm. 149.4. He will
beautify the meek with salvation: or, He will make the meek glorious by
deliverance

Psalm. 34.17.19. The righteous cry, and the Lord hears: and delivers them
out of all their troubles. Many are the afflictions of the righteous: but the
Lord delivers him out of them all. Job. 5.17, 18, 19. Happy is the man whom
God corrects, for he makes sore, and binds up: he wounds, and his hands
make whole. he shall deliver thee in six troubles, in seven there shall no
evil touch thee. Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble: I will
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.

When thou art in many troubles, and fear thou shall never get out of all,
apply, The Lord will deliver the out of all. If the Lord has delivered thee
once or twice, and thou fear he will not continue so still, as often as thou
fallest into troubles, apply, He shall deliver thee in six troubles, and the
seventh it shall not touch thee.

THE XCIX. LEGACY. If thine enemies prevail.
WHen thine enemies prevail, apply, Psalm. 125.3. Theroa of the wicked shall
not rest upon the lot of the righteous: least the righteous put forth their
hands unto iniquity: Psalm. 18.3. I will call upon the Lord: so shall I be saved
from mine enemies. 1. Sam. 2.10. The adversaries of the Lord shall be broken
to pieces: the eyes of the wicked shall fail, their refuge shall perish, their
hope shall be sorrow of mind. Job. 11.20. Deuteronomy. 28.7. The Lord shall cause
thine enemies that rise up against thee, to be smitten before thy face.

See thou many to rise up to trouble thee? apply, thine enemies that rise
against-thee, shall fall before thy face. Hope they to prevail against thee?
apply, their hope shall be sorrow of mind: Have they great means to cause them
to prosper? apply, their refuge shall perish. Have they long oppressed thee?
apply, the rod of the wicked shall not always rest upon the lot of the
righteous. See thou no means to get from them? say with the Prophet David I
will call upon the Lord, so shall I be safe from mine enemies.

THE C. LEGACY. That thou may be delivered, and thine enemies afflicted
THat thou may be delivered, and thine enemies afflicted in thy stead,
apply, Deuteronomy. 30.7. The Lord thy God will put all these curses upon thine
enemies, and on them that hate thee, which per secute thee. Prove. 21.18. The
wicked shall be a ransom for the righteous, and the transgressour for the
upright.

THE CI. LEGACY. Jf thou would have thine enemies destroyed, etc.
IF thou would have thine enemies destroyed, apply, Job. 8.22. They that hate
thee shall be cloat head with shame, and the dwelling place of the wicked shall
come to naught.

Isai. 41.11.13.15. Behold all they which-were incensed against thee shall be
ashamed and confounded, they shall be as nothing, and they that strive with
thee shall perish: for I the Lord thy God will hold thy right hand, saying unto
thee, Fear not, I will help thee. Thou shall thresh the mountains and beat
them small, and shall make the hills as chafe, by which mountains and hills,
is meant the greatest enemies. 1. Sam. 2.30. They that despise me shall be
lightly esteemed. These promises are to be applied by us, as they are the
enemies of God and his Gospel, and ours for his sake.

THE CII. LEGACY. Jf the wicked plot against thee.
IF the wicked plot against thee, apply, Psalm. 37.12. The wicked plot against
the just; their sword shall enter into their own heart, their bow shall be
broken. The Lord shall laugh at him. Isai. 54.15. The enemies shall surely
gather themselves together against thee, but not by me; whosoever shall gather
themselves together against thee shall fall.

THE CIII. LEGACY. In the troubles of the Church.
IN the troubles of the Church, apply, Psalm. 128.6. Thou shall see peace upon
Israel, verse. 5. Thou shall see the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy
life. Ier. 31.12. Thou shall come and sing in the height of Sion: when thou
have applied the promises, and used all the means, and yet find not thy
self filled with God, as thou desire, then comfort thy self with this, Yet
a little while, and when thou awakest, thou shall be satisfied with his Image.
Psalm. 17.15.

THE CIV. LEGACY. For the fall of Antichrist.
BEcause the time draws near of the fall of Antichrist, we must stir up
our selves to hasten the Lord by carnest prayers, and for the strengthening of
our faith, apply these promises, Rev. 17.16. And the ten horns which
thousawest upon the Beast, these shall hate the Whore, and shall make her
desolate and naked and shall eat her flesh, and shall burn her with fire, Rev.
18.8.21. Therefore shall her plagues come in in one day, death and mourning,
and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord
God who judges her. And a mightty Angel took up a great stone, like a great
Millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great
City Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all. Even so come
Lord Jesus, and hasten this happy day.

THE CV. LEGACY. For the calling of the Jews.
SEeing the Lord has promised many glorious things to the Jews with much
grace and peace, both to the Jews and Gentiles at their conversion; when the
run tribes shall be reunited to the two, which hever yet was, let us never
give him rest till he set up Jerusalem the praise of the world, and for the
strengthening of us in prayer, apply, these promises: Ezekiel. 37.21, 22. Thus
says the Lord God, Behold, I will take the children of Israel, from among the
heathen, whither they be gone, and will gather them on every side, and bring
them into their own land: and I will make them one nation, in the land upon
the mountains of Israel: and one King shall be King to them all, and they
shall be no more two Nations, neither shall they be divided into two Kingdoms
any more at all, Ier. 3.18. In those days the house of Judah shall walk with
the house of Israel, and they shall come together out of the land of the North
to the land that I have given for an inheritance unto your fathers: Isai. 60.2,
3, 4, 5.15.16. The Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon
thee. And the Gentiles shall come to the light, and Kings to the brightness of
thy rising, thy sons shall come from far, and thy daughters shall be nursed
at thy side then thou shall see and flow together, and thine heart shall fear
and be enlarged, because the Sea shall be converted unto thee: the forces of
the Gentiles shall come unto thee. Whereas thou have been for saken and hated,
so that no man went through thee, I will make thee an eternal excellency, a
joy of many generations: Thou shall also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and
shall suck the breast of Kings. Isai. 62.2, 3.49. The Gentiles shall see thy
righteousness, and all Kings thy glory, and thou shall be called by a new
name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name, thou shall also be a crown of
glory in the band of the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God.
Isai. 61.4, 5, 6. They shall build the old wastes, they shall raise up the
former desolations, they shall repair the wast cities, the desolations of many
generations. And strangers shall stand and feed your stocks, and the sons of
the alien shall by your plowmen, and your vine-dressers, but ye shall be named
the Priests of the Lord: men shall call you the ministers of our God, ye shall
eat the riches of the Gentiles, and in their glory shall you boast your selves.
Isai. 48.22, 23. Thus says the Lord: Behold, I will lift up my hand to the
Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people, and they shall bring thy sons
in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders, and
Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and their Queens thy nursing Mothers, they
shall bow down to thee with their face toward the earth, and lick up the dust
of thy feet.

A Postscript sent from the Author.
THese promises I have observed: many more there be of most excellent use, but
because they need opening for the understanding of them, I would not set them
down, least through the shallowness of my understanding I should wrong the
precious promises: but I picked out the most plain, and those that I found of
continual use for soul and body, which I have found much good by, for the
promises are our Legacies bequeathed to us in the will of our Father, and we
are to claim them, as we stand in need of any of them: and surely that God
which would not have children wronged in that which is bequeathed to them in
the will of their Fathers, much less will he withhold that which his Son
has bequeathed to us in his last will, which he sealeed with his blood,
Therefore let us sue for them, for he says, he will be sought to perform
them to us. And when thou applyest any promise, seek unto the condition, and
labor to keep it, and doubt not of the performance of what is promised, for he
is both able and faithful that has promised.

FINIS.
AN EPITOME OF PROMISES FOR THE SAINTS SVPPORT IN TIME OF TROVBLE.

The sixth Edition.

PSALM. 119.140. Thy Word is very pure, therefore thy servants love it. OXFORD,
Printed by LEON. LICHFIELD, for Samuel Enderby. An. Dom. 1640.

AN EPITOME OF PROMISES FOR THE SAINTS SVPPORT IN TIME OF TROVBLE.
Promises.
I.
THat God has freely loved his Elect in Christ Jesus.

I will be gracious, to whom I will be gracious: and I will show mercy, on whom
I will show mercy. Exodus 33.19. I even I am he that blotteth out thy
transgression: for mine own sake. Esa. 43.25.

I have blotted out as a thick Cloud thy transgressions. Esa. 44.22.

I will heal their backslidings: I will love them freely. Hosea 14.4.

II. That GOD has given Christ to death for his Elect.
I will put emnity between thee and the woman: it shall bruise thy head, and
thou shall bruise his heel. Genesis 3.15.

But he was wounded for our transgression. Esa. 53.5.

When he shall make his soul an offering for sin. 10.

Hewas numbered with the transgressors, and bare the sins of many. 12.

Seaventy weeks are determined upon the people to finish the transgressions,
and to make an end of sin. Dan. 9.24.

III. That we are freely justified by Jesus Christ.
So by the obedience of one, many shall be made righteous: Romans 5.19.

And are justified freely by his grace: through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus. Romans 3.24.

By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many. Esa. 53.11.

IV. That GOD has made a Covenant with his Children to be their GOD.
I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in
their generations for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee and to thy
seed after thee. Genesis 17.7.

I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my people. Lev.
26.26.

With great and eternal mercies will I gather thee. Esa. 54.7.

I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Ier. 31.33.

I will say to them; Thou art my people, and they shall say, thou art my God.
Hosea 2.23.

V. That GOD will call his Children to the knowledge of his Truth.
The meek will he teach his ways. Psalm. 25.9.

I will instruct thee, and teach thee in all the way that thou shall go. Psalm.
32.8.

All thy Children shall be taught of the Lord. Esa. 54.13.

For they shall all know me from the least of them to the greatest, says the
Lord. Ier. 31.34.

I am the Lordthy God which teaches thee to profit, and leads thee by the
way that thou should go. Esa. 48.17.

VI. That GOD will give his Spirit unto his children.
I will power out my spirit upon you. Prove. 1.23.

I will power water upon him that is thirsty. Esa. 44.3.

I will put my spirit within you. Ezekiel. 36.27.

I will power out my spirit upon all flesh. Joel 2.28

I will power upon the house of David the spirit. Zach. 12.10.

I will pray unto the Father, and he shall give you even the spirit of Truth.
John 14.16, 17.

VII. That GOD will cause his Children to trust in him by faith.
Many shall see it and fear, and shall trust in the Lord. Psalm. 40.3.

Under his wings shall thou trust. 91.4.

On my arms shall they trust. Esa. 51.1.

The just shall live by his faith. Hab. 2.4.

They shall trust in the name of the Lord. Zeph. 3.12.

In his Name shall the Gentiles trust. Matthew. 12.21.

VIII. That God will give his Children an humble and broken heart.
I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and I will give them a heart
of flesh. Ezekiel. 11.19.

I will power on them the spirit of supplication, and they shall mourn for him
as one mourns for his Only Son. Zach. 12.10.

Every mountain and hill shall be brought low. Luke 3.5.

The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart. Deuteronomy. 30.6.

X. That Gods Children shall have power to mortify and overcome sin.
For sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the Law, but
under Grace. Romans 6.12.

I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be cleansed from all your
filthiness. Ezekiel. 36.25.

He will subdue our iniquities. Micah. 7.19.

Every branch that bears fruit he purges it.

X. That the Children of God shall live a holy and sanctified life.
He shall be like a tree that brings forth fruit in his season. Psalm. 1.3.

I will put my Law into their inward parts. Ier. 31.33.

The sound thereof shall be as the wine of Lebanon. Hosea 14.7.

For their sakes sanctify I my self, that they may be sanctified through the
Truth. John 17.19.

In holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives. Luke 1.75.

The Lord of peace sanctify you throughout. 1. These. 5.23.

Faithful is he that has promised you. verse. 24.

XI They that love God.
I will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live. Deuteronomy.
30.6.

XII. That GOD will give his Children hearts to delight in all his holy
Ordinances.
With gladne sand rejoicing shall they be brought: They shall enter into the
Kings Palace. Psalm. 45.15.

Therefore with joy shall they draw waters out of the Wells of Salvation. Esa.
12.3.

And in this mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make unto all people a feast of
fat things. 25.26.

Even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joy full in my
house of Prayer. 56.7.

Ye shall be borne upon her sides, and be dandled upon her knees. 66.12.

So will I comfort you, and ye shall be comforted. 13.

And when ye see this, your hearts shall be comforted. 14.

The feast of the tenth month shall be unto the house of ludah, joy and
gladness, and cheerful Feasts. Zach. 8.19.

XIII That God will give his Children hearts to fear and serve him.
They shall sanctify my name, and sanctify the holiness of Jacob, and shall
fear the God of Israel. Esa. 29.23.

They shall serve the Lord their God, and David their King. Ier. 30.9.

I will give them one heart and one way, that they may fear me for ever. Ier.
32.39.

That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him
without fear. Luke 1.74.

XIV. That God will give his Children hearts to seek him by prayer.
He shall call upon me, and I will hear him. Psalm. 91.15.

Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall pray unto me, and I will hear you.
Ier. 29.12.

And ye shall seek me and find me: search for me with all your hearts. 13.

I will power upon the house of David, and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem
the spirit of Grace and of Supplication. Zach. 12.10.

XV. That God will hear the Prayers of his Children.
Call upon me in the day of Trouble, and I will deliver thee. Psalm. 50.15.

He shall call upon me, and I will answer him. 91.15.

He will hear their cry, and will save them. 145.19.

Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer. Esa. 58.9.

Before they call, I will answer, and while they are speaking I will hear.
65.24.

He shall seek me and shall find me, when you shall seek I will be found of
you. Ier. 29.13, 14.

Ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you. John 15.7.

Ask and it shall be given your seek and ye shall find. Matthew. 7.7.

What soever ye shall ask in prayer, believing ye shall receive. Mat. 21.22.

XVI. That we may persevere in grace.
They shall bring forth fruit in their old age. Psalm. 21.14.

His leaf shall not wither. 1.2.

The Lord (...) guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought; and
make fat thy bones; and thou shall be like a watered Garden, and like a spring
whose waters fail not. Esa. 58.11.

XVII. That God will give unto his Children the good things of this life.
But the meek shall inherit the earth: and shall delight themselves in the
abundance of pence. Psalm. 37.11.

There is no want to them that seek him. Psalm. 34.11.

They that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. 1 (...)

No good thing shall he withhold from them that walk uprightly. Psalm. 84.11.

XVIII. That God will guide his Children by his special providence in all
their ways.
I will not leave thee nor for sake thee. Heb. 13.15.

Then shall thou walk in thy way safely, and thy foot shall not stumble. Prove.
3.23.

For the Lord shall be thy Confidence. 26.

He shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways. Psalm.
91.11.

The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in. 121.8.

And even to your old age I am he, and even to hoare-haires will I carry you.
Esa. 46.4.

XIX. That God will bless those which are diligent in their Calling.
The Lord will command the blessing upon thee in all thou set thy hand
unto. Deuteronomy. 28.8.

Thou shall eat the labor of thy hand: happy shall thou be, and it shall be
well with thee. Psalm. 128.2.

The hand of the diligent makes rich. Prove. 10.4.

He that tilleth his land, shall be satisfied with bread. 12.11.

XX.
That God will bless those that keep his Sabbaths.

Blessed is the man that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it. Esa. 56.2.

If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my
holy day: and call the Sabbath a delight: 58.13.

Then shall etc. 14.

Then this City shall remain for ever. Ier. 17.24.25.

XXI. That God will reward those that are fruitful in good works.
He has given to the poor: his righteousness endures for ever. Ps. 112.9.

The liberal soul shall be made fat: and he that waters, shall be watered
also himself. Prove. 11.25.

Honor the Lord with thy sub stance, and with the first fruits of all thine
increase. Prove. 3.9.

So shall thy barnes be filled with plenty: and thy presses shall burst with
new wine. 10.

He that has a bountiful eye shall be blessed: for be gives of his bread to
the poor. Prove. 22.9.

He that gives to the poor shall not lack: but he that hides his eye, shall
have many a curse. Prove. 28.27.

Cast thy bread upon the waters: For thou shall find it after many days.
Eccles. 11.1.

Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Mat. 5.7.

Whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold
water: he shall in no wise loose his reward. Matthew. 10.42.

Then shall the King say to them on his right hand. Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
25.34.

XXII. That we shall receive good by he society of the faithful.
He that walks with wise men shall be wise. Prove. 13.20.

Then they that feared the Lord, spoke of ten one to another: and the Lord
hearkened and heard it. And a book of remembrance was written before him, for
them that feared the Lord and thought upon his Name. Malach. 3.16.

And they shall be mine says the Lord God of Hosts, in that day when I make
up my Jewels, and I will spare them, as a man spares his own son that
serves him. 17.

For where two or three be gathered together in my name: there am I in the
midst of them. Matthew. 18.20.

XXIII. That God will keep afflictions from his Children as it may be for
their good.
The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil. Psalm. 121.7.

The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in from this time forth
and for evermore.

He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shall thou trust:
his truth shall be thy Shield and Buckler. Psalm. 91.4.

There shall no evil befall thee: neither shall any plague come near thy
dwelling. 10.

As the mountains are about Jerusalem, so is the Lord about his people for
ever. Psalm. 125.2.

XXIV. That otherwise God will be with, preserve and keep his Children in
afflictions that they hurt them not.
In all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence
saved them: in his love, and in his pity he redeemed them, and he bare them
and carried them all the days of old. Esa. 63.9.

They shall not be ashamed in the evil time, and in the days of famine they
shall be satis sied. Psalm. 37.19.

He is their strength in the time of trouble. 39.

The Lord shall help and deliver them from the wicked, and save them because
they trust in him. 40.

Fear thou not, for I am with the, be not dismayed, for I am thy God; I will
strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee with the right
hand of my righteousness.

Fear not thou worm Jacob: I will help thee says the Lord God, and thy
Redeemer the hold One of Israel. 14.

When thou passest through the water I will be with thee: and through the
Rivers, that they shall not overflow thee. When thon walk through the fire,
thou shall not be burnt: neither shall the flames kindle upon thee. Esa. 43.2.

XXV. That God will deliver his Children out of afflictions in his due time.
He shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome
pestilence.

I will be with him in trouble: I will deliver him and honor him. 15.

Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of them
all. Psalm. 34.19.

Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee. Psalm. 50.15.

I will restore health unto thee: I will heal thee of thy wounds says the
Lord. Ier. 30.17.

I will deliver thee in that day, and thou shall not fall by the sword. Ier.
39.17. John. 3.19.

XXVI. That God will sanctify all afflictions for the good of his people.
I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away
all thy tynne. Esa. 1.25.

By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the
fruit to take away his sin. Esa. 27.9.

And some of them of understanding shall fall to try them, and to purge and
make them white. Dan. 11.35.

Many shall be purified and made white and tried. Dan. 12.10.

And I will bring the third part through the fire: and I will refine them as
silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried: they shall call on my
Name, and I will hear them. Zach. 13.9.

XXVIII. That God in his own time will subdue all the enemies of his Church.
I will subdue all thy enemies. 2. Chr. 17.

I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the King of Assyria: and the
glory of his high looks. Esa. 10.12.

Therefore I will put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips: and I
will turn thee back by the way which thou came. Esa. 37.29.

For the arms of the wicked shall be broken. Psalm. 37.17.

I am against thee O Gog. Ezekiel. 39.1.

And I will turn thee back. 2.

And then shall that wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the
spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming. 2.
These. 2.8.

And the ten horns, these shall hate the whore and shall make her desolate and
naked, and shall eat her flesh and burn her with fire. Rev. 17.16.

I will smite thy bow our of thy left hand, and I will cause thy arrows to
fall out of thy right hand. Ezekiel. 39.3.

XXVIII. That the Children of God shall dye happily.
They shall come to the grave in a full age: like as a shocke of Corn comes
in his season. Job. 5.26.

He shall go in peace, they shall rest in their beds: each one walking in his
uprightness. Esa. 57.2.

Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that man is
peace. Psalm. 37.37.

XXIX. That the just shall be raised unto eternal life.
I will ransom them from the power of the grave: I will redeem them from
death: O death, I will be thy plague: O grave, I will be thy destruction. Hos.
13.14.

And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake to
everlasting life, and some to shame. Dan. 12.2.

All that are in the graves shall come forth: they that have done good, unto
the Resurrection of life. Ioh. 5.29.

I will raise him up at the last day. 6.40.

He that raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by Jesus. 2. Cor.
4.14.

When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye appear with him in
glory. Colos. 3.4.

XXX. That God will reward the labors of the righteous in the life to come.
Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. Matthew. 5.12.

Whosoever shall forsake houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother,
or wife, or children, or lands for my Names sake, h shall receive a hundred fold
more, and shall inherit everlasting life. 19.29.

Come ye blessed of my Father: inherit yet the Kingdom prepared for you before
the foundation of the world. Math. 25.34.

Thou shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the just. Luke 14.14.

He that overcomes shall inherit all things. Rev. 21.7.

XXXI. That God will make good and perform all that he has promised
And I will perform the Oath which I swear unto Abraham thy Father. Genesis 26.3.

Know therefore that the Lord thy God he is God; the faithful God; which
keeps Covenant and mercy with them that love him. Deuteronomy. 7.9.

Blessed be the Lord that has given rest unto his people; there has not
failed one word of all his good promises which he promised. 1. Kings 8.56.

My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my
lips. Psalm. 89.34.

Thus says the Lord, if you can break my Covenant of the day, and my Covenant
of the night; That there should not be day and night in their season, Ier.
33.20.

Then may also my Covenant be broken. 21.

For all the promises of God in him are yea, and in him, Amen. 2. Cor. 1.20.

1. GIve me understanding and I shall keep thy Word: yea I will observe it
with my whole heart. Psalm. 119.34.

Deal with thy servant according thy mercies, and teach me thy Statutes.
Psalm. 119.124.

2. How sweet are thy words unto my taste: yea sweeter then honey to my mouth.
Psalm. 119.103.

What shall J render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? Psalm.
116.12.

3. Consider how I love thy precepts, quicken me O Lord, according to thy
loving kindness. Psalm. 119.159.

With my whole heart have I sought thee, O let me not wander from thy
Commandments. Psalm. 119.10.

4. For ever O Lord, thy Word is settled in heaven: thy faithfulness is unto
all generations. Psalm. 113.19.

Plead my cause and deliver me, quicken me according to thy Word. Psalm. 119.154.

5. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven and in earth. Psalm.
335.6.

Make me to understand the way of thy precepts, so shall I talk of thy
wondrous works. Psalm. 11.27.

6. Remember thy Word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope.
Psalm. 119.49.

Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwells on high? Psalm. 113.5.

7. Incline my heart unto thy Testimony, and not unto Covetousness. Psalm.
119.36.

When my spirit was overwhelmed within me, thou knew my paths Psalm. 142.3.

8. My soul is continually in my hand, yet do J not forget thy Law, Psalm.
119.109.

Stablish thy word unto thy servant, who is devoted to thy fear. Psalm. 119.38.

A POSTSCRIPT, TO ALL TRVE BELIEVERS.
Gracious Believers,
KNowing you to be the only heirs of those rich and precious promises, which
it has pleased our gracious Father freely to give unto his freely beloved
Children: I have presumed without your knowledge, to bequeath unto you a
fatherless child brought forth into the world without the parents knowledge,
hoping you will not be unwilling to let it pass under your favorable
protection, For the subject matter of it, it is very beautiful, and of such
use, as no child of God can pass to Heaven without it, and in that regard, it
shall be no shame unto you whom the Lord has honored with the grace of
believing, to accept of this small, Treatise from one that desires your
prospering in your souls and bodies. There is no blemish in this that I
dedicate unto you, but such as came by the hands of the unskilful bringer
forth of it, which only minded their own good in it. And weighing daily the
beauty of it, and the sweet refreshing strength which flowed from it, for the
overcomming of those three deadly enemies, the Devil, Sin, and the World, they
desired that Ged would be pleased to move the minds of some of his most
skillful workmen, to put to their hands to frame a more perfect work upon so
perfect a subject, and to give a more comely form, to this so beautiful a
subject, and till then they intended to smoother in their bosoms the beauty of
this, rather then to bring it forth with the blemishes of their unskilfulnesse.
But the good that may be gained by it being unutterable, I hope grace in the
hearts of Gods people will cause them, like the Be, to suck out the sweet and
nourishing virtue of these fragrant flowers, that grow here and there in the
garden of Gods word, and not with discontent to cast away this pleasant posy
gathered out of the celestial Eden of the sacred Scriptures, because an
unskilful hand, and indeed unworthy, has bound them up together, not so
orderly as might please the curious eye of man, no nor their own, neither was
it their aim so to do. J fany gain any good by it, the gatherer of these
sweet flowers together, neither deserves nor desires thanks, for they intended
it to none but to themselves, and some private friends, whose importunity wrung
some copies from them, and now without their consent have published it. And now
since it is published and cannot be stopped, the Lord cause it to work in all
his, according to that which he has given the promises for to work in the
hearts of his people, even to make them partakers of the divine nature. 2. Pet.
1.4. And as a means to make them to take every day a little posy from the rest,
one of the promises gathered together, and apply it to thy self, see how thou
stand in need of it, and every word in it, and then apply it to thy self by
faith, and let it stir thee up to go to God in prayer for the accomplishment
of them unto thee, then wait in the diligent use of all means for the gayning
of them, and you shall find God not only making you heirs of promises, but you
shall be comfortable possessours of those many good things which God has
promised to Believers. The more you meditate, and the oftener you ^ay upon them,
the more good will you see in them, and find flow from them. I say no more, but
I doubt not, but your experiences of good by these promises will be more then I
can make known unto you. I desire the God of mercies, our loving father, in
our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom all the promises are Yea and Amen, to make you
daily find experimentally, the truth of all his gracious promises.

FIVE TABLES FOR THE Right and Ready finding out of any Promise in this Book,
for the comfortable supply of present necessity: the number shows the page,
where the Promise (we would have) is to be found.
The 1. Table, Concerning sin.
RVles for reading the Promises. If we find nothing in our selves that may move
God. page 1. If we fear God will remember our sins to punish them. page 4.
If often sinning cause thee doubt of pardon. page 5. If thou despair. page 6.
If thou find sin an heavy burden and Satan pursuing. page 8. If thou turn
from sin, and yet doubt of pardon. page 10. If thou would have thy manifold
rebellions subdued. page 13. If thy heart be hard and full of corruption. page
14. If unbridled nature break out into passion. page 16. If thou be in bondage
to some sin. page 17. If thou fear the breaking out of strong sins. page
18. When thou art stayed from sin by admonition. page 20. If thou fear God
will destroy thee for sin. page 21. If thou be tempted to uncleanness. page
22. If thou can not find out thy sin, for which God corrects thee. page 23.
If thou doubt of salvation. page 24.
The 2. Table. Concerning Grace.
IF thine heart be as a wilderness, barren of good. page 25. If thou want
holiness. page 29. When thou can not offer up any sacrifice. page 30. When
thou feel but little grace. page 31. When all thy graces are weak. page 32.
When thy heart is dry for want of grace. page 35. If thou want the spirit.
page 38. If looking on Gods love, thou can not love God again. page 39. If
thou can not bring thine heart to delight in the Lord. page 40. If thou
feel not Gods fear in thine heart. page 41. If thine heart will not praise
the Lord. page. 42. If thou want wisdom. page 43. If thou can not
understand Gods voice. page 44 If thou can not see into the mysteries of the
Gospel. page 45. If thou see a good way and have no power to walk in it.
page 46. If thou want memory. page 48. When thou see thine ignorance. page
49. If thou desire grace and art not fatisfied. page 52. If thine heart be
dead. page 54. If thou fear falling away. page 55. If thou art fallen page
58. When the Lord has forsaken thee p. 60. When thou feel thy vileness.
page 62. When thou feel thy spiritual poverty. page 64. When thou art in a
strait. page 65. If thou fear Satan will cause thee to fall. page 67. If
thou can not profit by the word of God. page 69. If thou find thy self
unlike Gods people. page 70. If thou would have Gods blessing rest upon thee.
page 71. If thou would be a blessing in thy place. page 72. If thou
separatest from the wicked in their corrupt worship. page ibid. A promise to be
applied in every ordinance. page 74. When thou prayest. page 75. When thou
meditatest. page 76. In meditating, conferring, reading Gods word. page 78. In
reading of the word if thou understandest not. page 79. If thou can not
confer. page 80. When thou art to go to the assemblies. page 82. Would
thou enjoy the ordinances of God, and a blessing upon them. page 87. If thou
enjoiest grace or means of grace. page 89. When thou art banished from Gods
ordinances. page 91. Whilst thou art banished from Gods house. page 94. When
wicked sheepheards are over us. page 96. When through wicked sheepheards thou
art come to great misery. page 98.
The 3. Table. For comfort in time of persecution.
When thou set thy self to fast. page 100. If thou art railed upon for
well doing. page 101. If thou art perseucted. page 102. In partaking with Gods
people in suffering. page 104. When thou art called to defend the truth. page
ibid.
The 4. Table. Concerning earthly things.
IF thou would bring forth seasonable fruit for every estate. page 106. If
thou have children. page 107. If thou want children. page 109. If the Lord
deny thee children. page 110. If thou would have a comfortable and holy use
of thy habitation. page 111. If thou would have thy going out, and coming in
blessed. page 112. When thou eatest or enjoyest any blessing, that it may
satisfy, and be sanctified. page 113. When thou take thy rest at night, etc.
page 114. When thou put thy hand to any work. page 115. If thou would
have thine outward blessings blessed. page 116. If thou desire to enjoy the
Iabours of thine hands. page 118. If thou art diligent in thy calling. p. 119.
When thou see wicked men follow unsatisfying things with restless desires
and thou desire content. page 120. If thou fear thou shall loose by
following the Lord. page 121. When thou have lost blessings by sin. page 122.
If thou fear loss of thy good name. page 123. If the world despise thee,
etc. page 124. When thou art in want for soul or body. page 126. In liberal
giving. page 127. If sickness be among us. page 129. If thou fear death.
page 131. If thou fear untimely death. page 132. If thou fear hurt by any
of the creatures. page 133. When thou have a troubled heart. p. 134. If thou
would have thy purpose to prosper. page 135. When thou art called to a great
work. page 136. In times of danger. page 138. When thou art in great troubles.
etc. page 139. When thou seem to be forgotten in affliction. page 141. When
thou fear to dye in misery. page 142. When thy sorrows grow great. p. 143.
When thou know no way out of misery for soul or body. page 145. If thou
would have deliverance out of trouble. page 146. If thine enemies prevail.
page 147. That thou may be delivered, and thine enemies afflicted. page 149.
If thou would have thine enemies destroyed, etc. page 150. If the wicked plot
against thee. p. 151. In the troubles of the Church. page 152. For the fall of
Antichrist. page 153. For the calling of the Jews. page 154.
The 5. Table. For the Saints support in time of trouble.
THat God has freely loved his Elect in Christ Jesus. page 1. That God has
given Christ to death for his Elect. page 2. That we are are freely justified
by Jesus Christ. page 3. That God has made a covenant with his Children to be
their God. page 4. That God will call his children to the knowledge of his
truth. page 5. That God will give his Spirit unto his Childern. page 6. That
God will cause his children to trust in him by faith. page 7. That God will
give his children an humble and broken heart. page 8. That Gods children shall
have power to mortify and over come sin. page 9. That the children of God
shall live a holy and sanctified life. page ib. That they shall love God. page
10. That God will give his children hearts to delight in all his holy
Ordinances. p. 11. That God will give his Children hearts to fear and serve
him. page 12. That God will give his Children hearts to seek him by prayer.
page 13. That God will hear the prayers of his Children. page 14. That we may
persevere in grace. page 15. That God will give unto his Children the good
things of this life. page 16. That God will guide his Children by his special
providence in all their ways. page 17. That God will bless those which are
diligent in their Calling. page 18. That God will bless those that keep his
Sabbaths. page ibid, That God will reward those that are fruitful in good
works. page 19. That we shall receive good by the society of the faithful.
page 21. That God will keep afflictions from his children as it may be for
their good. p. 22. That other wise God will be with, preserve, and keep his
children in afflictions that they hurt them not. page 23. That God will deliver
his childen out off afflictions in his due time. page 24. That God will
sanctify all afflictions for the good of his children. page 25. That God in his
own time will subdue all the enemies of his Church. page 26. That the children
of God shall dye happily. page 28. That the just shall be raised unto eter.
nall life. page ib. That God will reward the labors of the righteous in the
life to come. page 29. That God will make good and perform all that he has
promised. page 30.
FINIS.

