A BRIEF REFVTATION OF JOHN TRASKES IVDAICAL AND NOVEL FANCYES.

Stiling himself Minister of Gods Word, imprisoned for the Laws eternal
Perfection, or Gods Laws perfect Eternity.

By B. D. Catholic Divine.

Gal. 3. Verse. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being
made a curse for us. Imprinted with License, M. DC. XVIII.

THE PREFACE.
THE Controversies handled in this short Treatise are two: The first is of the
Jews Sabbath, Apostolically translated into the ever memorable day of our
Saviors Resurection. The second, whether al forts of meats may be lawfully
now eaten by Christians: disputed against John Traske, of a Puritan minister
lately grown half a lew in his singular opinions concerning the old Sabbath,
and Moysaical difference of meats, held by him and many other men and women,
obstinately professing and practicing the same doctrines, as moral Laws
vnreapealed by Christ, and necessarily now to be observed by Christians. His
only learning is a litterall knowledge of Scriptures, and some little Hebrew
and Greek lately learned for the better understanding of them: which alone he
holds sufficient, not only to instruct us in all points of faith, but to
direct us also in our particular thoughts, speeches, and actions; so as no
manner of speech is by Christians to be used, no meat to be eaten, no kind of
apparel to be worn etc. not particularly expressed and warranted in
Scripture. Huma^e judgment and experience (whereby we are originally taught to
discern the natural goodness and evil of al our actions, and to make a
conscience of them) being so little regarded by him, as he ridiculously deemeth
it not to be any rule at all to direct Christian men in common manners and
morality of life; God himself having by a higher law contained in the old and
new Testament, particulerly instructed them in all holy and needful knowledge.

Out of which ground he deduceth, as I shall have several occasions to declare
afterward, strange Conclusions and Distinctions not easy to be distintly
known and refuted by any learned man that has not from his own mouth hard
them. This was my chief reason to write these two Controversies against him,
whereby so^e of his disciples may peradventure be reclaymed from his gross
doctrines; and other itching eared people now inclinable to his Sect, may be
moved utterly to forsake him. And one soul so happily gained to a nearer
degree of truth, will make me think a few spare hours well bestowed from
better studies. Learned men also will gladly, perchance, spare an idle hour or
two to read a new Controversy, briefly, as I could contriue it, and plainly
expressed. Smaller errors, and of less consequence then these novel fancies
of Traske have been by sundry holy Fathers answered in large volums, which may
well serve to show my labors not wholly needles.

Little sparks of fire not timely quenched, soon grow into flames, that
devour houses and Cities. Small wounds wax festered soars, when they are
not speedily cured. Single seeds of tare and cockle sown in fields amongst
good Corn make great bundles in harvest, fit only for combustion. And the
miserable experience of these latter times abounding with nouel and heretical
doctrines, witnesses, that as plaguey people are for fear of infecting others
carefully to be secluded; and small leakes in a ship are speedily to be stopped
for the safety of such persons as sail in it: so all moral and pious
diligence is by Governors and Guiders of souls to be used for the timely
prevention and suppressing of pernicious opinions, with which Traske is so
stored, as he is in very few points of our Christian faith rightly persuaded.

He has 8. arguments to prove that Melchisedech was the holy Ghost mentioned
Genes. 14. Hebr. 7. He is infallibly assured, that he himself has truly
repented, and is made sure of his eternal election in Christ: and that he can
in this life neither sin, nor repent any more. Likewis, he is able to collect
out of Scripture when Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and other Saints were truly.
penitent and justified in Gods sight: and will often presume to tell his
disciples, whether at all, or when, they truly repented. Yea he is able, as I
have heard, by Phisiognomy, to make certain ghesses whether particular persons
shall be damned or saved. His own and his disciples prayers are commonly
roaringes, and such loud outcries as may be heard in distant rooms and
houses, voluntarily framed, and filled for the most part with frequent
imprecations, that God would confound the adversaries and persecutors of his
little flock, such as walk in the lust of their own flesh, eating like the
Idolatrous Gentiles all prohibited and unclean meats; profaning his holy
Sabbath, and changing it into another day never commanded by him, but by
themselves invented; Frequently rendering thanks to God for keeping them so
holy as hitherto he has done, and desiring him according to their vprightnes
to bless and protect them.

Pretended revelations also are not wanting amongst them. He will tell you of
straung abstinences from food and other great austerities used by himself,
notwithstanding his cheeks seem full, and his body still fatt and in good
liking. He will with great glory utter the singular approuement made of him in
his Ministerial ordination, when other Country Scholars were rejected,
himself having never been more the^ a guest in any University. His excellency
above others was chiefly occasioned by a perfect Sum of all Divinity, only
abstracted by his own Confession out of Musculus his common Places. When he
was a schoolmaster at a Gentleman's house in Somersetshire to a few Grammar
scholars, he could write and speak pure latin, as he gravely told one of his
fellow prisoners, which in his riper and maturer studies since of Divinity, he
has quite forgotten, and altered his Ciceronian wonted style into the humble
and plain phrase of Scripture; and indeed much more barbarous. When he was
reprehended by an Adversary for denying the minor of an enthimeme, he produced
in excuse of his gross ignorance Rhamus logique, only affirming an enthimeme
to be an imperfect sillogisme, and said, that Ramists and Aristotelians could
not understand each others terms and manner of disputing but after much
practice together. He will brag of many books written, and some of them
dedicated by him to his Majesty, who because he eats not willingly swines
flesh, he supposes by his Princely nature half framed and fitted to embrace
and profess his doctrines, which he is confident to have generally one day
held in our English, and all other Protestant Churches.

Hearing that Master Howes the Continuer and Augmenter of Master Stowes
cronicle was desirous to see him, out of a vain desire to have al
circumstances of his person and opinions historically blazed, he wrote a letter
to Master Howes fully to inform him of both, mentioning therein the day,
order, and continuance of his imprisonment, if he listed so to recount them. He
will tell you how many public Lectures he made weekly with great applause
during his abode with Master Drake in Devonshire, and how his chamber lay open
besides to all comers, day and night for private instruction, showing himself
a Fool, if not a Pharisy, in affecting humane praises so palpably, in all his
speeches and actions.

Two of disciples only understand Latin as well as himself: the one a poor
seduced Gentleman, better skilled in Hebrew then himself, and equally
conversant in Scripture: the other a Comfit-maker, who lately undertook by
Traskes directions, as is probably guessed, to publish his doctrinall
conclusions, and to defend them against M. Crashaw who has written an idle and
loose refutation of them. For contrary to his common Pulpit-doctrine, and
raylinges against Catholics, for admitting traditions and points of faith not
contained in Scripture, he supposes without further proof, that Christ in
conversation with his Apostles after his Resurrection, taught our keeping of
the Sunday in place of the Sabbath, that being a mere Tradition no where
mentioned in Scripture. Which sorts of advantage are craftily observed by
Traske in all conferences of learned Protestants with him, and he will not
stick in answering their arguments deduced from the authority and universal
practice of Christ's Church in all ages before him, to tell them, that they
fight against him with the Catholics borrowed weapons, and in their strokes at
him, wound themselves more deeply, overthrowing most opinions of their own
faith, which are as strange and unheard of, till within the last 100. years,
as his doctrines, and equally repugnant to the ancient authority and known
practice of all Christendom in times past. So that if his ground of admitting
no doctrine not expressed in Scripture be shaken, their Religion will totter
also. For the same authentical testimonies of antiquity which serve to prove
the Apostolical observation of the Sunday, do likewise mention Liturgies and
Massing Sacrifices celebrated by Christians in their public sinaxes and
meetings on festival and dominicall days, testified by S. Augustine sermon.
251. de tempore, by S. Cyprian de oper. and eleemosyn. by the Fathers of the
Agathen Council cap. 47. by the 6. Oecumenicall Council cap. 8. and sundry
other ancient authors.

His Ipse dixit, and sole assertion is a sufficient rule of faith to all his
disciples, among whom if any chance to grow wiser (as many of them lately have
done) and to depart from his doctrine, he will seem to have formerly feared
and foreknown that man's frailty and final reprobation. Thus not long since he
dealt with one of them, who notwithstanding then protested that Traske had
heertofore under his own hand warranted his true repentance, and eternal
election in Christ Jesus, though passion at that time transported him to make a
contrary judgment of him.

There is nothing more troublesome to him and his disciples, then to be termed
ignorant or absurd in any of their assertions. And albeit himself seems
modest and temperate in his speeches and carriage: yet anger and malice hidden
in his heart, soon breaks out, upon very small occasions, into railing and
ill terms, such as himself will condemn in others by many Texts of
Scripture. Which his dangerous disposition tried by one of his Protestant
fellow prisoners and other personal facts I purposely here forbear to
relate, having more authentical testimonies against him.

His frequent Solecismes when now and then he boulteth out a word or line of
Latin, as to say: Index expurgatorium etc are for quietness sake to be accounted
but lapsus linguae, unfit to be told him. His barbarismes in speaking or
writing must pass currently as Hebraismes and Scripture-phrases: and all his
arguments are to be accounted no other then formal and conuincing
demonstrations. Among which for proof that S. Peter and the Apostles still
observed the legal difference of meats, this one for example is his Achylles,
written to my knowledge by him in three several discourses sent to one of his
fellow prisoners.

Qui ambulat in praecepto veteri recepto a Patre, ambulat secundum legem
discriminis inter animal quod comeditur, and animal: quod non comeditur.

Sed Petrus ambulauit in praecepto veteri recepto a Patre.

Ergo ambulauit secundum legem discriminis inter animal quod comeditur, and
animal quod non comeditur.

Thus Englished.

He that walks in the old Commandment received from the Father, walks
according to the Law of difference between the living creature that is to be
eaten, and the living creature that is not to be eaten.

But Peter walked in the old Commandment etc.

If you tell him first that his syllogism is tedious and composed in barbarous
Latin, unfit to come from the pen of an ancient schoolmaister and professed
Grammarian: He will falsely tell you that Praecepto veteri recepto a Patre etc.
is the express phrase of S. John in his first Canonical Epistle.

If you further tell him, that his argument is ridiculous in sense and form,
as having no medium at all in the premises to prove the conclusion; to walk in
the old Commandment etc. and to walk according to the law of difference etc
being in sense all one, in words only changed. He will more absurdly tell you,
that by the old Commandment etc. he meant Gods precept given to Adam in
Paradise, which all learned men know to have been a personal precept of
abstayning from the fruit of one tree, not concerning S. Peter afterward or
any Christian, more then to the general known doctrine of Adams transgression
thereof fearfully punished in his posterity. And to deter his adversary from
laughing at this argument, and other more ridiculous passages of his papers, he
added this Caveat for a grave conclusion, or memorable sentence of instruction.

Si forte dum loquutus fuero, postmodum vero sermonem meum subsannato. If when
peradventure I shall have spoken; but afterward laugh at my speech. Wherein
any learned man may plainly see indeed his wonted Ciceronian style strangely
altered.

By reading in Eusebius history lib. 1. cap. 22. how Saint Policarpe and other
holy Bishops of Asia observed the Jews time of keeping Easter, he and his
disciples are lately therein resolved to imitate them. And that which he never
read of S. Policarpe or any Christian Doctor before him, he has added to his
Easter the festival observance of Azimes, as is probably guessed by all his
fellow prisoners; seeing him and his disciples after the fourtenth of March
moon to eat contrary to their custom at other times, white unleavened
loaves, and seeming in his speeches to allow of the observance of that
festiuity, albeit of the manner he be something doubtful, as peradventure,
whether it must be with a Phascall Lamb eaten etc.

He esteems it no arrogance or pride of judgment in him to dissent in his
doctrines from all known Christians, either living now, or in any age before
him. Neither will he yield it to be a dangerous nouelty and notable giddines in
him to change, and coin at his pleasure weekly doctrines; defending them with
such peremptory pride of judgment, as if he had received clear and certain
revelations thereof.

The order of my discourse is easy to be discerned by the titles of my
questions in both Controuersyes. My manner of writing is to declare and refute
his assertions with as much breuity and plainness as I could contriue each
question. I cite not many authors for any opinions, both because my adversary
contemns such proofs, as also for that I want the commodity of a Library to
collect them. I have intentionally written this Preface to discover Traskes
opinions, not to disgrace his person, further then I conceived personal
circumstances fitly uttered to express fully the grounds and occasions of his
doctrines: having to authorize me therein sundry examples of great Saints, not
sparing to relate grosser passages, then here I have done, of their
Heresiarchicall Adversaries, who as Devils in their fearful apparitions by
platter-eyes, cloven feet, or stinking smells are wont to be discerned: so
they truly wolves in sheeps garments, are by leuity of Doctrine, pride of
judgment, and other personal demeanours easily discovered to want the innocent
humble nature of lambs, conterfaited by them. And as he that puts himself
on a stage to play the Fools part, must patiently expect laughter from his
beholders: so Traske broaching his heretical fancies, must prudently prepare
himself to be more then smiled at by judicious Readers.

THE I. CONTROVERSY.
QVESTION I. Of the seventh Day before Moses.
JOHN Traske seems falsely to suppose, and Master Cra. his Adversary as
lightly to grant, that a Sabbath, or seventh day of rest from bodily labor
was from the beginning of man's Creation commanded by God, and by faithful
people continually observed: grounding as it should seem this their assertion
upon the holy text of Genesis cap. 2. v. 3. wherein God is said to have rested
from his labors, blessed and sanctified the seventh day. As if for God to
sanctify and design a day to be holy afterward, observed in his especial
honor and service, were all one as to make it a sabbath, or day of rest from
external labors; which is most false, and may be easily disproued by sundry
plain examples in the Moysaicall feasts of Azimes, Tabernacles etc. Wherein
amongst eight holy ferialls or festival days celebrated with peculiar
sacrifices and ceremonies commanded in them, Leuit. 3. verse. 8. 36 37. the
first and eight only were to be observed as sabaoths and days of rest from
corporal labors.

So that God might sanctify and design the seventh day to be holy, and
especially honored therein by Adam and his faithful posterity, and yet not
make it such a sabbath, as afterward he commanded Exodus 20. verse. 8. 9. that
strict manner of rest from eternal labors, being no essential condition, but
only a cerimoniall solemnity of a sanctified day, as those already instanced
textes of Leuiticus do import: in which it is said of the first and eight
days, that they should be more solemn the^: he other six; and immediately God
commanded in them abstinence from all sorts of bodily labors, which
notwithstanding when they are either necessary in themselves, or charitably
expedient for others, cannot be accounted moral breaches, profaning that day
in which they are, with due honor and praise otherwise given to God, moderatly
performed: That representation of Gods rest by ours on the seventh day which
is chiefly respected and often instanced by John Traske, being only a typical
or figurative respect, having no holiness or morality in itself further then
moderate rest from servile and continual labors, as needful and convenient
for all men to perform their thankful duty and service toward Almighty God,
and less oftentimes interrupted and hindered by external exercise of the
body, then by superfluous sleep, idle words, or distractiue thoughts not
expressly forbiden in the precept of the Sabbath, which according to the strict
and ceremonious observance thereof from corporal labors is no where in the
whole history of Genesis intimated to have been observed by Abraham and other
Patrarches, whose labors, iournies, manner of spe^ding their lives, altars
erected, sacrifices offered, exequies celebrated, covenants and laws given by
God, and holily by them observed, are without any insinuation of such a Sabbath
particulerly recounted.

Moreover many passages of that sacred history seem evidently to import, that
before Moses time their was no such Sabbath commanded by God, or by holy
people practiced, as Genesis 31. verse. 40. 41. Where Jacob pleading his
faithful and diligent services done to Laban, he testifies him self to have
endured laborious days and sleeplesse nights for twenty years together,
making no exception of Sabbath days, as he would have done no doubt if such
had then ben observed by him. And Exodus 5. verse. 19. the labors of his
children are said to have been per singulos dies, every day prefixed and exacted
by Pharaos officers, without any insinuation of Sabaoths interposed. And to
say, as John Traske seems in his conference to do, that as the first
institution of marriage was by degrees corrupted. with bigamy and diuorcing one
wife to marry another afterward, Math. 19. verse. 8. So the Sabbath likewise
in process of time grew neglected by gods people, until in his law he renewed
the old institution thereof, is coniecturally only affirmed, Christ himself
having taught us the first institution of marriage to have been so depraved: but
no mention is made in scripture at all of the old Sabbath neglected.

Who likewise sees not, that neither the Patriarchs themselves nor their holy
progeny being known to have observed any Sabbath, but that it were a far more
pious and profitable conjecture thence rather to infer, that no Sabbath was
then commanded, then that such holy persons neglected the dew observance
thereof, and lived Idolaters of Gods precept against his own express
testimony given of Abraham Genes. 26. verse. 5. Where he is said to have obayed
Gods voice, kept his precepts, comandements, ceremonies, and laws; amongst
which John Traske groundlesly and idly supposes to have been included the
observance of the sabbath, sithence no such precept given to Abraham, or
practice thereof can be found mentioned in scripture, until the Israelites
returning out of Egypt came into the desert of Sin, and began to be feed on the
Manna rayned down unto them Exodus 16. verse. 5. of which they were commanded to
gather only six days, and on the sixth day they were willed to gather a double
measure to serve the day following; Moses then first beginning to tell them,
verse. 23. and 26. that God had spoken unto him, that on the morrow, which was
the seaue^th day of gathering that miraculous food, the rest of the Sabbath was
to be sanctified to our Lord.

And when the Israelits either not crediting or not understanding that which
Moses had told them, went out to gather Ma^na on the 7. day as they had done
on the other six days before (which is an evident sign that as yet they held
not such labors of providing corporal food unlawful any day) they found
none. And Moses said unto them: Behold, God has allotted you a Sabbath,
giving you double provision of food on the sixth day to serve you the seventh
day, wherefore let every man remain with himself, or in his own tent, and let
him not go out on the seventh day: and the people then sabathized, or began to
observe the Sabbath on the seventh day; first then being taught (says Philo
lib 1. de vita Moysis) not only by Prophetical instruction, but also by a most
manifest argument of the Manna ceased to be rayned down that day, and
continuing incorupted which was gathered in a double measure on the sixth day,
that the same was the seventh day wherein God rested from his labors, they
having long before desired to know the day of the worlds first creation, and
could not till then learn it: which observance God afterward commanded, and
wrote in the first Table of the Decalogue, willing his people not only to
sanctify and keep holy the seventh day, but expressly also forbidding them all
sorts of external labors, in memory that him self had rested from his
labors on that day, calling it therefore in hebrew Saphath of the word Sacath,
which signifies to rest.

QVESTION II. Whether the precept of the Sabbath were Moral, or Cerimoniall.
JOHN Traske seems not in any of his speeches or writings rightly to
understand wherein the morality of any Law or Precept consists; neither does
Master Cra. his superficial adversary endeavor in his confused answer to
instruct him in the true understanding thereof, as he ought specially to have
done, considering that all Traskes singular opinions are chiefly grounded in a
wrongefull conceyuing of some Moysaical precepts to have been moral, and so
consequently not abrogated by Christ's coming, which were indeed morally
cerimoniall, according to that precise figurative and mysterious manner, at the
least commanded to the Jews, in the observance of them.

Here therefore for both their instructions I define the morality of a law or
precept, to consist in that conformity which it has to the natural light of
humane understanding and judgment, taught in all true Philosophy, to be the
rule of natural and moral actions, and rightly termed by the Apostle ad Romans
cap. 2. verse. 14. and 15. A Law written by God, even in the hearts of such
Gentills, as had no knowledge of any other supernatural law, approving them in
good, and reprehending them in evil actions, causing in them that practical
internal knowledge called Conscience, and justly serving to condemn all such
as contradict, and do against it.

So that only such laws and precepts are said to be moral which are
conformable to this Synderesis, and natural light of humane judgment,
perfected by grace, as well in the knowledge of natural objects, as of
supernatural and revealed verities: amongst which some are purely speculatiue,
and do only require a faithful, pious, and firm assent of our judgment unto
them: and others contrarily are in their own nature practical precepts and
divine directions or laws, commanding or forbidding things to be done by us,
which if they be such, according to the substance or manner of the act
commanded or forbidden by them, as do appear to humane understanding and
judgment voluntarily to have been commanded by God, and exacted in due
obedience from us his Creatures for such mysterious respects, as natural
judgment cannot apprehend to be necessary or any way belonging to our direction
in manners, and morality of life toward God, our selves, or our neighbors;
those precepts are not to be accounted moral, but mysterious and ceremonial
abrogated by Christ, as John Traske willingly confesses.

Which true ground supposed briefly declaring the nature and condition of a
moral law, I answer thus to the difficulty of my Question here proposed,
that the Commandment given to the Jews of keeping a Sabbath, or weekly day
of rest, was according to the substance and chief intention of that law
moral: Because natural understanding, illuminated by faith, teaches it to be
fit and expedient that all sorts of persons should abstain from corporal
labors, so far forth as to allot certain days of their life to the especial
service and honor of Almighty God: but the determination rather of the
seventh day in which God rested from his labors, then of the sixth in which
man was created for to serve his creator here in this world, and to enjoy him
afterward, merely depended on Gods free choice and election misteriously
resolving to make the day of his own rest the Sabbath, and resting day of his
people also from corporal labors, symbolizing thereby that eternal day of
clarity and rest, which they were to enjoy with himself afterward.

As touching likewise the precise manner of rest from all sorts of labors,
even such as were easily performed and belonged in a sort to the convenient
health and nourishment of their bodies, commanded to the Jews on their
Sabbath, as to light fire, prepare meat etc. I affirm and prove it to have
been merely cerimoniall; natural experience teaching us first that the
lighting of fire, and such easy labors of preparing food on the Sabbath for
our selves or for the charitable releife of our brethren, are no way repugnant
to the moral end and intention for which the Sabbath was chiefly ordained, to
wit of yealding due honor and praise to God for his continual blessings and
benefits toward us, which only requires moderate rest from servile and
paineful labors, wholly distrasting men's minds; and making them unapt for holy
exercises of piety and devotion. Secondly experience likewise teaches us, that
men's dulnes and unableness ordinarily to be actuated any whole day together in
prayer and praises to God without ceasing, is such, as easy walking and other
needful or charitable exercises moderately used, do help rather then hinder
the frequent and fervent use of mental and devout exercises, and serve to
honor God and sanctify the Sabbath, more then superfluous sleep, idle
thoughts, unprofitable conversation with others, not expressly in that
commandment prohibited.

Which moral observation of the Sabbath even since Christ's time, religiously
and universally practiced by Christian pastors and people on the weekly day of
our Saviors Resurection, was intimated by our Savior himself in many
passages of the Gospel, doing for example many miracles on that day, albeit
he saw them by the Scribes and Pharisees scandalously apprehended to have been
breaches of the Sabbath, Luke 6. verse. 9. Matthew. 12. verse. 10. etc. commanding
such as he had cured to take up their beds and go home to their own houses,
which seemed a work of toil and labor forbidden to the Jews on their
Sabbath, Io. 5. verse. 8. 10. defending his disciples for rubbing the ears of
corn to eat, Matthew. 12. verse. 1. Luc. 6. verse. 1^ Marc. 2. v. 23. which the
Jews present reputed to have been a certain laborious preparation of food
seemingly forbidden by God, Exodus 35 verse. 3. in Moses declaration of that
precept; instancing against those captious accusers of himself and his
disciples, the exercises of Priests laboring about sacrifices in the Temple,
yet not violating the Sabbath, the practice of Circumcision on the eight day,
albeit it happened on the Sabbath, their usual custom of leading out their
cattle to water, and drawing them out of pittes and places of danger on the
Sabbath day, without any sinful breach thereof, as may be gathered out of our
Saviors manner of speech, Luke 13. 14. importing no reprehension of them for
such facts, but produced rather by him as fit examples apt to authorize his
miraculous works, done with less labor and more charity and vtility to such
as were by his voice, or a touch of his hand or garment, in soul and body
perfectly cured.

So that John Traske and other Puritanes in their cerimoniall and precise
manner of observing the Sabbath, are rather superstirious imitators of the
Jews, our Saviors adversaries, then humble and faithful members of Christ's
Catholic Church, ever known to have practiced a moral, and not the Jewish
and cerimonial observance of the Sunday.

QVESTION III. Concerning the abrogation of the Jews Sabbath.
JOHN Traske adhering more constantly, and consequently then other Protestants
do, to their dangerous ground of believing nothing not expressly mentioned in
Scriptures, or thence necessarily deduced; has of late upon conference with
others, and more diligent search then he had made before of many texts in the
old and new Testament, like a weather-cocke, turned with every blast of his
own ignorant fancy and judgment, has determined himself, and drawn his
disciples to a most strict keeping of Saturday the Jewish Sabbath, commanded,
says he, by God out of fire, and written with his own finger in the first
Table of the Decalogue, holily likewise by Christ and his disciples afterward
observed, as a sacred memorial of Gods rest on the 7. day, and therefore now
also as a moral and divine precept still to continue* Press him with the
universal practice of Christ's Church present and past since the Apostles,
certainly known to have rejected the Jewish Sabbath, and instead thereof to
have observed the first day of the week in continual memory of our Saviors
Resurection, and he will in horrible pride and pertinacity of judgment affirm
it to have been a corrupt and abusiue practice, little by him regarded, as not
being at al grounded in Scripture but repugnant unto it. Urge him with Christ's
promises of being present with his Church to the worlds end, Matthew. 28. verse.
20. of establishing it so surely on a rock, that hell gates shall never
prevail against it, Matthew. 16. verse. 18. of comforting it with his spirit of
love, and leading it into all truth Job* 14. verse. 16. 17. 26. which fitly
therefore is said to be Colum^^ and firmame^tum veritatis, the suporting pillar
and foundation of true faith, 1. Tim. 3. verse. 15. to whose holy obedience all
Christians are tied under pain of being by their brethren accounted as
Ethnickes and Publicans, Matthew. 18. v. 17. he will ridiculously tell you as he
did to one of his fellow prisoners conferring with him on this very point, that
the true Church of which these and the like texts were written, is known to
very few, consisting of 2. or 3. gathered together in Christ's name, himself
promising to be in the midst of them Matthew. 18. verse. 20. that is to say, a
small number of such little ones as have truly repented, and are made sure of
their election in Christ, hated and persecuted by men, but beloved by God and
guarded by Angels, seeing the face of their Heavenly Father. Matthew. ibid.
verse. 10. And examining him further on this point, he will in process of
speech, tell such as he will be confident with all, that himself and his
brethren are those little ones, the only Gnostiks, and illuminated members of
Christ's Church, others belonging thereunto no further then true faith,
repentance, and morality of life shall lead them, and ignorance with all excuse
them, for not actually professing his singular doctrines.

So he foolishly seeks with Ebion and other ancient Heretics to breath life
and spirit into the ceremonious carcass and buried rites of the Jewish law,
feeding his gross children with such unsavory excrements, for so the Apostle
terms them ad Philip. 3. verse. 8. as Christ long since in the ending of that
Law has cast out of the mystical body of his church, as not containing any
true norishment of souls in them; and vainly endeavors to illuminate those
which observe shadows, who have happily since Christ's time lived in the clear
sunshine of heavenly graces, planting like a foolish builder such new points of
his faith on the sandy and fleeting foundation of the Jewish law, and seeking
to set up again medium parietem maceriae, that parting wall of ceremonies,
which distinguished Jews and Gentills subverted and quite overthrown by
Christ, ad Ephesians. 2. verse. 14. and 15. euacuating al such legal decres and
ceremonial comandements that he might build on himself the foundation and
corner stone both people in a Holy Temple and habitation of God etc. purifiyng
alike their hares by faith. Act. 15. verse. 9.

And that amongst other cerimoniall precepts and decrees of Moses Law
abrogated by Christ, the Sabbath was one, holily rra^slated by the Apostles
themselves into our Sunday, as shall be proved in my next Question, is by S.
Paul ad Coloss. 2. verse. 16. 17. expressly affirmed willing his disciples not to
be judged or discovered in their faithful profession in meat, or drink, or
new moons, or any part of a festival day or Sabbath, which are shadows of
future good things. By which Sabbath cannot be meant the feasts of Trumpets,
Tabernacles, Expiation, and other such ceremonial and Jewish festiuities, as
Traske heretically co^menteth. For albeit those feasts be called indeed (
Leuit. 23.) Sabboths, or days of rest, because all external works were alike
forbidden in them, as on the seventh day: yet the Apostle rest rayneth the
word Sabbath in this place, to signify the weekly Sabaoths of the Jews, as
appears first in that he numbreth such Jewish festiual days distinctly from
the Sabbath, equally forbiding the observance of them both.

His second reason why he prohibiteth them contained in that part of the text,
quae sunt vmbra etc. which are shaldowes of future good things, equally
agrees to them both: for as those feasts were shaddows and types, so were the
weekly Sabaoths also. Wherefore Ebion and his disciples, the first heretical
obseruers of our Lords day and the Jewish Sabaoths together, as witnesses S.
Epiphanius haers. 30. S. Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 26. pressed with the authority
of this place, and perceauing the vnanswerablenes thereof, rather then they
would thereunto conform their doctrines, absolutely rejected all S. Paul's
Epistles, and accounted him an Apostata from the Jewish faith: The which John
Traske seems not yet to do, albeit he dared once to say of S. Paul, that he
sought to please men, so consequently could not be the true servant of Christ.

Secondly, I deduce out of Scripture this Theological argument. The Jews for
the like respect, and memory of Gods rest, were as well bound to observe each
Sabbath of years, and the Sabbath of that yearly Sabbath, called the Iubily, or
50. year, as to keep the weekly Sabbath of days, Leuit. 25. But those yearly
Sabaoths, are certainly (I suppose in Traskes opinion) abrogated: wherefore
the weekly Sabbath is no longer to be observed: Gods precepts thereof deliured
out of fire to the people, and written wit his own singer in the Decalogue,
especially instanced by Traske, being mere circumstances impertinent to the
morality thereof, further the^ is in my former question already declared: Gods
commandment whether given out of fire, or not being sufficient of it self to
oblige his creatures to the perpetual observance of any Law for morality of
life fit to be observed. And no learned man will deny but that many precepts,
neither delivered out of fire, nor written in the Decalogue Tables were moral,
and as such, are now to be observed by Christians: as for a man not to marry
his Fathers wife, his sister, his daughter etc. The prohibition of usury and
sundry other like moral precepts, amongst which (though falsely) Traske
numbreth the legal difference of meats, albeit it was neither commanded out
of fire, nor written in the Decalogue Tables.

Thirdly I argue, that John Traske has no sufficient authority of Scripture,
proving the continuance of the Jewish Sabbath: for our Saviors observance
thereof little imports for this purpose, the Law whereunto he voluntarily and
in obedience to his Father subjected himself, being not before his death
determined, so that he practiced likewise Circumcision, and many other
cerimoniall rites, now unlawful to Christians. The practice also of the
Apostles, entering commonly, after Christ's death, into the Temple, and other
Jewish Sinagogues on their Sabbath, makes as little as our Saviors example to
prove the continuance thereof, this their practice being in no text of their
holy Acts testified. Wherein likewise the holy Evangelist insinuates not, the
motive and end of this their Custom to have been not so much a religions
observation of that Sabbath, as a more commodious and general instruction of
the Jews concerning the Law and Prophets, fulfilled in Christ their expected
Messiah, they being in those days and places chiefly assembled and best
prepared to have such spiritual doctins propounded unto them by the Apostles:
Who for celebration of Christ supper, preaching, and other public exercises
of Christian piety and devotion, were accustomed to meet on the first day of
the week, called therefore our Lords day Apocal. 2. because our Lord had then
sanctified the same by his resurrection, and commanded the religious
observance thereof, as shall in my next Question be fully discussed.

If John Traske will further contend, that the Apostles for other religious
respects besides preaching of Christ, entered the Temples and Sinagogues on the
Sabbath, and festival days, as Act* 21. verse. 23. 24. 25. where S. Paul not
to auert the whole nation of the Jews from Christ, did by the counsel of S.
James purify him self with other Nazaretts, and so enter the Temple, that he
might seem to observe the Law as other Jews converted unto Christ the^
commonly did. I answer, this conditional observance of the Sabbath and other
cerimoniall rites for a time by the Apostles, was only permitted by Christ, as
a charitable means the better to unite the Jews and Gentills in the unity of
one Church: The giver of the Law (says S. Augustine writing to S. Hierome
Epist. 19.) having so determined to end the same with his own death, and
afterward honorably to bury it, by permitting the converted Jews for a while
to practice it, until his Ghospel were sufficiently promulgated. For (says
this holy Father) those legal obseruaunces were not sudainely to be detested,
as the devilish sacriledges of Gentills, when Christ's grace began to be
revealed, which was in such shadowing rites prefigured; but to be permitted for
a season to their posterity, who first received them, which after their
exequies honorably performed, were by all Christians to be utterly forsaken.

If Traske will press me further to know the precise time, when the ceremonial
observation of the Sabbath, and other rites of Moses Law wholly ceased, and
became unlawful to be practiced any more by Christians. I answer him, that
peradventure until the very destruction of Jerusalem, and subversion of the
Temple, more then 40. years after our Saviors passion, the old Sabbath and
other ceremonious rites of the Law, might be by some faithful Jews, without
any touch of infidelity, and falling from Christ, albeit unnecessarily and
improfitably, observed: Gods providence (says Origin homil. 10. in Leuit)
wisely ordaining, that the City, Temple, and all things else belonging to the
former glory of that Law and nation, should be altogether destroyed, least
sucklings and weaklinges in faith, should be longer allured by the^, and drawn
away from purely embracing Christian verities shadowed in them. So that when
our Savior willed his disciples, Math. 24. verse. 10. to pray that their flight
might not happen in winter, says S. Jerome, because extremity of could would
hinder their lasting abode in mountains and desert places; nor in the Sabbath
because the religious rest thereof would hinder their flight: which had been idly
spoken, says Traske, if Christians to whom these words were uttered, had not
ben bound to a strict observance of the old Sabbath, when Jerusalem was sacked.

I answer first this objection, that albeit it might be gathered out of this
text, that many Christian Jews did observe their old Sabbath as before, until
the destruction of Jerusalem: yet can it not thence also be inferred, that such
Christians observed it in like manner afterward, when they had seen the
perfidious cruelty of their whole nation against Christ, so examplarly
punished, their city sacked, their Priests slaughtered, and Temple subverted,
never again, by Christ's speeches, to be restored, which could not but be taken
by faithful people as certain signs of that law and religion wholly abrogated
by Christ and ended, the chiefest exercises whereof consisted in prayers made
in the Temple together with misterious rites and sacrifices therein only
performed. Secondly. I answer, that these words were uttered by Christ to his
disciples who were natural Jews and members of that Commonwealth, wherein the
Sabbath was by most people strictly still observed. Wherefore our Savior might
well take an occasion to utter this speech to them, which chiefly concerned the
generality of unbelieving Jews, living together with them and observing the
Sabbath, as may be instanced in many other examples of like speeches in
Scripture. Thirdly. I answer, that Christ uttered that speech, as fore seeing
that the very day in which Titus should besiege the City, should be no other
then the Paschall solemnity, and great Sabbath, wherein multitudes of people
repayring to Jerusalem from all places, should be suddenly so enclosed, as
they should have no means to fly, having the gates shut upon them by such
captains and people as undertook to defend the city, and so narowly watched
by the Roman soldiars, as when any were taken to fly they were usually
crucified before the walls, and being restained by such multituds, they
suffered unspeakable famine, plague, and slaughters, by external foes and
intestine dissentions, which being forknowne by our Savior, he might well wish,
them to pray that their flight or cause of flying, to wit, the approach of
Titus army, might not happen in winter, or on the Sabbath, not that they might
not lawfully fly thereon for safeguard of their lives, or fight against their
enimyes, as we read of Judas Machabaeus soldiers 1. Machab. 3. but because all
means of flight should be hindered by the sudden approach of their enemies
without, and Jewish captains within the City, and their miseries be multiplied
by occasion of such multitudes assembled on the Sabbath.

Finally if John Traske for continuance of the Sabbath, shall object, as one of
his disciples seemed to do, that the celebration of the same is called, Exodus
31. A sempiternall Covenant between God and his people, to be observed with
perpetual honor in all their generations Exodus 12. I answer, that the like
manner of speech is used of the old Aaronicall Preisthood, Exodus 28. now
translated into the Priesthood of our Savior ad Heb. 7. v. 11. 12. 15. 16. and
abrogated by Traskes own confession. Wherefore we are to interpret the eternal
duration of such rites, to import only a continuance of them, till the Law
fully ended, or because they still remain according to the moral and eternal
things signified by them, as S. Augustine solueth this objection quaest. 46.
124. and 131. in Exodus

QVESTION IIII. Of the Sabbath translated into the weekly day of our Saviors
Resurrection
SAINT Augustine epist. 118. rightly terms it a most insolent madness for any
particular man to reprove that which the whole Church of Christ generally
observes for in so doing, with unreasonable pride he practically prefereth his
own singular opinion before the judgments of all other Christian Pastors and
people, as does John Traske in his novel observance of the Jewish Sabbath,
abrogated by the Apostles themselves, as I have proved in my former Question,
and translated into the holy and ever memorable day of our Saviors
Resurrection, as is plainly testified by the 65. Apostolical Canon, by S.
Ignatius the Apostles disciple, in his Epistle ad Magnesianos, by holy Justin
Apologia 2. by Tertullian de Corona militis and Apologia cap. 16. by Clemens
Alexandrinus lib. 7. stromat. by Origin homil. 7. in Exodus by S. Athanasius in
illa verba, Omnia mihitradita sunt etc. by S. Hilary praefat. in psalm. by S.
Ambrose epist. 83. and sermon. 62. by S. Hierome in cap. 4. ad Galatas, by S.
Augustine contra Adimant. cap. 16. lib. 22. de ciuitate dei, cap. 30. and sermon.
252. by S. Leo epist. 81. ad Dioscorum, by S. Gregory lib 2. epist. 3. by the
Laodicean Council cap. 29. Wherein Christians are expressly forbidden to play
the Jews, and to be idle on the Sabbath, and willed with all to observe and
prefer our Lords day before it. So as if any testimonies of antiquity might be
by Traske and his Companions admitted, and held sufficient to prove the
Apostolical translation of the Sabbath, there would need no other arguments to
refute, and reduce them from their idle and singular fancies, then those former
undoubted authorities of ancient and learned Fathers. But as he and his
companions are wholly ignorant and unacquainted with their works, so are they
fully bent to contemn all such Testimonies, which they find not warranted by
plain texts of scripture, as themselves only are pleased to expound them.

For whereas not only the Ancient Fathers, but Ebion also himself, and his
disciples acknowledged their heretical doctrine of Jewish feasts and Sabaoths
necessary to be observed by Christians, together with their own Dominicall
days and proper festiuities, to have been expressly contradicted and condemned
by S. Paul ad Coloss. 2. rejecting thereupon all his Epistles from the Canon of
Scripture; these new Ebionites, by shifting comments, and absurd glosses of
their own devising, seek to delude the text, and draw it against all ancient
expositions thereof, to be only understood of cerimoniall feasts mentioned in
the 23. of Leuiticus, only because they are there called Sabaothes. Whereas the
Apostle distinguishes such festival days from the weekly Sabbath, and
equally in this text forbids the observance of them both to Christians.
Which true exposition here supposed, I conclude this argument. One day of
seven is still as a moral precept to be holily observed by all Christians.
But the observance of the old Sabbath is prohibited by the Apostle to
Christians, and no other day introduced in place thereof, but the day of our
Saviors Resurrection. Therefore that day only, and not the Jewish Sabbath, is
still as a moral precept to be holily observed by Christians.

Secondly, because John Traske is most delighted with Sillogisticall
collections, albeit himself be so little skilled in Logique, as writing lately
against an Adversary, he denied the Minor of his Enthimeme, supposing that
Christ was, as he told the Jews, Dominus Sabati, and had full power either by
himself, or his Apostles to abrogate and alter as well as to institute and
approve the observance thereof; I frame this argument. That day of the seven
is by Christians now weekly to be observed, which the Apostles themselves
allotted for their holy Assemblies, and other public exercises of their
Christian faith. But the day which the Apostles so allotted etc. was the first
day of the week, and not the Jewish Sabbath. Wherefore the first day of the
week, and not the Jewish Sabbath is to be observed by Christians.

The Mayor, or former part of my Argument is certain, because such public
assemblies and exercises of faith, are the chief end, for which the Sabbath,
and other festival days were first ordained. The Minor, or latter part is
clearly proved by the practice of the Apostles Act. 20. v. 6. 7. where S.
Paul, and many other Disciples, of seven whole days which they spent in
Troas, are read only to have assembled themselves for preaching and frequenting
Sacraments, which are the most public exercises of faith, on the first day of
the week, and not on the Jewish Sabbath. Likewise on that day, the Apostle 1.
Cor. 16. verse. 1. 2. willed the Christians at Corinth to make their Collects,
or common gatheringes for the poor brethren at Jerusalem, which is an evident
sign that Christians used to assemble themselves on that day, there being no
reason to be yealded why such common collections of alms should be rather on
the first day of the week, then any of the rest, but that Christians used only
therein to make their holy Sinaxes and conuents for prayer, preaching, alms,
frequenting Sacraments etc. mentioned by holy Justin in Apolog. 2. to Marcus
Antoninus, and other Gouerners of the Empire in behalf of Christians, and
sundry of those holy Fathers formerly mentioned.

Thirdly, I make this Argument for observance of the sunday in place of the
Sabbath. That day of the week is chiefly to be observed by Christians, which
our Lord was pleased to make, and have called his own day. But our Lord did
make and call his own day, the first day of the week, and not the Jewish
Sabbath. Therefore the first day of the week, and not the Jewish Sabbath, is
especially to be observed by Christians. The mayor is certain, because as
Christians are bound by their faithful profession to honor Christ himself
with thankful and humble services; so does the wisdom of faith teach them
also especially to honor and esteem that day of all others most holy, which
their Lord himself most respected, and did choose to make, and have called his
own day. For as to name any day, the day of a King, imports that day to be
specially regarded by the king himself, and festiually observed by his
subjects in memory of some victory obtained, or memorable good, happened to
himself or his people on the same: so for such holy and memorable respects,
the first day of the week is called our Lords day, Apocalyp. 2. 5. worthiest
of all other days of the week to be honored, and festiually observed by
Christians as shall be particularly proved in my next Argument. My minor is
proved clearly by that former text of S. John, expressly calling one day of the
week or year as a familiar name known to all Christians in his time* Diem
Dominicum, our Lords day, to wit, a day especially sanctified by Christ, and
devoted to his service which was not the Sabbath of the Jews, no where else in
Scripture so called, nor any other day but vna, or prima Sabbati, the next
after the sabbath, as S. Ignatius S. John's scholar testifies epist. 6. ad
Magnesianos, saying: that after the Sabbath each lover of Christ celebrateth
Diem Dominicum, our Lords day, consecrated to our Lords Resurrection, regina
and principium omnium dierum, the chiefest and principallest of all other days
etc. else where Epist 8. ad Philippenses, he contesteth, that if any Christian
celebrateth his Easter with the Jews, or their other Symbolicall festiuities,
amongst which the Sabaothes are included, he makes himself partaker with
those who killed Christ and his Apostles. S. Augustine also to omit many other
like testimonies of ancient Fathers, sermon. 251. de tempore, teaches the
religions solemnization of our Lords day to have been instituted by the
Apostles themselves, because our Savior therein rose from death to life, and
to have been by them called our Lords day, that we might learn by that name
to abstain therein from sin, and earthly labors, attending to divine
services. And after much honorable mention made of that day, he says, that
therefore the holy Doctors of Christ's Church, meaning the Apostles, decreed to
transfer on that day all the glory of the Jewish Sabbath, that what they
celebrated in Types we might celebrate in Verities etc.

Fourthly the precept of the Sabbath obliges Christians no further then it can
be proved to conteyne a moral law, necessary to direct them in their religious
duty, and thankfulness toward Almighty God for benefitts. But the observance of
our Lords day is fitter to direct Christians in their duty toward God, and to
put them in mind of his gracious benefitts toward them, then the observance of
the old Sabbath. Therefore our Lords day, not the old Sabbath, is now
commanded, and fittest to be obserned by Christians. The mayor is certain
because all cerimoniall and judicial precepts are confessed by John Traske to
have been abrogated by Christ; and no law of the old Testament binds
Christians which is not morally expedient and necessary to direct them in their
Christian duty and service. My minor may be best proved by examining and
comparing the institution and ends for which our Lords day and the old Sabbath
were first ordained and observed.

The old Sabbath was cheifely ordained in memory of Gods rest from his labors,
of creating all things in six days, and therefore Philo lib. de opificio
mundi, wisely calls it the worlds birthday, serving for a continual
instruction of Gods people in the knowledge of their creator, and to exclude
the error of Philosophers commonly teaching the world to have had no beginning.
Secondly it served to represent unto the Israelites that rest, which God had
given unto them after their Egyptian servitude, and painful labors ended, as
is expressly affirmed Deuteronomy. 5. verse. 15. Thirdly it declared them to be a
peculiar people, sanctified by God and devoted to his service Exodus 31 verse.
13. Fourthly the Jews Sabbath allegorically prefigured Christ's rest in his
sepulcher, after his paynefull labors for man's redemption ended, as is
insinuated by S. Paul ad Hebr. 4. verse. 10. Fifthly in a tripologicall sense it
signified the spiritual rest of souls, after the servile works of sin by
Christ's grace ended, as S. Augustine teaches us tract. 30. in Joan. and in
sundry other places. Sixthly is was Anagogically a figure of that rest which
holy souls after this laboursome life ended, were to enjoy in Abraham's bosom,
as is insinuated by S. Paul ad Hebr. 4. verse. 6. and 11. and is also taught by
S. Augustine epist. 119.

For all which holy respects and mysterious significations it was expedient and
necessary that the old Sabbath should be changed by Christ into that blessed
day, on which himself was borne for man's redemption, to wit, the first day of
the week, as may be Mathematically demonstrated by searching backwards the
Cicle of Dominical letters, which will be found on the 25. of December in the
second year of the hundred and ninty fourth Olympiade; of Rome first built
754. from Cesars death 42. from the Triumuirate began by Augustus 41. of Herod's
reign. 29. when our Savior was certainly borne, to have been B. Secondly on
that first* day of the week he rose, and began humanely to lead his glorious
immortal life, as may be expressly gathered from the last chapter of all 4.
Evangelists. Thirdly, on that day he visibly infused his holy spirit on the
Apostles, in the day of Pentecost, to wit, the fiftith day after the second of
Azimes when the Jews began to number their day of Pentecost, which happened to
be co^pletly e^ded in the year of our Saviors passion on sunday, as is
learnedly proved by Ribera de festis Iudaeorum Cap. de Pentecoste, by Bellar de
Cultu Sanctorum lib. 3. Cap. 13. and sundry other authors. So as three of the
greatest mysteries of our Saviors life, and most singular benefitts that God
could devise to bestow on mankind happened on our Lords day, to sanctify and
make it more worthy then the Jews Sabbath, to be by us Christians weekly
celebrated, and observed.

To which holy respects we may add also these, that God created the earth, the
heavens and Angelical creatures on that day, graciously so therein preparing
the local place of our eternal Beatitude and heauently repose, signified
better by ours, then the Jewish Sabbath, providing our companions therein an
earthely habitation in the mean while to honor him in this life, and make our
selves by his graces worthy of our future glorification. All Types of the old
Sabbath are in the mysteries of this fully accomplished. This day is a gracious
Symbol, or sign of our special devotion toward Christ, a holy memorial of
spiritual graces received from him, as the other was chiefly of Gods temporal
benefits toward his creatures. So as they seem to be Jews rather, then
Christians, who against the universal and known practice of Christ's Church,
since the Apostles time, esteem the old Sabbath more holy, and worthy to be
observed, then our Lords day, made for such high and mysterious respects,
memorable to Christians.

Lastly, the Apostle S. Paul ad Hebr. 4. plainly supposes Christ to have
instituted a new Sabatisme, or day of rest for his people in memory of his
rest, after the labors which he sustained for our redemption ended, as God
ordained from the beginning, a holy day in memory of his own rest after his
works of creation perfected. And from the mystical signification of these two
distinct Sabaothes succeding each other, and simbolizing a double rest of Gods
people, the one in Abraham's bosom, as our Savior terms the place, wherein
the Patriarchs before him rested, and the other in heaven with himself after
his Resurrection; he takes an occasion to exhort the Hebrews, that sithence
their Forefathers entered not through their incredulity into Gods rest, figured
by the first Sabbath, they should hasten to enter into the rest of Christ, by
the day of his new Sabbath represented, from which Text literally, so, and
truly explicated, I make this argument.

The first Sabbath representing that rest which God gave to his people before
Christ, of which it is said Genesis 2. he rested the seventh day from his
works etc. is ended according to the Apostle verse. 7. and 8. and a new
Sabbath, or Symbolicall day of rest was fortould by David, and ordained by
Christ after his labors ended verse. 9. 10. But no new Sabbath or Symbolicall
day of rest, distinct from the seventh day can be understood to have been
mentioned by David, and instituted by Christ after his labors ended, praeter
diem Dominicum, besides the day of his glorious Resurrection. Therefore the old
Sabbath figuring the rest, whereunto God invited holy people before Christ, is
now ended, and the Dominicall day, symbolizing the new rest which Christians
invited holy souls unto is in place thereof happily succeeded.

John Traske lately entered into a humor of reading histories that he might
seem skilled in some other good studies, besides the knowledge of Scriptures,
may chance to stumble upon an objection seemingly sufficient to prove the
continuance at least of the old Sabbath, together with our Lords day. For
example S. Gregory Nissen in his Oration against such as brooked not
reprehensions, asks an Heretic, with what eyes he saw our Lords day, who
despised the Sabbath, these days being brethren, so as he that reproacheth the
one wrongeth the other also. Socrates lib. 6. hist. cap. 8. affirms the
Sabbath and our Lords day to be the weekly feasts of Christians, wherein they
were wont to assemble themselves. And Anastasius Nicenus lib quaest. 77.
affirms those two days to be holy and festival. The Apostolical Church
also of Aethiopia does at this day religiously observe both Sabaoths: so as the
old Sabbath by these historical passages, and other authentical testimonies
of antiquity, seems not to have been abrogated by the Apostles.

Whereunto I answer, that albeit the Apostles abrogated the old Sabbath, and
introduced the observation of our Lords day in place thereof, as is already
proved in this and my former question, yet afterward Christian Bishops,
occasionally, and for a while only in many Eastern Churches renewed a
festival and Christian observance thereof, not that they held the Moysaicall
precept still to oblige them thereunto, as does John Traske and his disciples,
or that as Ebion, they held it necessary for all Christians equally to observe
both Sabaothes, whose opinion all the ancient Fathers are known generally* to
have detested. But for a holy and zealous refutation of the Symonians,
Menandrians, Cerinthians, Carpocratians, Basilidians, Marcionistes, and other
like Heretykes, who to reproach the Author of the old Testament, whom they
termed An evil God and least they might seem to honor him in any sort,
feasted on the Sabbath, as S. Epiphanius recounted haeres. 42. the holy
Pastors and people of Christ's Church in a zealous detestation of their
blasphemies, and to show the same God to have been author of both Testaments
faithfully and fittly for a time observed both Sabaothes, forbidding any
Christian under grievous penalties to fast on Saturday more then on our Lords
day, one Saturday only excepted wherein our Savior lay dead in his sepulcher,
as is expressly mentioned in S. Ignatius Epist. ad Philipenses, in the 55.
Apostolical Canon, and in sundry other ancient Authors. Which Christian and
occasional observance of the old Sabbath is known not to have been generally
practiced, but only in particular Churches, wherein such heretics lived: and
as those Heresies ceased, the festival keeping of the Sabbath ceased also, and
Christians feasted as well on it, as on friday in memory of our Saviors death,
and the Apostles sorrow continued until his joyful Resurrection, as is
expressly affirmed by Innocentius epist. 2. c. 4. Hieron. epist. 97. August.
epist. 86. and 18. by Cassianus collat. 3. cap. 10 etc. As for the Aethiopians
still observing the Sabbath, I answer, that they are known to have been
corrupted since their Apostolical conversion with many Heretical and Iudaical
doctrines, practicing circumcision and sundry other rites of Moses law,
unlawful to Christians.

An other Argument much used by Traskes Disciples is, that if circumcision were
by an express decree of the Apostles Act. 15. repealed, with much more reason
was the Sabbath by their like decree to have been abrogated also, considering
that the Commandment thereof was included amongst the other moral, and still
continuing precepts of the Decalogue tables etc. Whereunto I answer first, that
Circumcision was indeed by the Apostles declared to be a burdensome and
unnecessary precept, to be imposed on the Gentills. But to the Jews it was
abrogated only, as generally the Sabbath was, by the contrary doctrine of the
Apostles, sufficiently warranting and securing the consience of any good
Christian, to believe and practice any point of Religion taught by them, albeit
we read of no Apostolical Synod purposely made to determine the same.

Secondly I answer, that an express decree was more necessary to have been
made by the Apostles of abrogating the practice of Circumcision then of
transferring the Sabbath to an other more mysterious and memorable day; the
determination of the seventh day rather then any other being as I have else
where declared, immateriall to the religious observance of Gods Commandment,
binding only according to the moral end, and intention thereof, faithful
people to abstain in one day of seven from servile labors, and to deuote the
same to Gods especial honor and service: whereas the practice of Circumcision
given before Moses, as a covenant and sign, distinguishing Abraham's holy
posterity from other faithless people, was wholly to be repealed,
notwithstanding the Jews so highly regarded it, as not to converse or admit
into their Temple any one that wanted that holy seal, and sign of Gods
covenant with them.

Other arguments more frivolous and less important I willingly omit, being
loath to detain my Reader needlessly, and impertinently in them, wishing here
for a final conclusion of this question, that Io. Traske and his brethren
would maturely consider the final issue of their unchristian and exorbitant
doctrines, disliked by our Sovereign and State, contradicted by all learned
men coming to hear of them, and utterly as yet unheard of in other parts of
Christendom: so as the first Inuenters and obstinate Professers of them can
truly belong to no Christian Church, present now, or past in any age before
them.

QVESTION V: Wherein is proved that Christians are to celebrate the yearly day
of our Saviors Resurrection on Sunday, and not on the 14. day of March-Moone,
as the Jews celebrated their Paschall.
JOHN Traske in his humor of Iudaisme and Heretical innovation, is lately
grown so great an enemy to the weekly observance of our Lords day, as he
seems also to deny the yearly feast of our Saviors Resurrection to be
lawfully celebrated on any other day in the year then the 14. of March-moone,
wherein the Jews were commanded by God to celebrate their Passover. And upon
his late reading in Eusebius lib 5. hist. cap. 22. Policrates epistle directed
to Victor Bishop of Rome concerning the Asian custom of keeping easter with
the Jews, and S. Irenaus his judgment that Victor did with over much severity
excomunicate many Eastern Churches, for persisting in that wonted
Quartadeciman manner of celebrating the yearly day of our Saviors
Resurrection, together with the Jews Paschall; he will arrogantly presume to
call Victor that holy Bishop and Martyr, famously mentioned in ancient
histories, a proud Prelate, and not stick to accuse other ancient Fathers of
ignorance in censuring afterward, and condemning for heretics the
Quartadeciman obseruers of Easter: God himself, says he, having expressly
commanded, and Christ himself with his Apostles celebrated on that day his
Paschall festiuity.

And not contented with this heretical temerity of renewing the Quartadeciman
heresy, he surpasses Blastus himself in his Jewish manner of keeping Easter.
For as I have touched in my Preface, he by his eating of unleavened bread seven
days together after the 14. of March-Moone, and by sundry speeches uttered to
some of his fellow prisoners, has given great suspicions that lately he has
observed the feast of Azimes, together with his disciples. The next year
peradueuture they will have profited in Iudaisme so far, as to sacrifice a
Paschall Lamb also. And lastly it is to be feared, that falling more and more
from their Christian profession, they will with Adam Neuserus, Bernardinus
Ochinus, and other Puritan Deuines finally forsake Christ, and embrace
Iudaisme, or Turcisme, the fearful sequel and just punishment of such
fantastical spirits, as will embrace no Religion but of their own devising,
nor be obedient children to any Church, but of their own raising.

But let John Traske, and his Disciples celebrate what Paschall they will, and
on what day they please, our Paschal-Lambe according to the Apostle 1. Corinthians.
5. verse. 7. 8. is Christ sacrificed in the evening of the world, for our
redemption: and our festival azimes are to be as near, as by the assistance
of divine graces we shallbe able to arrive unto, the sincerity of holy actions,
and verity of doctrines, whereby our souls may be happily nourished after
their spiritual flight out of Egypt, and conducted toward the eternal
inheritance of heaven through the merit of Christ's holy life and passion
prepared for us; humbling our selves here, to be else where eternally exalted;
eschewing any temper, as near as we can, of that Pharisaicall leaven, with
which Traskes speeches, and actions are as it may be probably ghessed in Gods
sight abhominably corrupted, who with his disciples will not seem to be sicut
ceteri homines in any thing, showing all those simptoms, whereby the spiritual
Physician of souls was pleased to describe the infection of the Scribes and
Pharisyes, rightly by him compared to dead men's sepulchers painted and polished
without, but internally filled with all guile and malice.

The Apostle tells the Galathians cap. 5. verse. 2. and 3. that whosoever
circumciseth himself, makes himself a debtour of the whole law, and Christ's
death profits him not: and so it may be proportionably auerred of Traske,
that in teaching the festival observance of Azimes he is consequently also
bound by the same reason, to observe the entire Law of Moses, and so cannot be
longer a Christian. He was wont heretofore to understand that text of the
Apostle ad Coloss. 2. Let not man judge or discover you in meat or drink, or
new moons, or part of a festival day etc. of the Ceremonial feasts of the
Jews mentioned Leuitic. 23. abrogated by Christ, amongst which the feast of
Azimes is first mentioned. But he has as it should seem since altered his
judgment, and (as Ebion and his disciples were wont) little I fear does he
regard any doctrine contained in S. Paul's Epistles. Policrates Epistle never
taught him to conioyne the Judicial feasts of Azimes with our Christian
Passover, only that ancient Bishop of Ephesus in a preposterous zeal of
observing the yearly memory of our Saviors resurrection, as S. Policarpe and
other great Saints had done before him in those parts of Asia, wrote very
ernestly in the defense of that Quartadeciman Custom. Whose authority has, as
it should seem, much moved John Traske, who either out of ignorance had never
before read, or out of rashenes never marked, far more conuincing proofs for
the Dominicall observance of Easter.

For long before Victors decree thereof, Pius his holy predecessor, as.
Eusebius recounteth in his Chronicle, declared it to have been an Apostolical
doctrine that Christians should keep their Easter on the Sunday, and not on the
14. of March-moone, as the Jews celebrated their Paschall. Socrates also lib.
5. hist. cap. 21. expressly affirms, that S. Peter and S. Paul taught in the
Roman and other Western Churches the like Dominicall obseruaunce of Easter,
which is also testified by S. Protenius, Patriarch of Alexandria in his Epistly
to S. Leo, wherein he testifies also, that S. Mark introduced the same manner
of keeping Easter in the Egyptian Churches S. Ignatius who saw our Lord himself
in flesh, who also conuersed with many of the Apostles, and was the second
Bishop of Antioch after S. Peter, in his epistle to the Magnesians, not only
taught them to keep holy our Lords day, as the queen and chiefest of all
other days consecrated to our Saviors Resurrection, but also he contesteth
Epist. ad Philip. that any Christian celebrating his Paschall with the Jews,
makes himself thereby a partaker with those who killed our Lord himself, and
his Apostles.

Neither was the decre of keeping Easter on the Sunday lightly made in Victors
time, but gravely and maturely determined in many holy and learned Synods of
Bishops, assembled by Victors appointement, before he proceeded to
excommunicate the Asian Bishops, as Eusebius in his chronicle also testifies;
in so much as besides the Council which Victor himself called at Rome,
Theophilus metropolitan of Cesaraea, Narcissus Patriarth of Jerusalem, Palmas
Bishop of Pontus, S. Irenaeus Bishop of Lions, Barchillus Bishop of Corinth,
and many Bishops of other Provinces assembled Synods, and with one consent from
no other fountain then the certain doctrine and tradition of the Apostles
themselves determined the Dominicall observance of Easter. So that Policrates
assertion having been taught by S. John, the Quartadeciman manner of keeping the
yearly feast of our Saviors Resurrection, seems to be against S. John's own
writing, Apocal. 2. calling Sunday, Diem Dominicum, our Lords day, for the
reason formerly assigned by his scoller Ignatius, to wit, because it was
sanctified, and chiefly above all other days observed by Christians for our
Saviors Resurrection which thereon happened. And if in a festival and holy
memory of that sacred mystery the Apostles themselves instituted a weekly
observance of that day; how can it be wisely thought that they would have the
anniuersary day it self of our Saviors Resurrection not celebrated on that
determinate day also? Wherefore, as we may suppose, that which S. John only
permitted in Asia for the peace of those Churches, touching their Quartadeciman
observance of Easter, Policrates partially and mistakingly affirms it to have
been taught by the Apostle.

As for S. Irenaeus agreeing with Victor in his doctrine, yet seeming to blame
him for overmuch severity used in excommunicating the Asian Churches for a
practice tolerated in the^ long before by his holy predecessors; I answer,
that Irenaeus peradventure knew not Victors motives of doing so, which was to
resist Montanus errors then newly begun to be broached in Asia, and to cut
quickly off Blastus Judicial innouations, rising even in Rome it self, and
much confirmed by that legal manner of keeping Easter, which made holy Victor
to undertake a violent remedy to cure a dangerous wound then beginning to
corrupt the purity of Christian doctrine in many Churches: the case of the
Asian Bishops being not the same then, as it was in S. Policarpes days. For
whereas before they only by permission observed Easter with the Jews, in
Victors time they held it to be an Apostolical institution, necessary to be
embraced by all other Churches. In which decree Victor was according to his
name truly Victorious, the whole Church of Christ taking afterward part with
him, and numbering the Quartadecimans amongst other Iudaizing heretics: and the
Nicen Council, as S. Athanasius writes in his book of Synods, reclaymed
multitudes of them, renewing Pope Victors decree of keeping Easter on the
Sunday, and ordayning that the Patriarchs of Alexandria for the Egyptian
skill above other Nations, in computing years and days, should be appointed
to order yearly the Paschall Cicles, and by their Epistles first directed to
the Roman Bishop, and by him to other Churches, to determine the Sunday, on
which Easter day was yearly to be observed by Christians, as is testified by S.
Leo Epist. 64. ad Marcianum Imperat. and is to be seen in the Paschal epistles
themselves of Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, translated by S. Hierome, and
yet extant Tom. 1. Biblioth. Sanct. PP. All which and many other authentical
testimonies of antiquity for proof of our Christian manner of keeping Easter
on the Sunday, Io. Traske is likely to regard as little in this as he does in
other controversies, a ceremonial precept of the Moysaicall Law, being apter
to convince his fantastical judgment, and immoueably determine him in any
opinion, let all Christian Churches present and past, teach and practice what
they will against him.

THE II. CONTROVERSY.
QVESTION I. Of the uncleanness of meats before Moses Law.
JOHN Traske and his disciples hold the Legal difference of meats mentioned
Leuit. 11. Deutron. 10. to be so moral in it self, and religiously from man's
first creation by faithful people observed, as our first Parents themselves in
Paradise had the same in a sort commanded to the^, and their holy posterity
ever afterward ^^actised it: as may be gathered (say they) by that difference
of clean and unclean beasts entering the Arc Genes 7. verse. 2. 3. their
usual argument being this following. That which was from the beginning
commanded by God, and by holy people observed, is no doubt a moral precept
still to continue: But the Law of meats was from the beginning commanded by
God, and by holy people observed: Therefore it is as a moral precept still to
continue.

Which argument before I proceed fully and particulerly to answer, I purpose
here orderly to overthrow the doctrinall grounds thereof. First absolutely
denying, that Gods precept of not eating the forbidden fruit given to our first
parents in Paradise, was any Law at all of unclean meats, as ridiculously
they suppose it to have been, but only a commandment of abstinence, imposed by
God for a holy exercise, and trial of their obedience toward him, that having
^eir souls illuminated and sanctified with abundant graces, and all sensual
and disordered motions of their inferior fleshly nature happily restrained,
and suppressed with the golden bridle of original justice, so as all other
moral precepts were easily, and connaturally as it were in that harmonious
union of nature and grace observed by them: God was pleased only in an
extrinsecall and indifferent matter, to exact their due obedience and
subjection toward him; which did no more concern the Moysaicall difference of
meats afterward commanded, then if he had forbidden them to touch the same
tree, or to eat of any another fruit in Paradise; nor was the tree, but the
wilful transgression of their Creators commandment unclean, and as well in
the^selus as in their unhappy posterity fearfully punished.

As for the difference of birds and beasts, clean and unclean entering the
Arc, which is another chief ground of Traskes former argument: I answer,
that this uncleanness was not then understood in respect of their use for food,
but for the sacrifyces of those former times before Moses, wherein no birds or
beasts but such as were legally afterward reputed clean in Moses Law, could
be offered, as may be gathered out of Abels sacrifice Genesis 4. verse. 4. of
Noah's, cap. 6. verse 20. of Abraham's, cap. 15. verse. 9. of Ioabs, cap. 42. verse.
8. etc. God himself no doubt having given some especial ordinance or
inspiration thereof to Adam himself or Seth his holy son, who is said to have
begun to inuoke Gods Name, Genes. 4. verse. 26. which must necessarily be
understood of some peculiar rites, and order of celebrating sacrifices, first
taught and practiced by him.

But that those birds and beasts are not said to have been then unclean for
food and unlawfully to be eaten, as afterward in Moses Law they were declared
to be, I prove, because before the flood they seem not at all to have been by
holy people used for food, and after Noah's time until Moses Law given, all
meats, but strangled and blood, were freely permitted. The former of these two
assertions, I prove by this unanswerable argument. Holy people before the flood
did only eat such meats as God had licensed and appointed them for food. But
before the flood no flesh or fish was by God licensed, and appointed unto them
for food, but only herbs and fruits of the earth as Gods own words do
expressly import, Genesis 1. verse. 29. saying: Behold I have given you all kind of
herbs that seed upon the earth, and all trees that have in themselves seed of
their own kind to be your meat etc. not mentioning fish, birds, or beasts, as
afterward he did to Noah and his posterity cap. 9. verse. 2. 3. Wherefore only
herbs and fruits of the earth were then eaten by holy people.

And a double reason may be yealded, why such herbs and fruits of the earth
were more sufficient for man's sustenance before the flood then after. First for
that the earth was by the deluge of salt* waters corrupted, and altered from
the former fertility thereof, and yealded not such wholesome and nourishing
fruits as it did before, whilst it purely remained in that estate wherein God
created it, and whilst the first progeny, as I may term it, of herbs and
trees remained, which God himself had out of the earth produced Secondly also
for that men's nature in process of time became weakened, and less able by the
fruits of the earth to be sustained, then it was before, when it newly came
out of Gods own omnipotent hands, that did temper and frame the same in all
natural perfection, and ordain it no doubt long after so to continue, as it
appears by the lasting lives of our first humane progenitors, and their
natural force to beget children after they had lived many hundreds of years.
Wherefore holy Jacob told Pharao demanding his age Genesis 47. verse. 8. and 9.
that his days were a^ hundred and thirty years, short and evil, to wit,
subject to infirmity and diseases, and not ariuing to the days of his
Forefathers.

Likewise that after Noah until Moses Law given (which is my second assertion
here to be proved) all meats, but strangled and blood, were freely permitted,
may evidently be gathered out of Genesis cap. 9. verse. 2. 3. 4. where God first
licensing men to eat fish and flesh, Every thing (says he) which moves and
lives shall be to you for food, as growing herbs, I have delivered the^ unto
you, excepting that you shall not eat flesh with blood. Out of which text I
argue thus against John Traske. Holy people from Noah unto Moses time might
lawfully eat al meats licensed unto them by God to be eaten: But all meats,
except such as were strangled and blood were licensed by God to be eaten by
them. Therefore they might lawfully eat them. The first proposition is
certain, and granted by Traske. The second likewise is evident, because
strangled meats and blood are in that general Law and appointment of
Creatures for food, only excepted; which kind of exception in such an
universal rule as that text contains, authorizeth all other particulers not
therein expressed, or out of the same necessarily deduced.

So that the Minor of Ie. Traskes above mentioned argument is false, to wit,
that the Moysaicall difference of meats was from the beginning commanded by
God, and by holy people observed. And were it granted to be true, that the
Moysaicall difference of meats had been so commanded by God, and by holy
people ever until Christ's time observed: yet does it not thence necessarily
follow, that now alsom like manner it is to be practiced by Christians all
ceremonies and figures of former times, as well before Moses Law, as after,
being by Christ fulfilled, and wholly ceased: amongst which the legal
uncleanness of meats was one, as shall be afterward fully declared.

The first Proposition also of that great argument is clearly false, to wit,
that every religious rite from the beginning commanded by God, and by holy
people observed, is doubtless a moral Law ever to continue amongst Christians:
because bloody sacrifices, for example, were from the beginning inspired by God,
and practiced by Adams faithful posterity, and yet as types of Christ's bloody
sacrifice they were now with the same wholly abrogated and ended; so that, it is
no such certain sign, as Traske would have it, of a moral and ever
continuing Law that the same was from the beginning inspired or commanded by
God, and by faithful people, until Christ's coming observed.

QVESTION II. Of the Moysaicall law of meats, and mysterious ends why God
commanded it.
JOHN Traske willingly admits the common division of the old law into
Moral, Judicial, and Cerimoniall Precepts, mentioned by Moses himself,
Deuteronomy. 2. verse. 1. and taught by all modern and ancient Writers, treating of
the two later sorts of Precepts abrogated by our Saviors coming. So that if
it may by evident circumstances of the text be proved here in this question by
me, that the legal observance of meats commanded to the Jews Leuit. 11.
Deuteronomy. 14. was merely cerimoniall, and for typical and mysterious respects only
imposed, such as can have now no moral end to be still continued and practiced
by Christians; I shall easily shake and overthrow the sandy and fleeting ground
of my Adversaries doctrine.

And to proceed orderly in this question, and fitly for my purpose. I prove
first, this Law of meats to have been merely cerimoniall, because it is not
at all mentioned, but jointly and commixt with other Ceremonies of Moses law.
For in Leuiticus it is immediately anexed to the Typical rites of sacrifices
and oblations, and has subsequently following it the cerimonious law and order
of cleansings and purisications etc. In Deutron. likewise it has before it
many Judicial precepts, and that whole cerimonial ordinance of celebrating
festiual years, days, Sacrifices after it etc which is a sign at least, that
this differentiall law of meats is cerimoniall also, and no moral part of
Moses law. Secondly the ends for which this distinction of meats was holily
ordained by God, do sufficiently declare it to have been cerimoniall then, and
in no sort now appertaining to the moral observance of our Christian duties.
The first and chiefest end thereof expressed by God himself, Deuteronomy. 14. verse. 2.
was, that this observance of meats might be a note and distinctiue sign of
his people. Because (says Moses) thou art holy to thy Lord God, and he has
chosen thee amongst all other nations of the earth to be his peculiar people,
eat not things unclean. So that this Judicial difference of meats was part
of that middle vnmortered wall of Cerimoniall and Judicial Precepts,
separating for a time Jews and Gentills, until our Savior threw it down,
conioyning in him self the foundation and cornerstone both people in the
spiritual edifice and building of his Church, ad Ephesians. 2. verse. 14. and 15.
so that now as there is no distinction further made between Jew and Gentil ad
Romans 3. verse. 9. and 29. Act. 15. verse. 6. and as circumcision, and other
distinctiue signs, causing enmity and division between those two people, now
united in Christ, are by his death on the cross taken away and destroyed: So
is the law of difference imposed for that end, euacuated also.

Secondly, as marriage with Gentills was forbidden to the Jews, for that it
was foreseen by God to be an occasion to seduce and draw them from their
faithful profession, Exodus 34. verse. 16. as was lamentably experienced in
Solomon 3. Reg. 11. v. 1. and 2. and many other Jews by that means corrupted:
So for the same cause, Almighty God was pleased to inioyne them such a strict
abstinence, and horror of sundry meats, used by the Gentills round about
them, and such purifications for any that did either touch those meats, or
such persons as had eaten them, that the Jews for a necessary observance of
their law, were enforced in a manner to abstain from all civil commerce and
conversation with such Gentile nations as might be powerful to seduce them,
accounting it a great abomination even to enter into them, as S. Peter told
Cornelius, Act. 10. verse. 28. Which reason of forbidding meats is now taken
away by the happy conversion of Gentile people to Christ.

Thirdly these unclean fowls and beasts forbidden in Moses law, figured the
impure manners and abominable rites of the Gentills, as appears by S. Peter's
vision Act. 10. verse. 11. by which our Savior mystically taught him to account
no man vncleane^, as before he had done, ibid. verse. 8. Wherefore as the Gentiles
spiritual uncleanness was cleansed by their faith in Christ, Act. 15. verse. 9.
so was the figure thereof to cease also. And consequently this, and all other
ends of the cerimoniall law of meats, ceasing at Christ's coming, the
obligation of the law it self was abrogated also. A third Argument to prove
the legal difference of meats to have been cerimoniall and appertaining to
the Jews only, whilst they remained distinguished from other people, may be
gathered from these words so often repeated by God in the ordinance of that
law, They shall be unclean to you, abominable to you, execrable to you etc.
which manners of speech import that in themselves and to other nations they
were not so, but by his forbidding of them only made so.

Fourthly, the same arguments by which John Traske usually proves this law of
meats to be moral, and not cerimoniall, prove many other Judicial parts of
Moses law moral also, and still to be observed by Christians. Traskes common
argument is, that the Scriptures being perfect, must expressly contain a
sufficient and particular rule to direct Christians in all things, concerning
their duty toward God, and civil conversation amongst themselves, as what to
eat, what to wear etc. but this particular rule and direction of meats, for
example, to be eaten or not eaten by Christians, is no where expressed, but in
the 11. Chap. of Leuitic. and 19. of Deutr. Therefore the Law of meats
contained in those Chapters is moral, and still to be observed by Christians.
The Mayor of which argument is false, that the Scriptures must expressly and
particulerly instruct us in all natural actions as what to eat, what to wear
etc. For God has given us a natural Law to direct us sufficiently in such
particular actions, according to moral and general precepts of avoiding sin
in them, as to eat only such meats as are wholesome and necessary to sustain
our bodily forces, humbly thanking, and intending to serve our Creator by
them; to wear only such garments as are convenient for our estate, and
needful to cover and keep our bodies healthful etc. leaving us to holy liberty
to exercise religious abstinence and mortification in them: so as no other
supernatural rule is necessary to appoint either the particular fashions of
our garments, the kinds of meats which are to be eaten, the manners of dressing
them etc. the Scriptures teaching us not to be good Cooks or Taylers, but to
be good Christians, and to carry our selves morally, and without sin in all
our actions, whereunto the special nature of meats is wholly impertinent, as I
shall declare more fully in my next Question.

John Traske out of the general promises of Christ's graces and mercies,
plentifully ordained for faithful, righteous, and penitent persons, arrogantly
presumes assuredly and infallibly to collect the particular election of
himself, and others of his disciples, else why will he ridiculously deny the
sufficiency of general precepts and instructions to direct us in moral and
particular actions? Or why does he admit of many unnecessary trades embraced by
some of his chief disciples, as the trade of Comfitmaking, Perfuming etc.
tending in their own nature to luxury, and no where expressly mentioned in
Scripture, no not in such places, wherein the delicacies of Kings themselves
are expressed, as Samuel 1. cap. 8. Paralip. 2. cap. 9. 3. Reg. cap. 10. etc.
Moreover as there is no particular appointment of meats, but in those Chapters
of Leuitic. and Deutr. so is there no particular determination of judgments
against malefactors, and particular laws to be observed for the civil
government of people, but such as are contained in Moses Law: yet will not
Traske I suppose, be so very a Jew, as to introduce amongst Christians a
necessary practice of such Judicial, and sundry other cerimoniall precepts,
seeming more pertinent to the morality of Christians, then the legal
observance of meats, neither unclean in themselves, as the Minicheans and
other hateful Heretics supposed them, nor defiling in any fort the souls of
such as do eat them, with thanks and a holy intention to honor God by a
temperate use of them. Lastly John Traske admitting the legal difference and
uncleanness of meats yet to continue amongst Christians, is consequently also
bound to admit legal purifications appointed to be used by such as had eaten,
or touched them, as washing of their clothes, secluding themselves from humane
society, till the evening etc. which he seems not to do, but rejects them
as cerimonious, and impertinent now to the moral direction of Christians.

QVESTION III. Wherein the proper and perfect rule of moral Actions is briefly
declared: and how according to the same no meats are now unclean, and
unlawful to Christians.
JOHN Traske and his disciples are so absurd in their doctrine of meats, as
they wholly in a manner reject humane reason, from being any direction or rule
at all to guide them in moral actions. The Law of Nature, say they is a rule
only for natural and carnal persons to live by, Gods children having a higher
Law contained in the holy Scriptures, teaching them what to eat, and making
them perfect in all things else belonging to Christian manners and humane
conversation, 2. ad Tim. 3. verse. 15. and 16. My purpose therefore is in this
Question briefly to declare what the natural light of reason is, more fully
then I have done in the 2. Question of my first Controversy, showing it is
perfected by supernatural knowledge, and still remains a full and perfect
rule to direct us in all natural and moral actions.

Natural Reason is in it self the essential and internal clarity of man's
soul, by the use whereof we are distinguished from bruit beasts, taught to know
what is morally good and evil in our actions, and made capable of grace and
all supernatural perfection. So that whilst we continue naturally men here in
this life, we must guide and govern our selves thereby in humane and moral
actions: Faith being a supernatural light, graciously by God infused into our
soul, not to destroy natural knowledge in us, but to perfect the same two
Ways. First by helping us to a more easy and certain knowledge of sundry
natural verities, then we can ordinarily in this life attain unto, from the
bare experience of our senses. Secondly by notifying unto us the intellectual
power of our soul, and inclining it firmly and piously to believe many
revealed mysteries far above the natural reach and capacity thereof to be
discovered or thought upon by us: yet are they always found so conformable
thereunto, as no point of faith is to be accounted credible and worthy of our
faithful and devout assent, which is in true discourse repugnant to natural
reason and judgment in us.

So that John Traske and his disciples seem to deal unreasonably, and without
judgment, in excluding natural reason and judgment from being any rule at all
in moral and humane actions; contrary to the express doctrine of S. Paul ad
Romans 2. verse. 24. 25. 26. where he affirms, that the very Gentiles who wanted
all knowledge of a written law, were a law to themselves, being naturally
taught to observe that law, and to show it written in their hearts (to wit,
according to the moral precepts thereof) their own consciences sufficiently
serving to approve them in good, and to condemn them in evil actions, and so
consequently to be a proper rule to guide and direct them in all moral and
humane actions. The supernatural direction of faith, being graciously by
Christ ordained, as I have formerly said, to facilitate and explane natural
knowledge many ways corrupted, and obscured in us, and happily to conduce us
to a higher degree of heavenly knowledge and Evangelical perfection, is idly
and ignorantly confounded by Traske with natural morality, and falsely made
the only and proper rule of humane and moral actions, which Gentill people
wanted not, according to the Apostle, who notwithstanding are known not to
have had the light of heavenly knowledge and evangelical perfection revealed
unto them.

Which true distinction of a moral and supernatural law supposed, I here
undertake to prove the law of meats mentioned Leuit. 11. and Deutr. 14. to
have been merely cerimoniall, and no way now to appertain to the moral or
susupernaturall law and direction of Christians. And that the Judicial
observance of meats appertains not to that internal law of reason written
by God in the hearts of all men, and suficiently teaching them to know the
moral good and evil of their actions, and to make a conscience of them. I
prove it first, because never any Philosopher, or Wiseman among the Gentills
can be proved to have taught or practiced, amongst many other moral and
excellent precepts delivered and observed by them, this difference of meats:
but they are contrarily known to have indifferently eaten all sorts of
meats, which experimentally they found wholesome, and fit to sustayn their
bodies, as Connies, Hares Swines flesh, and other meats, prohibited to the
Jews. Which natural and daily experience 10. Traske ridiculously denies,
falsely pretending them to be not only legally unclean, but unwholesome also
for corporal sustenance, and no more created by God for food, or less
forbidden by any law to be eaten, then toades and serpents, which by the
natural precept of not killing our selus, we are taught to refrain from; not
for that they are in themselves naturally unclean, but because they are in
experience found to be inconvenient and hurtful to our nature, not nourished
but destroyed by them: yet was never wise Jews or Christians so absurd before,
as to teach that, for the like moral respect of preserving our natural life,
Swines flesh was as toads and serpents forbidden in that precept.

Secondly holy people after the flood observed, no doubt, the moral law and
divine directions given them, and yet as I have proved in my former Question,
were no other meats but strangled and blood, and those also for mysterious and
figurative respects, expressly until Moses time prohibited unto them.

Thirdly our Savior Matt. 15. verse. 11. 16. 17. from common reason and
natural understanding collecteth this universal rule and moral position,
that nothing entering the body can defile a man, who is only made impure by
sinful acts proceeding from his soul etc. S. Paul also ad Romans 14. verse. 17.
morally teaches us, that the kingdom of heaven, or the means of gaining
heaven is not, or consists in meat and drink, but in justice, peace and joy
in the holy Ghost, and he that in this serves Christ, pleases God, to wit,
what meats soever he eats. For (says he, 1. ad Corinth. cap. 8. v. 8.) meat
commends us not to God. Out of which holy texts I frame this argument.
Nothing is morally unclean, and unlawful to Christians that defiles not
their souls: But no meats entering their bodies can according to our Saviors
own words defile their souls: Therefore no meats are morally unclean and
unlawful to Christians. The Mayor of my argument is certain, because Christian
morality consists in freedom from sin. The Minor likewise is out of reason
it self deduced by our Saviors blaming his disciples for conceauing that any
meat eaten by the mouth can of it self defile the soul, and so consequently
for any natural uncleanness be unlawful to be used: wherefore the legal
prohibition of them, cannot be moral but mysterious and cerimoniall. Secondly
I frame this argument. That which neither commends men to God, nor
appertains to the gayning of heaven, as Justice and other virtues do cannot
belong to the moral or supernatural duty of a Christian: But meats according
to S. Paul do neither of themselves commend us to God, nor so appertain to the
gayning of heaven, as Justice and other virtues do: Therefore meats of
themselves cannot belong to the moral or supernatural duty of Christians, and
consequently no Christian is now bound to the legal observance of them.

Fourthly S. Paul 1 ad Tim. 4. v. 3. 4. and 5. speaking against Heretics
teaching people to abstain from meats which God created to be received with
thanksgiving by faithful persons, and such as know the truth, yields this
reason of his doctrine. Because every creature of God is good, and nothing to
be rejected (to wit for meat) which is received with thanksgiving: for it is
sanctified by the word of God and prayer. In which Text albeit it should be
granted that the Apostle chiefly disputed against the Symonians, Saturnians,
Marcionites, and other like Heretics, who in, and soon after the Apostles
times, taught many Creatures to be ill in their own nature, as having been by
an evil God created, and so to be detested by Christians: yet the reason of
his doctrine is moral and sufficient to show the legal impurity of meats
abrogated by our Savior, which I prove by this argument.

Every Creature of God that is good, and not to be rejected, being received
with thanskgiuing, may lawfully be eaten by Christians: But every Creature of
God is good, acording to the Apostle, and not to be rejected being received
with thanskgiuing: Therefore every creature may lawfully be eaten with prayer
and thansksgiuing by Christians. Secondly I argue thus. No creature is to be
accounted impure for food which is or may be sanctified by him that eats it:
But S. Paul affirms, every Creature to be sanctified with the word of God,
and by the prayer of him that with thanksgiving receaueth it. Therefore no
Creature is to be accounted impure for food, being with prayer and thanksgiving
so received. If Traske ask me how it is to be understood, that all creatures
may be sanctified with the prayers and thanksgiving of such as receive them; I
answer, that those words of S. Paul in their true sense, do only importe, that
whosoever eats any creature with prayer and thanksgiving, makes a holy use
thereof, and so that Creature may rightly be called holy, or a cause of holiness
to him that so receaueth it.

If he ask me whether it be not also required to the holy use of any creature,
that it be wholesome of it self for food, and created by God to be so with
prayer and thanksgiving received; I answer yes, because no vnwholsom creature,
poisonous, and hurtful to our bodies can for food be holily used, but wickedly
against the natural precept of not killing our selves etc. And those words of
S. Paul, Every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be rejected etc.
containing an universal sense, without limitation or exception, do necessarily
infer every wholesome creature apt to norish our body, and to be converted into
the natural substance thereof, to have been created for that purpose by
Almighty God, who has given us natural judgment and experience to know what
creatures are wholesome and apt to feed and sustain us: else were the natural
knowledge of man indiuidually to preserve himself by the external use of
creatures, more defective and imperfect then the natural instinct which beasts
and other living creatures have to choose wholesome food for themselves, and to
avoid things harmefull and contrary to their nature. And whereas eating and
other acts tending to men's individual preservation are of all others belonging
to our human condition and estate meanest in themselus and most connaturall
unto us, Io. Traskes barbarous folly may be worthily admired, in excluding
natural reason from being any rule at all, to guide and direct us in them. And
it may fitly be termed a desperate and frantic kind of ignorance and
impudency in him, to deny, against the general experience of men, in all ages
and countries of the world, that Swinesflesh, and other beasts, fowls, and
fishes legally prohibited, being dressed and eaten, are apt to nourish and
sustain our bodies.

Qvestion IIII. Proving by sundry texts of the New Testament the law of meats
abrogated to Christians.
MY first argument proving the differentiall law of meats to have been
repealed by our Savior and his Apostles in the new Testament, shall be deduced
out of S. Peter's vision Act. 10. v. 11. 12. 13. 14. and 15. wherein he was
willed to kill, and eat those unclean beasts and fowls represented unto him,
and by a second voice taught not to term that common or unclean which God
had cleansed. Which purification of unclean beasts and fowls, as I deny not
but that mystically and chiefly it imported the cleansing of the Gentills
hearts by faith in Christ and supernall graces conferred equally on then and
the Jews (as is plainly testified ibid. verse. 18. act. 15. v. 7. and 14.) So
likewise I affirm, that as S. Peter's horror and denial of having ever eaten
any unclean thing, was literally meant by him; so was Gods command likewise
that he should kill and eat them, and his divine warrant of their being
cleansed, literally to be understood, and made a chief ground of that
Apostolical decree Act. 51. wherein all sorts of meats, not strangled,
sacrificed to Idols, and blood, were freely licensed to the converted Gentiles.
For as by this vision S. Peter was instructed first concerning the general and
actual vocation of the Gentills: so in like manner was he taught not to impose
on them the cerimonious, and burdensome law of meats, further then a necessary
abstinence from these three for a time already mentioned.

My second argument shall be collected out of the Apostles decree Act. 15.
wherein against such as taught to introduce Circumcision, and the observance of
Moses law verse. 5. it was after a diligent conquisition made of this question,
jointly by all the Apostles determined, that the heavy and insupportable burden
of the old law should be no further imposed upon the converted Gentills, then
that they should abstain from meats strangled, sacrificed to Idols, blood,
and fornication; and in so doing they should do well. Whence I argue thus.

The Apostles determined in their decree all necessary abstinence from meats
to be observed by the Gentiles: But the Apostles in their decree licensed unto
them all sorts of meats except strangled etc. Therefore only those meats were
necessary to be abstained from by the Gentills. The mayor of my argument is
certainly proved by the main drift and intention of the Apostles, expressed in
the text it self, which was to determine how far Moses law did oblige the
converted Gentills particulerly about meats, and using many women, as they had
been accustomed to do before their conversion: so that as the Apostles in
their decree did tie them to the matrimonial knowledge of one lawful wife; so
did they also fully instruct them in such an observance of meats, as they saw
needful to be imposed for a time, to make faithful Jews and Gentills to live
peacefully together in the unity of one Church. The minor of my argument is
evident by the decree it self, wherein it seemed good to the holy Ghost, and
the Apostles, to impose no other burden on them then that they should astaine
from those 3. sorts of meats, and fornication: which decree had been an
insufficient rule to direct them concerning meats lawful or not to be eaten,
if other meats prohibited in Moses law had still remained so.

Secondly out of that Apostolical decree, I frame this argument. If the legal
difference of meats had continued after Christ as before, and equally obliged
faithful Jews and converted Gentills to the wonted observance thereof, then
was the Apostles particular and express prohibition of blood, meats strangled,
and offered to Idols, needles and ridiculously imposed to the converted
Gentiles, and they were falsely told, that in abstaining from those meats they
should do well: because according to John Traske, they were by God equally
commanded to abstain from other meats also. But it were blasphemy to affirm
this Apostolical decree, to contain any false, absurd, or superfluous
doctrine: Therefore those meats mentioned in the decree, were only and
determinatly prohibited to the converted Gentills. Thirdly never any ancient
Father, or Christian Divine did before Traske understand other, then that the
Apostles intended in their decree to ease the Gentills from some burdensome
obseruances of the law besides Circumcision, which the Jews had been before
Christ's coming tied unto, as may be plainly gathered from the whole scope of
S. Peter's and S. James speeches assented unto by the other Apostles. But if the
Moysaicall Law of meats did generally oblige al Christians after this decree as
before, then were the Gentiles nothing at all eased thereby from the burdensome
obseruances of Moses Law etc. Therefore the Apostles certainly meant in that
decree to repeal the Mosaicall Law of meats, and prohibit to the Gentills
only such as that decree particulerly mentioned.

My third argument shallbe the words of S. Paul. ad Galat. 2. whereas S. Peter
is said to have eaten at Antioch with the Gentills verse. 12. but afterward
being fearful to offend certain Jews sent by S. James from Jerusalem* he
withdrew himself, for which simulation S. Paul publicly told him verse. 14.
If thou being a Jew did live Gentillike and not Iewishlike, how do thou
enforce the Gentills to Iudaize? which could not be understood of the Jews in
respect of Circumcision, whereof no mention is made in that place, nor in
respect of conversation wherein it cannot be conceaped how the Gentiles could
Iudaize or imitate the Jews: therefore it must neoessarily be understood of the
Judicial observance of meats wherein they imitated S. Peter's example. Likewise
when S. Peter eating with the Gentiles is said to have lived Gentillike and not
Iewishlike, it cannot well be understood, but in regard of eating such meats as
the Gentills did, and his not observing that difference of meats which the
Jews observed.

My fourth argument to convince John Traske in his Judicial observance of
meats, may be taken out of S. Paul ad Hebr. 9. verse. 10. numbering the
observance of meats amongst other cerimonious rites, and carnal
instifications of Moses Law imposed only until the time of correction or
reformation, which Christ was ordained to make: Wherefore such wonted
obseruances of meats are abrogated now by Christ and no longer to continue.

My fifth argument may be collected out of the same Apostle, who having in his
first Epistle to the Corinthians cap. S. given them a liberty to eat or
abstain from meats offered to Idols, as their own consciences served them,
observing mutual charity therein, cap. 10. verse. 25. he wills them to eat
without exception, all meats sold in the shambles of the Gentill City, asking
no question for conscience sake, that is to say, not regarding whether such
meats had been offered to Idols or not: For the earth (says he) is our Lords
and the plenitude thereof, and if any Gentill inuit you to a feast, and you
will go, eat all things set before you etc. In which place albeit S. Paul
treats only of meats offered to Idols, yet his license is generally
understood of all meats and a fortiori proves all other things not offered to
Idols lawfully eaten, which I prove by these unanswerable arguments. Meats
offered to Idols were not only prohibited to the Jews as were other unclean
meats but also by the former decree of the Apostles Act. ^^. forbidden to all
Christians: But S. Paul licensed the Corinthians to eat such sacrificed meats
without scruple or question* Therefore other meats legally only prohibited may
be eaten also.

Secondly S. Paul wills the Christians of Corinth to eat all things sold
in the shambles; or set at Infidells tables: But it cannot be reasonably
doubted that in the shambles, and at Infidells tables many meats forbidden in
Moses Law were usually sold, and eaten: Therefore S. Paul licensed the
Christians at Corinth to eat those meats also. Io. Traske and his disciples
will not stick ridiculously to retort the Mayor of my argument, and to tell me,
that if the Christians at Corinth might eat all things sold in the Gentills
shambles, they might eat horns and skins also. They will also foolishly
deny that meats prohibited to the Jews were either sold in the Gentills
shambles or set at their tables making so the differentiall law of meats
particulerly given to the Jews, to have been naturally observed by all other
nations also. And for a shift they will flatly deny meats prohibited to the
Jews, to be food at all for men, more then toades, or serpents. Which
fooleries against common experience, learning and judgment are to be derided,
and charitably compassioned in them, rather then answered.

Thirdly the reasons why Christians were licensed by S. Paul to eat Idol
offeringes, are two expressed in the text it self; the first is because an
Idol to him that has judgment to distern it is nothing in the world able to
pollute the creatures thereunto offered; the second is because the earth is our
Lords, and the plenitude thereof; that is to say, all creatures therein
contained are good and created by him. Which later reason is effectual also to
prove other meats prohibited to the Jews to be good in themselves and lawfully
eaten by Christians. Lastly S. Paul ad Romans 14. like a moderator, or
peacemaker between the firm Christians, who were the Gentills, and the
infirm who were the Jews weakly and scrupulously still inclined to observe
the differentiall law of meats, and festival days commanded by Moses, be
exorteth the Jew not to condemn the Gentill, using his liberty in eating al
sorts of meats; and the Gentil in like manner not to condemn the scrupulous
Jew, but rather to abstain from using his liberty, then offending the Jew, to
be an occasion to him of scandal and falling from his faith* Him that it weak
(says the Apostle v. 1) take unto you, not in disputation of cogitations: for
one believes that he may eat all things: But he that is weak, to wit the
scrupulous Jew that will neither eat meats prohibited in Moses Law, nor
sacrificed by the Gentiles, let him eat herbs. Let not him that eats
despise him that eats not, and he that eats not, let him not judge him that
eats, to wit, all sorts of meats, for God has assumed him to himself etc.
and he eats to our Lord (verse. 6.) for he gives thinks to God. etc. Why
iudgest thou thy brother (speaking to the Jew verse. 10.) for his liberty of
eating all things? And (speaking to the Gentills) why despisest thou thy
brother for his weakness in putting a differnce between meats? I know (says
he verse. 14.) and am persuaded in our Lord Christ that nothing is common or
unclean of it self. But to him that supposes any thing to be como or
unclean, to him it is common (to wit; for the error of his conscience, making
it-seeme so.) All things indeed are clean (verse. 20) but it is ill for the man
that eats with offense etc. (to wit of his weak brother:) concluding thus
his advice to Jew and Gentill* Have thou faith (that is to say, ar^ (...)
firmly persuaded of the lawfulnes of al meats) have it with thy self before
God etc. But he that discerns, or makes a difference of meats, is damned or
commits a damnable sin if he ^ie, because (...) of faith, or because he
is not fully persuaded of the lawfulnes of that meat which he (...); for all
that is not of faith, is sin, to wit, every thing that a man does against his
own knowledge and conscience is sin.

Which discourse of S. Paul is so clear in self for refutation of Traskes
doctrine, and so vn^^^^^lly understood by ancient Fathers and m^de ^^e
Expositours, as well Protestants as Catholics, that the (...) and (...)
devises whereby some of Traskes difciples have sought to delude so many plain
passages of this Chapter, may well seem to learned men, not iudiciously,
embraced, but in an heretical pride, and a desire of nouelty and singularity
purposely affected by them* In so much as one of them being pressed with the
litterall plains of so many texts, concluding in express terms and directly
against his contrary doctrine; first he ridiculously devised a new argument of
this Cha^pter, and pretended that S. Paul endeavored therein to instruct such
Christians, as being invited to mourning and lamentation, might think it
unlawful to eat any meats at all; idly citing many Prophetical textes,
commending^ such ti^^* abstinence from nourishing and delightful meats*
Whereas S. Paul speaks no one word in that Chapter of inuiting Christians to
mourning and lamentation, but only endeavors to compose controversies and
occasions of offense between Jews and Gentills, and to make their ordinary
conversation particulerly about meats and festival days peacefully and
charitably together. They seem also to have sundry other fancies to avoid the
pressing authority of these textes, but so grossly as I hold them* not w^^^^ to
be here recited, much less particulerly refuted: whippes being the best
answer to such arguments, and Bedlam^ or Bridewell the fittest school for
such a Sectmaister, and disciples to dispute in.

QVESTION V. Wherein is proved, that Blood and strangled meats may be
lawfully now eaten by Christians.
MY purpose in this Question is not so much to refute John Traske in his Jewish
and absurd doctrine of meats, sufficiently already in my former Questions
discussed, as particulerly to overthrow the Puritanicall abstinence of some
percise people, who wholly grounding their faith upon he authority of Scripturs,
and little crediting any Christian practice or doctrine not expressed in them,
are in many places known strictly to observe the Apostolical decree Act. 15.
commanding Christians to abstain from strangled meats blood etc. Which (say
they) was a precept expressly given by God in the law of nature Genes. 9. and
renewed by the Apostles, a a law necessary to be observed by the Gentills
converted, and is not found to have been repealed, as was the like prohibition
of meats offered to Idols (1. ad Corin. cap. 8 and 10.) by any latter
doctrine or practice of the Apostles. But contrarily it may be by many ancient
and authentical testimonies of antiquity certainly proved, that many hundred
years together after Christ, holy people observed this abstinence from
stragled meats and blood, as a doctrine taught them by the Apostles. Tertullian
for example in Apologia cap. 9. expressly affirms Christians not to (...)
blood at all but to abstain for that cause from beasts dying of themselves or
strangled, least they should be defiled with blood etc.

Blandina also in her Martyrdom mentioned by Eusebius lib. 5. hist. cap. 1.
tells the Gentiles that they did much err in thinking Christians to eat the
blood of infants, who (said she) use not the blood of beasts, which is
testified also of Christians by Minutius Felix in Octauio, by Origin contra
Celsum lib. 8. and sundry later Counsels have under great penalties forbidden
the eating of such meats, Apostolically prohibited to all Christians. So that
their doctrine and practice is not Iewishly grounded, as John Traskes opinions
are, on a cerimonious precept of the old law, certainly abrogated, as is
already proved: but they observe it as a precept given to Noah by God himself
in the law of nature, repeated in Moses law, and renewed by the Apostles.

The difficulty also of this question is increased and made more hard, and
uneasy to be solued, by reason, that the Adversaries against whom I am to
dispute, admit no infallible authority of any ancient or modern Church, guided
by Christ's holy Spirit, and lead into all truth, so that faithful people may
securely and without danger of erring embrace her communion, follow her
directions, and rest in her judgment, as the supporting pillar and foundation
of Truth, according to the Apostle 1. Tim. 3. They admit no Apostolical
Tradition or certain rule to know any unwritten doctrine to have been held and
practiced since Christ successively and universally by Christians. Finally they
little regard any reasonable discourse or Theological deduction, not
literally and plainly expressed in Scripture, the only Rule of their faith
and Judge of controversies between us. According to which their usual and
unreasonable manner I cannot more forcibly endeavor to disprove this their
Puritanicall abstinence from blood and strangled meats, then by orderly
proving three things. 1. That this precept given to Noah (Genesis 9. verse. 4.)
was mysterious and not moral in it self. 2. That it was not but for a time
only, and for ends now wholly ceased, decreed by the Apostles (Act. 15. verse.
20. 28.) 3. That it has been since by a holy and lawful practice of Christ's
Church generally repealed, so as it is a singular fancy for Christians now
again to renew the observance thereof.

And that this abstinence from blood and strangled meats was not a moral
precept, I prove first by the reason for which God prohibited those meats to
Noah and his Posterity, which was chiefly by this horror of blood to make them
detest manslaughter, and bloody cruelty, as appears by Gods words
immediately annexed to that precept, Genes. 9 verse. 5. 6. 7 that sin of murder
having been first committed by Cain (Genes. cap. 4. verse. 8.) afterward by
Lamech (ibidem v. 23.) Nomrod also and other mighty men in those first ages of
the world, over easily multiplied that horrible offense against Gods intended
propagation of mankind: whereas now to us Christians the example of our
Saviors meekenes, his express prohibition of killing, striking, or miscalling
our Neighbors, his doctrine of pardoning seauenty times seven our enemies, of
being quickly reconciled unto them, of doing good for evil, and praying for
such as persecute us etc. do sufficiently instruct us to abstain from effusion
of blood and cruelty: so that such a horror of blood in meats cannot for that
end be longer necessary to be continued by Christians. Secondly, if this
precept had been a moral law, necessary to direct us in humane conversation and
manners toward God, or between our selves, it had no doubt been included in
that natural law, by which Noah and his faithful posterity were sufficiently
instructed, and taught to know the moral good and evil of their actions, and
to refrain from sin in them: So as this precept had been unnecessarily
imposed if perfect reason and natural judgment had otherwise taught it unto
them, as it did other moral precepts. Thirdly, never any Philosopher or wise
Gentill, ignorant of that positive precept given to Noah, either taught or
practiced after Christ's days or before, abstinence from blood and strangled
meats, as a moral and natural precept; neither can it be, as I have else where
declared out of natural reason, the rule of natural laws, iudiciously
conceived, that blood or strangled meats entering the body, can defile the
soul etc. Neither was the Apostles Decree ( Act. 15.) concerning abstinence
from such meats, imposed on the Gentills as a moral law perpetually to
continue, but only as an easy observance necessary for a time, the better to
unite Jews and Gentills, in the unity of one Church. For the Jews having an
especial horror of Idoll-offerings, stra^gled meats, and blood, would have
abhorred al manner of society with Gentiles, if they had not observed some kind
of order and conformity in meats with them.

And this is to be proved first out of the decree it self Act. 15. verse. 28.
wherein it seemed good to the holy Ghost and the Apostles, to lay no further
burden upon the Gentills then that they should abstain etc. By which words
(no further burden) is plainly insinuated unto us, that the prohibitio^ of
such meats was a part of that burden which the Apostles would not have wholly
laid on the Gentills necks, to wit the cerimonious obseruances of Moses Law,
so many in number and so hard in practice, as few amongst the Jews observed
them, ibid. v. 10. and so consequently it was no moral precept included in
Christ's law formerly embraced and professed by the faithful Gentills.
Secondly, the Gentills were by the same Apostolical authority, and for the
like respects commanded to abstain from Idoll-offeringes, as they were taught
to refrain from meats strangled and blood. But the same Gentills were
authorized afterward by S. Paul ad Romans 14. 1. ad Corin. cap. 8. and 10. to
eat Idoll-offeringes without scruple or question, as has been in my former
Question already declared: wherefore then might they not afterward in like
manner be licensed to eat indifferently meats strangled and blood? For (says
S. Augustine cont. Faustum lib. 32. cap. 13.) albeit the Apostles then
commanded Christians to abstain from blood and strangled meats, choosing for
a time an easy observance, and not burden some to the Gentiles, that the Jews
and they might be built on the same corner stone etc. yet after the Church of
the Gentills became such, as no natural Israelite appeared therein, what
Christian now observes it so as not to touch black birds, and other lesser
birds, unless their blood be effused, or not to eat a Hare or Conny killed
only with a blow given in the neck, without any other bloody wound? and if
perchance some fear to touch those meats, they are derided by other
Christians: so that in S. Austines days, especially in those Western Churches,
as Jews (for whose satisfaction and better gayning to Christ that cerimoniall
Abstinence was conditionally and for a time only imposed) ceased to embrace the
Christian faith, so the obligation of that precept ceased also, and began to be
no longer observed by Christians. And as the Eastern Churches were nearest to
Jerusalem, and most stored with Jewish Conuertites; so the Apostolical
precept of abstayning from strangled meats and blood was in those Churches
longest observed.

And in those first ages after Christ, because Christians were by occasion of
the Carpocratians and other wicked heretics, eating children sacrificed, with
abominable rites, for their Eucharist, exceedingly traduced and infamed to the
Gentill magistrates; therefore to show themselves innocent and fre from such
horible slanders, they holily, whilst those monstrous Sects continued, tied
themselves to a Christian observance of that Apostolical decree, as the above
mentioned authorityes of Tertullian, Eusebius, and other producible testimonies
of antiquity do certainly testify; which makes nothing at all to prove the
still continuing obligation of the precept generally anulled by the contrary
practice of Christians in after ages.

If my adversaries object, that as the decree of the Apostles was according to
the prohibition of Fornication therein contained, a moral Law still continuing:
so was the same decree moral also according to those enjoined abstinencyes
from meats etc. I answer, that the prohibition of Fornication was a moral
precept; reducible to the Commandment of not committing Adultery, contained in
the Decalogue, necessarily imposed at that time to instruct the Gentiles newly
converted in the Christian law of Matrimony, and to deter them from
Concubinisme, and using any more then one of those many women whom
peradventure they had been accustomed carnally to have known before their
conuersions: whereas their enjoined abstinence from blood and stangled meats,
was no more decreed as a moral and ever continuing law, then was their like
prohibition of meats sacrificed to Idols, plainly repealed in the Apostles
time by a contrary and lawful practice of Christians. And whereas S. Paul ad
Romans 14. verse. 1. etc. accounted it only weakness in the Christian Jews of
those times to tie themselves to the legal observance of meats, and to be
scandalized at the liberty of the Gentills, eating indifferently all things,
it is now to be worthily reputed an extrauaga^t folly and fancy for our pure
Professors of spiritual Sanctity and Euangelical Perfection to tie themselves
to such a Cerimoniall, and burdensome observance of meats, never dreamed of in
many ages past by their Christian and Catholic Predecessors, and nothing
pertinent to their pretended adoration, and service of God in spirit and verity.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
THE Preface, declaring the Authors scope and intention in this Refutation.
page 3. I. CONTROVERSY.
QVEST. I. Of the seventh day before* Moses. page 21. Quest. II. Whether the
precept of the Sabbath were Moral or Cerimoniall. page 26. Quest. III.
Concerning the abrogation of the Jews Sabbath. page 31. Quest. IIII. Of the
Sabbath translated into the weekly day of our Saviors Resurrection. page 42.
Quest. V. Wherein is proved, that Christians are to celebrate the yearly day of
our Saviors Resurrection on Sunday, and not on the 14. day of March-Moone, as
the Jews celebrated their Paschal. page 57.
II. CONTROVERSY.
QVEST. I. Of the uncleanness of meats before Moses Law. page 65. Quest. II.
Of the Moysaicall Law of meats, and mysterious ends why God commanded it.
page 71. Quest. III. Wherein the proper and perfect rule of moral Actions is
briefly declared: and how according to the same no meats are now unclean, and
unlawful to Christians. page 77. Quest. IIII. Proving by sundry texts of the
New Testament, the law of meats abrogated to Christians. page 85. Quest. V.
Wherein is proved, that blood and strangled meats may be lawfully now eaten by
Christians. page 95.

FINIS.

