EIPNOGONIA; OR THE PEDIGREE OF PEACE, DELIVERED IN A SERMON INTENDED TO THE
IVDGES AT THE ASSIZES holden at Okeham in Rutland, July. 31. 1629. but after
upon an occasion, preached at Vppingham, in the same County, September. 6. 1629.

By Antony Fawkner, Master of Arts, late Student in Jesus College at Oxford.

PSALM. 89.14. Righteousness and equity are the stablishment of his Throne.

PSALM. 119.72. The Law of thy mouth is better unto me then thousand (...) and
silver.

LVK. 22.36. (...) Peace be unto you.

LONDON. Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Robert Allot^, and are to be sold at
his shop in S. Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Bear. 1630.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL MY LOVING UNCLE, MASTER EVERARD FAWKNER, Peace Internal
and External from God the Author of Peace.
SIR;
IN the time of your Shriefaltie, you requested this ensuing labor, which I
was ready at the time appointed to have paid as the tribute, not so much of my
courtesy, as duty. It was intended for your ear, but (by I know not what
prevention twice or thrice put off) J present it now (what ere it is) to your
and the Worlds eye. Which is a doctrinall sense too, and by so much the more
critical then the ear, by how much the more curious, and indeed can better
satisfy its own quaintness by a privilege it has to dwell longer on its
object. But for my own part, J quail not for any Momus. I have been so well
acquainted with the worlds folly, that J scorn either to flatter, or fear it.
I have known it requite fawning with flouting: and he that claws it, had best
take heed that it kick not him. Such is its dotage, that for the more part it
plants its prime flowers in dunghils, not gardens. So that he who dreams to
purchase her favor by deserts, does but (...) make roapes of sand; a labor
foolish, because fruitless. Yea this I dare say, that he of our calling
(though it be most excellent) which by his laudable endeavors alone, supposes
in these last and worst days to gain preferment, shall with expectation,
hunger, and study make himself so lean, that (unless Nature be more
indulgent, then charity harborous) he shall scarce ever be able by all his
gains to put himself in flesh again. So much, and no more honesty may we
expect from the World in its downright Nature, and as little or less from
its veiled, hypocritical, and whining sanctity. Experto creed. Wherefore if
the best deserts can hope for no better, I have small reason by my weakest
endeauours to expect so much, unless (as indeed it often happens in this cross
world) the sillier fellow may have the better fortune. Briefly, I lie so almost
level with the earth, that Non habeo vnde cadam, I cannot fall much lower.
Wherefore I fear no censure; not because I am above any envy, but because in
the security of a shrub from the wind, I am beneath all. As for you Sir, to
whom I offer this poor piece in its homely proportion, shapen to a Country
Auditory, if it offend you, reject it, for even so you shall not displease me,
or (which J wish) if it please you read it, and in it

Your poor Kinseman in all Christian service to be commanded, Antony Fawkner.

EIPNOGONIA, OR THE PEDIGREE OF PEACE, etc.
LEVIT. 24.11. His Mothers name also was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri, of
the Tribe of Dan.


NAtures perfection presupposes an imperfection. Instants are too nimble for
her sober determination, and her actions for the more part are accomplished by
a graduall motion. Art receives, and imitates her method, first hewing her
work in the rough, ere she can put to vltimam manum, her finishing, her exact
hand. And see how the Devil will be Ape to them both; he must have his Climax
too, ascending from the conception of a sin to its birth, from its birth, to
its maturitie. Discord boakes to equal contention, contention swelles to the
greatness of a quarrel, then by its own poison bursts in Death. 22. q. 37,
38, 41.
It Is the Schoolemans gradation from the infancy of malice to its age, from the
beginning to the end. It Is conceived in the heart, brought forth by the tongue,
executed by the hand, and receives its just vengeance in its selfe-destruction.
We need not stray far to find an example; my Text affoords a wretched one,
the son of an Egyptian; who first went out, verse. 10. Lo, his heart was full.
Then he strove, again verse. 10. (...), as the Septuagint, Iurgatus est, as
Saint Hierome renders it, he brawled. His tongue would be the Midwife to bring
to the birth that mischief, which his heart had determined. And it is like,
had not prevention hindered, what passion threatened, there would have been some
knocks. Or at the least, suppose the hands bloody execution be prevented; then
will the tongue supply its place, and so challenge a double share in guilt. For
Maledixit, he cursed. Yea, and because his hand might not wound him, whom his
tongue had reviled, Coelum ipsum petijt stultitia; God must be the object of
his malice, as well as his neighbor; for blasphemauit Nomen Domini: He
blasphemed the Name of the Lord, ver. 11. And what now can be added? The sin is
swollen to its complete to its, stretched hugeness: then it must needs burst.
Justice will avenge, they brought him unto Moses, verse. 11. and vengeance will
reward, they stoned him, verse. 14. So then, the transgressour is dead, but not
the sin; or if the sin, yet not the shame. There are two fames in the
fiction, good and evil, each equally perpetual. Happy are the good, if their
fame be eternal, and as unhappy are the bad, if theirs be more then
momentany. The memorial of the Just is as a sweet odor; Illic Nascuntur
violae: the memory of the wicked repaires, reuiues their ignominies, which
otherwise would decay, and lie dead, as their forgotten carkeises. Nay, so
selfe-diffusiue is this opprobry of sin, that it is not limited to the
transgressors person, but as more infectious then the contagion of Leprosy
spreads it self at once over both Auncestry and Posterity. If the Father tread
awry, (...), (...).
The children shall be sure to taste the shame, perchance the punishment. Achan
sinned: he and his whole family perished: Josh. 7.24. Haman transgressed: he
and his ten sons were utterly destroyed: Esth. 9.10. (...).
(...). So perilous is the company of the ungodly, and so full of danger
alliance to the wicked. Nor is it more unhappiness to be the son of a
wicked father, then to be the father of a rebellious child. When the
Blasphemer in my Text cursed, happily Shelomith was dead, it is probable that Dibri
was, and that Dan was, most certain: yet, as if there had been a secret
unhappiness due to have been inflicted upon them for the mutual relation
between their very ashes, and their accursed seed, they must undergo the
punishment, to be recorded the misfortunate parents of so graceless a son:
yea, so exact is the register, that it catalogues from the nearest of Kin to
the first of the Tribe.

His mothers name also was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri of the Tribe of
Dan.

Affectation of method is the confusion of method. Wherefore not to tire, or
fright you (as with so many Hydraes heads) with tedious Heptacotomies, nor to
delude your apprehensions with subtle curiosities as vain and brittle, as
they are thin. Briefly, my Text includes a threefold disquiparant relation.
The first (according to the order of words) is inter matrem and filium,
between the mother and the son: Shelomith and the blasphemer. The second is
Inter Patrem and Filiam; between the father and the daughter; Dibri and
Shelomith. The third is inter Patrem and Filium; between the father and the
son; Dan and Dibri. This we may observe from the historical Genealogy; in
which again, if with a sharp eye we but look into the veiled treasure of
the names signification, we may discover the like relation included in a
genealogy mystical. Let then so heinous a transgressor as this blasphemer,
be taken in the abstract for his transgression, sin. Whose son is he?
Shelomiths. What is she? The Interpreter translates her, Paguin. de Derinat.
Nom. Heb.
Peaceful, from (...) [ Shalom] Peace. Ascend next to her father, Dibri, which
the Translator renders, My Word, from (...) or (...) [ Dabar or Dibber] a Word;
a written, or unwritten word, the two dividing members of Lex, a Law. The
Scripture iustifies the interpretation; Ho wrote on the Tables according to the
first writing, the ten Words: Deuteronomy 10.4. The Words, that is, the Commandments,
which are The Law. Climb yet a few steps higher, and from thence in a fair
prospect, view the Ancestor of Dibri: he is Dan. Holy-writ construeth him
Judging, a Judge, or Judgment: for first, his reputed mother gave him that
name with her blessing; And Rachel said, God has judged me, therefore called
she his name Dan: Genesis 30.6. And again, Jacob confirmed it with his blessing;
Dan shall judge his people: Genes. 49.16. Descend then in the right line of
this Genealogy: Dan is the father of Dibri; Judgment of the Law: Dibri begets
Shelomith; the Law, Peace: and Shelomith is the parent of the Blasphemer; Peace
brings forth transgression. Dan begets Dibri; again, Dibri, Shelomith; and
Shelomith bears the Curser. Judgment procreates the Law; the Law, Peace; and
Peace brings forth her misshapen offspring, Sin. Old Hesiod, whether
benefited by the twylight of Nature, or fortunate by a luckie stumble in the
Heathenish darkness, in his (...), Hesiod. in Theogon.
groaped at the shadow of this Genealogy. He makes Judgment, the Law and
Peace, three Sisters, the daughters of one Mother, Themis, or Justice, (...).
But we leave the Tale to the Poets patronage, returning to their mutual and
successiue generation in my Text: in which leaving the order of words in the
ascent from Shelomith, we will begin at the further end, and so in linea recta
descendente, pass downward from the father to the children; first, touching
him which was first by the priority of Nature and Time, Honor and Order, and
he is

Dan, Judgment.
Judgment is the act of Justice. Aquin. 22. q. 60. art. 1.
Justice an habit, by which we have an inclination, Aquin. in AR. Ethic. lib.
5. c. 2.
power and will to the performance of what is just: so the Philosopher.
Justinian. de Iustit. and Iure.
Or, as the Imperial Lawyer (though not so formally) it is Constans and
perpetua voluntas suum cuique tribuens; a constant and perseuering will; Georg.
Reisch. Margarit. Philosopn. lib. 12. cap. 23.
or more Logically, the habit of that will, which gives, and by which, each one
receives his proper and peculiar right. Now we know, that Habits are by so
much the firmer radicated in their subjects, by how much the actions from
whence they flow, are the more frequently and timely used. Horat. epist. lib.
1. epist. 2.
Quo semel est imbuta recens seruabit odorem Testa diu; The upright tree was
made straight when it was a sprigge. Virtues that are taught to youth, grow
habitual to age; and what Nature can never find easy, custom make natural.
Wherefore the Persians, that they might be sure to provide upright Judges, made
their children petty Justices, and taught them Law as soon as letters.
Xenophon. (...).
They went to the School of Justice every day, (...), says Xenophon, as duly
as amongst us our Nouices to learn their first rudiments. Yea, their very
sports were serious, and (as another small Commonweal) they had their (...),
Public Halles to moote their childish Cases in. So would they wisely prevent
Nature by their discipline, accompanying their increase of years with a growth
of virtue, that they might become men, and just both together. What the light
of Nature taught them, Horrt. carm. lib. 3. ed. 24.
the precepts of God commanded the Jews. Eradenda cupidineis Parui sunt
elementa. They were (...) (...), A stiff-necked people of an uncircumcised
heart, Act. 7.51. and the coare of their rebellion must be grubbed up from the
root, which is easiest done in the Spring of youth, when sin can take but
tender hold, wherefore they must teach Gods Laws diligently unto their
children, and to make them more habitual, they must talk of them when they
are in their houses, and when they walk by the way, and when they lie down,
and when they rise up: Deuteronomy. 6.7. yea, they must bind them as a sign upon
their hands, and as Frontlets between their eyes: Verse. 8. Whence the Pharisees
as seeming-performers of the Law, wrote those sentences in Frontlet-parchments,
which they should have graven in their hearts, and misplaced their consciences
in their Philacteries: Matthew. 23.5. Nor is it wonder, that a gemme so precious
should be in so high esteem. Aquin. 22. q. 58. art. 4.
For indeed Nature knowing her Original to be of God, has exalted her unto a
throne at least, for the more part above the rest of virtues. Her seat is not
in the lower appetite of sense, but in that supreme one of the Will, which
being a faculty of the diuiner part of man, is the most convenient receptacle
of a virtue, whose original is so Divine. Divine? Yes: for Justice is of the
Lord, yea it is the Lords. He executed the Justice of the Lord: Deuteronomy. 33.21.
Hear then, O Israel, The Lord our God is one Lord: Deuteronomy. 6.4. and that Lord
both merciful and just: Psalm. 116.5. Plato confessed, that he was attended by
a revenging Justice, which executed his wrath upon the transgressors of his
Law, and in that was more religious then the accursed Marcion, Iren. advers.
haereset, lib. 3. c. 45.
a blasphemer at least, equal with the son of the Egyptian, dividing the
Divinity into two Godheads. The one forsooth he called Good, and styled him,
The Father of Mercy: the other Bad, and reputes him the Patron of Justice. As
if he would make Mercy and Justice utter enemies, and by an unjust sentence
deprive Justice of her goodness. Irenaeus in the power of the Spirit mightily
confutes him, Iren. advers. haereses, lib. 3. c. 42.43.
and demonstrates him as guilty of contradiction as blasphemy, under whose
victorious feet we leave him clothed with shame and confusion of face,
mocking his foolish Thesis, as apparently repugnant to the first principles of
Philosophy, as Theology, with a Poets fiction, weighty enough to contrapoise
his slender position; Hesiod. (...).
(...): Judgment is the daughter of the most high God, indeed it is the work
of the Almighty: Ier. 9.24. And because God says so, Epiphanius is bold to say
as much, with as close a tie, knitting the rest of virtues unto Justice, as the
Philosopher can bind them unto Prudence: for Non aliter (says he) quis fiet
bonus, Epiph. cont. Haros. lib. 1.
si non fuerit Iustus: if a man cannot be just, it is impossible that he should
be good. To divide honesty from virtue, and goodness from justice, are
equally (...), both above the reach of possibility. And that it is a virtue,
Adrianus Turnebus aduersario, lib. 8. c. 20.
the Coryphaeus of our Modern Critics (not to talk of Aristotle's Media)
induces Vlpian to conclude from the definition of Justice, viz. that it is
voluntas constans and perpetua; A constant and perpetual Will: so Stoically
both arguing it to be a virtue, and distinguishing it from the perturbations
mutability, by a solid, fixed, and perseuering constancy: yea in one eminent
acceptance, Aquin. 22. q. ^8. art. 6. in corpore.
in regard of her general direction, she may justly be styled, Omnis virtus,
The whole universality of virtues, as guiding them al to the common good, as
charity directs them to the Divine Good. All which may challenge their evidence
from the office of Justice: (...): Hesiod. (...). Aquin. in Arist. Ethic. lib.
5. cap. 1. lect. 1. Ambros. lib. Offic.
suum cuique tribuere; to give every one his own; to God and Man, and to Man
and Man. S. Ambrose adds, Alienum non vendicare, propriam vtilitatem negligere
vt communem aequalitatem custodiat: Not to lay claim to our neighbors goods,
but to prefer the general equity, yea to our own profit. Lo then,
beloved, Iustitia tribuit, etc. Justice gives what is due, she does not sell
it. Just weights poyze her balance, not a heavy purse: and to declare her
innocence concerning rewards, the Thebans painted her without hands; Plutarch.
in Iside. Hesiod. (...).
(...); Justice is a Virgin, pure, immaculate, undefiled, incorrupt: wherefore
it is impossible she should associate her self with base mony-gods, whose gain
is their godliness, and are therefore (...), corrupt in mind, 1. Tim. 6.5.
and Spiritual Fornicatours, for their hearts have gone a whoring from the
Lord: Eccles. 46.11. Wherefore Vlpian doubts not to style honest Lawyers
Sacerdotes Iustitiae; the Priests of Justice, Turneb. aduersar. lib. 8. c. 20.
emulus (as Turnebus conjectures) of the Stoics sincere wise man, Irenaeus
aduersus haeres. lib. 4. cap. 20. sect. 2.
to whom only they vouchsafed the title of a Priest. And does not Iraeneus
astipulate? Omnes Iusti Sacerdotalem habent ordinem; Let any expound the word
Iusti in as large and general sense as he may, yet in this I suppose I err
not. The integrity of a righteous Judge may add unto his Honor the reverend
title, at least of a Lay-Priest: such a proportional Anallogie between their
Callings is grounded upon the uprightness of their actions. It was death
amongst the Romans to receive a bribe, especially in a cause of death. Yea, the
Acilian Law did prosecute this sharp decree against the person accused, with
such just severity, Pompon. Laetus de Legib. 1.5.
that there was admitted no Iusiitium, no Dies Iustus, but he was immediately
condemned sine ampliatione aut comperendinatione, without any delay of Demurre,
Adiourning Court, or possibility of repriue. I need not tell you, how Darius
fastened corrupt Sandoces to the tormenting Cross; Barnab. Brisonius de reg.
Pers. lib. 1.
nor how Cambyses caused Sisamnes skin to be plucked off, and spread upon the
Judges chair, placing his son first in it, that by the balefull spectacle of
his fathers hide, he might be deterred from perverting Justice by receiving
bribes. Wherefore having spoken of this (...), very briefly, yet as much as
needs, my theme being still of Justice and Judgment, I pass unto two other
inconveniences in their administration; Too sudden expedition and delay. From
the first of which, Epiph. lib. 11. c. de Manichaeis.
Epiphanius testifies, the Persians to be so free, that in the most capital
offenses they were slow to punish; supposing that in causes concerning life, no
time was long propeque esse vt lubenter condemnent qui cito, Barnab. Brison. de
reg. Pers. li. 1.
as Brissonius amplifies: They thought the condemnation half voluntary, and
consequently unjust, if very sudden. It is observed from a Rabbi, Targum
Ionath. Mumb. 9 8 c
that there were four causes brought unto Moses: two were respectively of
small moment, in which he made haste; one was the matter of uncleanness,
keeping from the Passover, Numb. 9.9. the other was the case of Zelophebads
daughters concerning their inheritance, Numb. 36.10. The other two were of
greater weight, as touching life and death, in which he delayed. The first was
the matter of the Blasphemer, in my Text: the second, that of him that brake
the Sabbath in gathering sticks, Numb. 15.35. yet in none of all these cases
was there more haste then good speed, for in them all (says my Author) Moses
answered, Non audiui, Godwin. Moses and Aaron. l. 5. c. 6.
I have not heard, to wit, from the Lord, intimating, that deliberation ought
to accompany judgment, and sentence not to be pronounced, before consultation
with God. For concerning all these cases the Lord spoke unto Moses, and in the
least of them, the Lawgiuer solemnly bespeaks the people to stand still, and
ego audiam, and I will hear what the Lord will command: Numb. 9.8. On the
contrary, as deliberation is requisite, so voluntary delays are dangerous.
What injustice do we read of in the unrighteous Judge, Luke 18.6. save only
delay? (...): The sooner the Cockle is destroyed, the better the Corn will
grow. The Royal Judge, David, knew it, when he said, (...), Betimes, early,
Sophocles in Electra.
in the morning will I destroy the wicked of the Land: Ps. 101.8. By this then
it is manifest, that Justice gives freely, deliberately, and (as the case
requires) speedily. The next Quaere is, What she gives? Her proper Object Ius,
or Iustum, What is right and due. Do you inquire what that is? the Schooleman
defines it to be Opus adaequatum alteri secundum aliquem aequalitatis modum.
Aquin. 22. q. 57. art. 1, 2.
An action squared and proportioned to another benefit or loss, according to
the equality of desert. Now this equality arises either ex natura rei, from
the nature of the thing: as if I lend so much, from the principles of Nature in
a Practicke Syllogism, conscience concludes, that so much is to be restored
again: or else this adequation or equality proceeds ex condicto, from a
mutual agreement, which again is either private, betwixt person and person;
or public, by common consent, and unanimous agreement of the public
Magistrate and people. From the first arises the judgment between private
contracts; from the second, that concerning public Edicts. It follows then,
Xenophon. (...).
that (...): Justice respects an equality; and that equality intimates a
twofold proportion: one is inter rem and rem: as betwixt the traffike and the
value, about which the commutatiue part of Justice is conversant: Aquin. 22.
art. 2. Arist. Eth. 5.
the other is inter rem and personam, between the Person deserving, and the
Reward, which by an equal distribution is adapted, Barnab. Brisson. de Reg.
Pers. l. 1.
or fitted to the persons deserts, by that other subiectiue part of Justice, to
wit, Distributive. The Persians religiously observed both parts, but just
Aristides extols them for the latter; Aristid. (...).
(...): They requited not a multitude of honorable attempts with few gifts,
nor great deserts with small rewards. And lo, the Precept of the Lord commands
both parts: Just balances, just weights, a just Ephah, and a just Hin shall
ye have: Leuit. 19.36. and the Labourer is worthy of his hire: Luke 10.7. From
these are evident the definition of this Ius, or right, and it is necessity.
This is that Palladium, that Image of Pallas, that Statue of Justice fallen
down from Heaven into our Commonwealth, which being religiously preserved,
our Cities are conserved from hostile violence: and upon whose violation,
Justice it self immediately, or at least by a sudden consequence receives the
afront, and the reason is (...): He that iniures the picture, Georg. Hemis. in
Hesiod. (...). ex Proclo.
reproacheth the person whose the picture is; now this Iustum, or Right, is the
lively image, the true protraiture of Justice: which as she renders what is
Ius, or Right, so to each one Ius suum, what is his own, proper, and peculiar
right. In matters of possession Justice takes not notice of conueniency, but
Due. It preserues inheritance, and that justly; yea oft-times to the bad, not
because he deserves it, but because it is his. That Story of Cyrus, when he was a
boy, is as useful as elegant: Being at the School of Justice, Xenoph (...).
whereof we spoke before, it was his turn to decide a controversy between
two of his play fellows, the one being a great boy that had a little coat,
the other being a little boy that had a great coat, and one at strife for the
others garment. He, as he thought most convenient, judged that both should
change, sentencing the larger coat to the bigger Lad, and the lesser to the
smaller. But what follows? (...), he was punished by his Tutor, to make him
remember, that Justice respects the right of possession, more then the
conueniency: it gives to each man what is his peculiar own by Law: (...):
Wherefore the Judge ought not to square his sentence by seeming expediency, but
by the Law. Hence it is manifest, that the goodness of Justice is not
terminated in the person of the just administratour, but as more
selfe-communicatiue then the rest of virtues, extends her benefits ad alterum,
to the commodity of others; yea, ad omnes, even unto all; for she gives what is
due vnicuique, Plutarch. in Iside.
to every one. She respects no persons, for she sees them not. The Thebanes
painted her without eyes: or if she have any, they are not in her own, but in
the Judges head: for him indeed Cyrus styles (...), the Seeing-Law. Xenophon.
(...).
But how? Marry he has an eye to see, but not to pity: an eye of
understanding to search out the sin, not an eye of partiality to favor the
delinquent. Respect of persons then is the reiection of Justice, and by it we
may become Judges: But of what? Of equity? No: but (...) of evil thoughts:
Iam. 2.4. From these then we may of a truth perceive, that God is no accepter
of persons: Act. 10.34. Yea, the poor whom God seems most to pity, and for
whose relief (as Philo with admiration of his Justice notes) he has left unto
his people so many precepts and excitements to Mercy and compassion, Philo
Iudaeus de officio Iudicis.
even they (I say) are excluded from all commiseration in judgment, and that
by his own express prohibition: Thou shall not countenance a poor man in his
cause: Exodus 23.3. Hence of so glorious esteem in ancient time was this
impartial justice, that the Poet calls it (...): Homer. ^dys. lib. 4.
The judgment of the most divine Kings. And lo, Saint James by warrant from
the holy Ghost, is bold to set the same Crown of glory on her head, terming
her (...): The Royal Law: Iam. 2.8. And indeed why not a Royal Law, Theod.
Beza in loc. cit.
if a Law so supremely general? For the performance of it, is the performance
of the Law. I conjecture Saint James thought so, when he made a direct
Antithesis between (...), Acceptance of persons, and love to our neighbor,
which is the performance of the Law, To. 13.9, 10. His words are these: If ye
fulfill the Royal Law, according to the Scripture, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self, ye do well: (...), But if ye accept persons, ye
commit sin, and are convinced of the Law as transgressors: Iam. 2.8, 9.
Hitherto (Beloved) I have shadowed Justice, and consequently Judgment (though
with a slubbering Pencill) together with their properties, and have proved
each of them to be several Canons of Gods Law. I appeal then, as well to the
approbation of your reason as your faith, whether Dibri be of the Tribe of Dan,
whether Judgment be the Father of the

Law. Dibri.
The division of the Law in general into Eternal, Natural and Humane, or
Positive: with the Original of the Positive from the Natural, and of that
from the Eternal, I have already heretofore in this place handled. At which
time I also manifested the strict tie, by which our conscience is bound to the
observation of this Humane Law, together with the duty of Magistrates, who
ought to proportion their Judgments according to the rule of this Law: it
being the best commendation which Mandana could afford her husband Cambyses,
Xenoph. (...).
that (...): He made not his will a Law, but the Law his will, and ruled best,
because he would be ruled. She said so to her young son, Cyrus; and it
seems he gave good ear and approbation to the commendations: for when
himself was after invested in his dignity, he confessed the law to be a
schoolemistris both to Magistrate and People; teaching them two lessons, to
each, one, (...): Xenoph. (...).
The Art of government to the Magistrate, the rule of Obedience to the Subject.
It is true indeed, that the Law had once its infancy, when the rulers will by
necessity for want of Law stood for a Law: Semiramis decrees had the force of
Law amongst the Babylonians, Briss. de Keg. Pers. lib. 1.
yea even in oeconomicall and private families, the father of the families word
had the full virtue of Law. Judah pronounced the sentence of Death against his
daughter in Law, Tamar: Bring her forth and let her be burnt: Genesis 38.24. So
that Polydore Virgils conjecture may be supposed, at least probable, to wit,
that written Laws were not in use in Homers time, Polid. Virgil. de Invent.
Rer, li. 2. cap. 1.
for in all his works (says he) he not so much as names a Law. Yet there was
even then without controversy (...), though not written, composed and public
edicts or constitutions, yet certain received Traditions agreeing with the Law
of Nature, equivalent in proportion with a Law. Such as were intimated by the
same Authors (...), Hom. (...) Pelid. Virg. Invent. Rer. l. 2. c. 1
The Justice of Retaliation, or retribution of like for like. But after the
ruder times of Barbarism had put off their rugged coat, Demost. cont.
Aristogitonem.
Draco and Solon brought this (...) (so their Orator styles it) this divine
invention of the Law first to Athens from whence the Romans after brought
their twelve tables well near 300. Dionys. Halicarnass. lib. 10. Ab. vrb.
condit. 293. Glarean. in Eutropij, lib. 1. an. 291.
years ab vrbe condita: from the beginning of their state. So diverse Law-giuers
furnished diverse Commonwealths, as Lycurgus the Lacedaemonians, and ours (for
why should we forget our own?) Mulmutius Dunwallo, Job. Stow Chron. Ang.
and the renowned Lady Mercia, the Royal foundresse of our Mercian Laws
Before all which, Flau. Iosep. contra Appion. lib. 2.
Josephus justly vindicates antiquity to the Hebrew Laws, the only absolute
and just Decrees: Laetus calls them, Pomp. Laetus de legib. cap. 1.
Coelo lapsas: Fallen from heaven: and indeed they of all the rest were written
with the finger of God. Exodus 31.18. This is that undefiled Law, Xenop. (...).
the rule and square of all humane Decrees, by which we are made (...):
Ciuiler and better: for the Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul.
Psalm. 19.7. Nor indeed is it a wonder that the Law should better us, for it
cuts off transgression as its Natural enemy, since the Essence of the Law is
Order, the Essence of sin merely (...): Disorder. This is that divine decree
to which, as to that of Nature if the rest be conformable, Horat. de Art.
Poetica. Cruquius in loc. citat. Pompon. Laetus de Legib. lib. 1.
we may Leges incidere ligno ingraue them in wood or brass as eternally and
inuiolably to be o^^^rued. But if they are dissentient from this Law, they can
neither Imperare, Vetare Punire, nor Permittere: nor Command nor Forbid, nor
Punish, Aquin. 12. q. 95. art. 2.
nor Permit, deprived of the four royal prerogatives of just Decrees: for
they are not Leges, but Legum corruptiones: not Laws but the corruption of
Laws: And Woe unto them that decree them, Isay. 10.1. So that in regard of
them the knot is loosed, which should bind our consciences to obedience: for
we ought to obey God rather then men. Act. 5.29. This is that Law of Order,
whose Author is the God of Order, and which begets the effect of Order;
Tranquillitatem ordinis: That calm of order: So Saint Augustine describes
Dibries, the Laws fair daughter

Shelomith, or Peace.
Eustath. in Homer. Il. 1.
A daughter, a fair daughter, beautiful as Rachel, amiable as Rebecca, (...):
mixing sweet smiles with a matrons honor; Alma Matter, Hesiod. (...).
a nourishing Mother: (...), the nurse of youth: the comfort of gray hairs.
What not? The gift, Beza in Epist. ad Romans cap. 5.1.
yea (...), all the gifts of God to men. She is the bond which ties us unto
God, to men, and to our selves (...), Eustath. in Hom. Il. 21.
says the Critic from knitting us by charity to God, by concordance to our
neighbors, and by an (...), or selfe-complacencie to our own selves. The
Daughter of the Law: Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri. I remember another
woman, Shelomith, mentioned in holy Writ. 1. Chron. 3.19. and she the daughter
of Zerubbabel. What Is that? (...)
The disperser of confusion: Dispergere.
and who can that be save Dibri, that great instrument of Order; Dibri, the
Law? Lo in this also the mystery is continued, Shelomith is the daughter of
Dibri, Peace of the Law. Shelomith an Israelitish woman, the daughter of the
covenant, and so of the Law. The blessing of Gods people: Peace on Israel;
Psalm. 128.6. a stranger to the rebellious: There is no peace says the Lord,
to the wicked. Isay. 48.22. He says so twice, concluding two Chapters with
the same Selah: There is no peace, says my God to the wicked. Isay. 57.21.
Christ chose to be borne in the Peace of the World, and by the embassage of an
Angel, sent the Peace of God into the World: (...): Glarean. in trop. lib. 7.
Peace on earth. Luke 2.14. Lo the bearer was no less then an Angel, and the
Doner, the very Son of God. Happy then, thrice happy, yea in the Jews
esteem, (...), Beza in Saint Matthew. 10.12,
compleately happy is that blessed brood, to whom belongs that divine title
of (...): the sons of Peace. O my brethren, know and blush. Lo we are they,
Pacem habemus sine timore, Ireneus aduers, haeres. lib. 4. ca. 49.
in vijs ambulamus, nauigamus quocunque volumus. So Irenaeus describes the
peace of his time, of which his Name was the Prophet. Let us at once interpret
and apply it. Was ever nation void of fear? We are more; we have been a
refuge to the fearful. Had ever people security in their daily iourneys? we
have more: our houses nightly are our Castles; yea our open fields are free
from civil and foreign invasions was ever Country rich in Merchandise? we
are more; our ships have brought home gold from Ophyr, yea we have lent to
other Nations. Briefly, our wives are not ravished; our Virgins are not
defloured; the blood of our Babes is not mixed with their Parents; our
grey-haired Fathers close not the eyes of their gasping sons; there is no
cry in our streets: God has not dealt so with every Nation. And what has now
our Shelomith? What has our Peace brought forth? An ougly brood, infinitely
dislike her self. Alas, a curser, a blasphemer, or a thief, Hugo Cardin. in
loc. cit.
which also takes Gods name in vain. Prou. 30.9. She was indeed lovely as
Dinah, but as unhappy: The one ravished by Shechem: The other contracted to a
foul Egyptian. Though then the Israelitish woman bare him, the Egyptian begat
him, Godwin. Moses and Aaron. lib. 6. cap. 4. ex Euricide. and Aben Ezra in
Number. 1.2.
(...): Familia matris non vocatur familia: The mohers families amongst the
Jews was esteemed as no family. He takes his name from his Father: He was the
son of an Egyptian: verse. 10. and though Peace per accidens, Accidentally may
be styled the mother, yet the procreatour, the begetter, the father of sin,
is that black Egyptian the Devil. He begets sin, not on the Substance, but
the excrements of Peace: as the best beauty may be corrupted, and that
corruption engender worms. To the evidence of which (...), to add one more
mysticke Genealogy, adstipulates, that of Hose; Hos. 1. His wife in the vision
was Gomer, (...) Deficere, consumi.
a Consumption or Rottenness, the Daughter of Diblaim, a Cluster of figs,
the expressiue emblem of Plenty: Deuteronomy. 8.8. Her children, Izreel, Lo-Ruhamah,
and Lo-Ammi, A Scattered people, (...) Massae ficuum.
an Negation of Mercy, an Alienation from God. Thus peace procreates plenty;
abused plenty, rottenness; (...) Non misericordiam consequi.
and rottenness the curse. Lo then my brethren, to what a pass our
transgressions have brought us: We have abused Gods plenty unto rottenness:
his gifts unto immoderate riote and excess, all of us; the two sisters, Aholah
and Aholibah, Samaria and Jerusalem, the People and Priests have committed
fornication with our own inordinate desires, Ezekiel. 23.3. and offered up the
gifts of God unto Baal: Hos. 2.8. even to that Idol of our own sensual
concupiscence. The Romans Leges Cibariae, Dion. Hist. Xiphilin. in Claudio.
their frugall sumptuarie Laws which moderated heathen feasts, may raise a
blush of shame in the face of us Christians. Good God what Epicurean
curiosities are daily devised by sluggish brains, able to labor for nothing
but their lust, to satisfy and delight the various lusts of our palates! What
more then abundant idle expenses, as foolish, as vain, are squandered away,
even to the justification of that most dissinct and lauishly profuse
Heliogable! When, God knows, we commit extortion in our riot: A nobis
extrahitur crudeliter quod consumitur inaniter, says a good man in the person
of the poor; The overplus of our estates is not ours, but Gods: He gives them
to the poor, but we usurp them to our own pleasures, turning our Peace into
gluttony, converting his Plenty into Luxury. These are (...), Iud. 12.
Spots in our banquets, which should be temperate feasts of Charity (...), when
without fear of God, or Magistrates, drunkenness is mixed with gluttony, and
all our tables are full of vomiting: Isay. 28.8. Shall we then be any more
Israel, prevailing with God by our prayers? I should suppose not, but rather
Izreel, a scattered people, full of blood. 2 King. 10.8, 11. yea Lo-Ammi and
Lo-Ruhamah, None of mine, says the Lord, nor obtaining mercy, unto whom thus
says the Lord: Plead with your mother, plead with her; for she is not my
wife, neither am I her husband, but let her take her fornications out of her
sight and her adulteries from between her breasts. Lest I strippe her naked
as in the day when she was borne, and make her as a wilderness, and leave her
as a dry land, and slay her for thirst. And I will have no pity upon her
children, for they are the children of fornications; Hos. 2.2, 3, 4. Their
dainty mouths at last must be filled with unsavory earth, and their pampered
flesh one day become the cold food of crawling worms. Temperance commended Ius
nigrum, a mess of thin black water-gruell, as a diet to the famous
Spartans, and (...), Nasturtium, Xenophon. (...).
a slender, homely sallet of Watercresses, for a breakefast to the noblest
Persians. Rich Abraham's banquet for three Angels, was but a piece of flesh, a
mess of milk, a dish of butter and a hearthcake. Genes 18.6, 7, 8. and part
of that royal present, which prudent Abigal bestowed upon King David and his
Chiefetaines to dinner, was five measures of parched corn. 1. Sam. 15.16. What
shall we do then with this loose prodigal, this son of the Egyptian, who
spends his patrimony to fill his belly, and, like Esau, his birthright for a
mess of pottage: Let him be brought unto Moses, Nigri patiatur carceris vncum,
Iuuenal saytr. 13
Let the hand of Justice be upon him. Hor. Carm. lib. 3. ode. 23.
Quid tristes querimoniae Si non supplicio culpa reciditur? The blasphemer will
still curse, if he be not punished: Ovid. meta. lib. 1.
yea Pars syncera trahetur, That corrupt member will rotte the body. Wherefore
thine eye shall not spare him. Deuteronomy. 19.13. It is Gods command or he will not
transgress his own precepts. The Heathen could confess his Justice to have
Acrem oculum: Heliod. hist. Ethiop. lib 1. and 8. (...).
A sharp eye to note transgressions, and a heavy hand to punish them. (...),
Stolen waters are sweet but they fill the mouth full of gravel: for,
understand it of what theft you will, the dead are there, and her guests are in
the depth of hell. Prou. 9.17, 18. The thief in the Epigramme finding the
golden sword, (...), (...).
He would feign have been fingering the gold; Oh but it was a sword, and it
is dangerous meddling with edged tools, let him take heed: The issues thereof
are Death. Prou. 14.12. Indeed he may for a time escape, and so make haste to
be rich: but the hand of God, though it be slow, wounds very deep. The Poet
can tell you a Tale worth the rehearsal, of a murderer, who slept under a
rotten wall; he was warned in a dream to depart thence: he starts up, and
was no sooner out of danger, but the wall fell. He thanks God, as he had good
reason to do, but intertaines a very evil opinion of him, and supposed, that
he was well pleased with his murder. But the next night another vision
certifies him, that he was foully mistaken, (...); Xenoph. (...).
God was nothing at all delighted with his sin, neither did he favor the
transgressour: he prevented that death, not in pity to save him, but in
vengeance to keep him for a worse and more shameful: he preserved him from
the wall, to reserve him for the gallows. None must kill Caine, Genesis 4.15. not
because he should be favorably preserved from death, but because he should be
punished and tired with a Vagabonds tedious and shameful life, Verse. 12.
Again, as for the conservation of an inuiolate Peace, we must abstain from
wicked deeds; so are we no less bound to refrain from injurious words. One
asked Charillus, why Lycurgus gave so few Laws to the Lacedaemonians: he
pithily answers, Plutarch. (...).
(...): Because they used not many words. The fewer the offenses, the less
need of Laws; and the fewer the words, the fewer the offenses: since the
hypocrite with his mouth hurts his neighbors, Prou. 11.8. Wherefore David
makes no great difference between (...) and (...), a prater, and an unjust
man. He ranks both names in one Text together with their punishments: The
backbiter shall not be established on the earth: evil shall hunt the cruel
man to destruction: Psalm. 140.11. Yea, God shall destroy him for ever; he
shall take him, and pluck him out of his Tabernacle, and root him out of the
Land of the living: Psalm. 52.5. Lo, what a world of punishment is inflicted
upon the tongue! Nor is it wonder: for it is a world of wickedness, yea, a
flame of Hell fire: Iam. 3.6. O then Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which scornest Gods
Ministers, and re-crucifiest the Lord of glory with profane oaths, and wicked
blasphemies, happy had thou been, had thou but known the things that
belonged to thy Peace. Flauius Josephus contra Appion. lib. 2.
The Lawgiver (as Josephus records) forbad the Jews to blaspheme the gods of
the Nations, though they were but Idols: and why? Because they were reputed
gods. Such reverence belongs unto the very naked esteem of a Divinity. But now
(O tremble to receive what I tremble to relate!) how often may we hear the
most sacred name of God puffed from the blasphemers mouths, as often as their
Tobacco, or (almost) their breath! And yet is no punishment proportioned to the
offense, nor destinate to the offendour; or if there be, may we not justly say,
not executed? This sin the Devil (since Nature has clothed it with no
pleasure) has seasoned with a customary delight. It Is the young Gentleman's
eloquence, and I pray God it creep into no higher titles. Will not my Lord
swear a greater oath, then a mean Gentleman, yea, and think it very
proportionate to his Nobility? (...). Suetonius in Vespasi.
Who ere thou art that vainly supposest by thy greatness to countenance this
sin; Sir, Sir, remember that when you die, and rise again, you must leave
your Honor behind you, and be a naked man; when so many eternal punishments
must be inflicted on thy trembling soul, as thou have given wounds unto thy
blessed, but violated Savior by wicked oaths, and cursed blasphemies: Hesiod.
(...).
(...) (...), when thou dartest thy curses to pierce another, they violently
recoyle, and wound thine own soul. And though by chance you escape the
punishment of man, yet The Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his
name in vain. Exodus 20.7. And this guilt shall surely be punished, for A man
that uses much swearing, the Plague shall never depart from his house, etc:
Ecclus. 23.11. This is that word which is clothed with death: God grant it be
not found in the heritage of our Jacob: but they that fear God will eschew all
such, and are not wrapped in sin. V. 12. Gods vengeance is slow, but sure.
(...): (...).
He delays long, not because he will remit all punishment, but because in that
time of delay he will increase and provide more. For his judgment (as
elegantly Tertullian) Non in compede aut pileo versatur, Tertul. lib. de
Patient.
sed in aeternitate aut poenae aut salutis; does not repay with momentany
retributions, but rewards with eternity, either of joy or pain. To conclude
then: concerning other offenses; let him that has sinned and escaped
punishment, sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto him. But let the
blasphemer, the notorious offendour, the son of the Egyptian be brought unto
Moses, and let Moses enquire of the Lord, and then in the fear of the Lord
execute the Justice of the Lord. (...): And you which set in Moses chair: take
heed that you judge righteously, lest the righteous Lord judge you. As Peace
has brought forth transgression, by a circular generation, let transgression
excite to Judgment, that so Dan may beget Dibri; and Dibri, Shelomith; that
Judgment may procreate the Law, and the Law beget a refined Peace. So shall
our Land be cleansed from the guilt of sin, and Peace shall be on Israel.
Which the God of Peace grant unto us, whom yet he has continued the sons of
Peace, for the Merits, and by the mediation of Jesus Christ the Prince of
Peace, to whom with the holy Spirit of consolation and peace be ascribed, as
to the only Author and Source, as all Power, etc. so all just Judgment,
upright Laws, and perfect Peace, etc. Amen.

FINIS.

