NICODEMVS FOR CHRIST, OR THE RELIGIOUS MOOTE OF AN HONEST LAWYER: DELIVERED JN
A Sermon, preached at the Assizes at Okeham, in the County of Rutland, March.
10. 1627.

By ANTONY FAVVKNER, Master of Arts, and late Student in Jesus College in
Oxford.

JOB 29. 16. I was a father to the poor, and the cause which I knew not, I
searched out.

LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Robert Allott, and are to be sold at
his shop in S. Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Bear. 1630.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL MY HONORED GOOD FRIEND MOSES TRYON ESQVIRE, Grace, Mercy
and Peace.
SIR,
A Godly liberality is not much different from a frugall providence; it is but a
letter of Return, by which we shall receive in heaven what we have wisely laid
out on earth: for he that has pity on the poor, lends unto the Lord; and
look what he lays out, it shall be paid him again, Prou. 19. 17. So that
the practice of this piety, is the most aduantagious usury: for we lend but
temporals, but we shall receive both the Principal and Interest in Eternals.
Happy might all Gods temporal Stewards be, if they would so employ their
golden Talent. Concerning your own particular, I will only thus much say, The
prayers of the poor for you will sooner present your charity to God, then the
praises of my Pen can unto the World. And as for the no mean apprehension of
your favor and good meaning toward my self, I can return no other, save the
poor man's tribute, prayers and thanks: of which this slender Present, the
thin gleanings of a Country Labourer, is a faithful, though vnproportioned
testimony. Which if you but as kindly accept, as it is freely offered, you
shall accipiendo dare, be bounteous in receiving, and so deserve new thanks
abundantly gratifying him, who always unfeignedly desires

By you and yours in all Christian Anthony Fawkner.

EGREGIO VIRO PETRO TRYON, ORNATISSIMI VIRI MOSIS TRYON Armigeri filio natu
maximo (...).
REi priuatae satago: Nec humili fortunae competit inuita quodammodo Lucina,
faetum quem vix peperisse ausa est in apricum seueriori Criticorum fronti
exponere. Satius familiari gratandum est lari, tutiusque tyronibus domestic a
declamare in porticu. Equidem lubentius labiorum vitulos fecissem in salutem
Maecenatis quam literas hasce publicassem in ipsius gratiam; nisi quod nobis,
dignitatem tuam (Generose vir) (...) istius nostrae vectigal iure proprio
vendicasse, solutumque parumper in hoc Xeniolo censuque modico tributum aequi
consultum iri, meridiana luce clarius innotuisset. Ad teipsum quod attinet, ne
quae e casto and syncero deprompta sunt pectore, adulterina videantur and
fucata adulantis ingenij deliramenta, rem paucis expediam. Depositis collo
Bulla Laribusque adhuc sub vmbonis candidi priuilegio media iuuentute egisti
virum, adeoque subitaneo virtutis incremento minutatim defluentes annorum and
aetatis fefellisti moras, vtpraecoce quadam maturescente indole gradatim quasi
and pedetentim sequaces Naturae gressus praeuenisse videaris. Mucos ergo
emungant proprios rugosae Hypercriticorum sannae. Vacillans adhuc nostrae
Theologiae sololes haec and decidua, pene dixerim primis infantiae vagiens
incunabulis, sub tuis modo succreuerit auspicijs, abunde mihi videbitur
conclamatum (...), fruarque votis vsque ad inuidiam foelicibus

Sigillatim tuus, Antonius Fawkner.
Ex Musaeo meo vndecimo Kalend. September. 1629.
NICODEMVS FOR CHRIST, etc.
Ioh. 7. 51. Does our Law judge a man before it hear him, and know what he
has done?


Majesty is an emblem of Divinity, and Magistracy the visible character of an
invisible Deity. So that as men are the best of Mortals, Judges also are the
best of men, and are by so much liker their Creator, by how much his Warrant
authorizeth them above his creatures. Men indeed are like God by a benefit in
their creation: Judges more like him by the addition to their creation of the
preheminency of their function. Men are like him in the fabric of their
souls, they, more like him, because both in that, and the excellency of their
Office. If then Melancthon may term men Earthly gods, in respect of inferior
creatures, why may not David style Judges transitory gods, in regard of
inferior men? I (...) said, you are gods, Psalm. 82. 6. The Lord indeed is God
of gods, but he has selected these to be gods to men. Yet though God permit
them to partake of his Authority, it is with a condition, that they shall partake
of his Justice too. God works all for his own glory, and his infinite glory
is his infinite Justice. Now because power is the supporter of Justice, God
makes the^ great, not because they should be great, but because by being great,
they might dare to be just. Those then whom God makes great, we deem to be
good, so that their place begets a reverence; their reverence, fear; and
greatness mixed with goodness produces imitation: insomuch that Honor
becomes Example, and Judges lives, the peoples rules. So that they live not
their own lives alone, but other men's; and the peril of their souls hazzards
others. As then there is no deformity so ugly as corrupted beauty, so no
Calling so wicked, as the best turned bad. Bad in it self, worse by example;
worst, if at all bad, because it should be best; most dangerous, because most
eminent. Adam indeed sinned, yet still continued man; but if Angels
transgress, they can be no less then Devils. Peasants may turn Pagans, and
none take notice: but if Julian become an Apostata, an Empire is in danger.
Ieroboams transgression made Israel to sin; and though the people compel
Aaron to make an Idol, yet if he do it, being a Magistrate, he brings the sin
upon them, Exodus 32. 21. He that believes in me, says Christ, out of his belly
shall flow rivers of waters of life, Ioh. 7. 38. An ample reward of the Jews
belief, if they had believed. And (poor souls!) many had believed, had not
the example of their Rulers hindered their belief. Many resolved that he was
the Prophet, Verse. 40. Some confessed he was the Christ, Verse. 41. Yea, and the
frozen consciences of the barbarous Officers, which went with a full resolution
to arrest him, were so thawed, that, let the Magistrates think will or ill,
they must needs confess, that Never manspake like this man, Verse. 46. Their
consciences acknowledged him, their tongues confessed him: yet (for the force of
example from Authority!) the wicked think to stop their mouths with this own
question, Does any of the Rulers or Pharifes believe on him? Verse. 48. Nay,
immediately with open mouth, according to their old fashion of balling Templum
Domini, Templum Domini; The Temple Ier. 17. 4.
of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord: or, We Job. 19. 7.
have a Law, and by our Law he ought to dye, they would condemn him untried
against the Law: and in the next verse outlaw him and his, with a dire
Anathema, (...)* This rout, this Many which know not the Law is oursed, Verse.
49. So would they have sterned the Law by their own passions, till Nicodemus
returns the curse unto the heads of the cursers, and mauger their bragging of
their skill in the Law, conuicts them of injustice by a question from their
own Law; (...); Does our Law judge a man before it hear him, and know what he
has done? Not to De simili quaestione vide Beza in S. Mat. 7. 22.
be tediously curious upon the words. The Verse is such a question, as may be
naturally resolved by a Negative position; and that easily done by the
Metathesis of the particle interogatiue, transferred from the subject to the
implicit Copula* so that (...), etc. Does our Law judge a man before it hear
him, and know what he has done? is equivalent, and the same with (...), etc.
Our Law does not judge a man before it hear him, and know what he has done.
And my Text so understood, may seem to be Solstitium solis Iustitiae, The
Solstice of Justice. It must not be idle, but proceed thus far: nor is it
boundless, it proceeds no further. It must judge, else 'twould not be Justice:
it must judge within the limits of these conditions, else 'twould be injustice.
The question is already become a position; let us once again turn the
Negative position to an affirmative proposition; and that not by the
dislocation of one Negative particle, but the exemption of them all. If then
our Law does not judge a man before it hear him, and know what he has done;
it follows, a contrarijs, that our Law does judge a man, if it hear him
first, and know what he has done. And the Text thus taken, points at two
things, (...) and (...); the Law in the first part; Our Law does judge a man;
and the Judge in the second; If it hear him before, and know what he has
done. The first part shows us (...), the rule of Justice, the Law dead without
the Judge. The second points out (...), the living Law, the Judge, corrupt
without the Law. Again, the first part contains two things. First, the Rule
of Justice, (...), the Law; noted by her coat of difference, (...), our Law,
the Jews Law, Gods Law. Secondly, the act of Justice, Judgment, (...), Our
Law does Judge; and that again attended with its object, circa quod, (...), a
man. In the second part are evident two especial necessaries to a good
Magistrate: The first is diligence, (...), he must hear; and that both (...),
before he proceed to sentence; and (...), of him that is accused. The second
is knowledge, and that both of the fact, and the manner of the fact, (...): And
know what he has done. Of these (the God of Truth assisting) and first of the
first, the Rule of Justice.

(...), The Law.
Gilbertus in Cantica. Ier. 30.
Sine lege sunt quae sine ordine sunt, says an Ancient; Order is one end of
the Law, God the Author Philo Iudaeus de Fabric. Mundi.
of all Order. He might have created the World as well in one day, as six; and
all at once as easily, as Heaven first, and Man last: but by his wisdom were
all things made, and the God of Order would be the example of Order. Now as all
is made, all must be sustained, lest Order should again be swallowed up in
confusion. So that as all was created in order, all must be so created, that
it may remain in order. Wherefore God will at once be (...) and (...), a
Creator and a Lawgiuer; and with the same Fiat rouse from confusion and command
to obedience. Each creature is so made it self, that it cannot be ought save
it self. The wisdom of his bounty gives it a Being; the wisdom of his
order gives it but one Being. Nor is this order in essence only, but in the
consequents of it, its qualities. The nimble fire will be above, and not below;
the sullen earth only below. The two great Lights have their alternate
courses. The Sea may threaten, cannot Domincere; it must ouerflow so much
earth, and but just so much. Thus the Decree of God checkes all Natures: his
Word created by a secret power; his Wisdom gouernes by an eternal Law. By
the Word of the Lord were the Heaven's made, Psalm. 33. 6. and he made a Decree
for the name, Job 28. 26. Now though all things are, and are guided by this
eternal Law, yet this Summa ratio, (so S. Augustine styles it) this supreme
directive S. August. de lib. arb. c. 6.
rule, though it be aliqualiter (as the Schooleman limits) in some sort in all
creatures Aquin. 12. q. 92. Art. 2.
subject to the Divine providence; yet I say more especially, more eminently it
shines in man. So that by this more excellent impression of the eternal Law,
there follows a participation of that Rule in man; by which he has an inbred
inclination to the accomplishment of his proper acts and ends. Which
participation of the eternal Law is defined to be the Law of Nature. By the
light of which we may easily view what should be done, by our natural
inclination to what we would do. God has made us to be men, and the nature
of men constraines us to be sociable. Yet is not Nature so blind a guide, nor
so unjust a Mistrisse, as to command society, and not to instruct us how to
conserve it. Wherefore she has written in our understandings one wise lesson,
from which our working intellectuals may deduce the rest of all her precepts.
And this general Statute is Eligere bonum and vitare malum; The common
instruction of Nature is, that we should embrace what is good, and shun
evil. It Is an evil against Nature to destroy the work of Nature; from thence
is concluded the Law, Thou shall not kill. The conservation of humane society
commands, that every man should have his own; from thence is enacted the Law,
Thou shall not steal. So that that general maxim is inviolable. Dianysius
knew it, when he confessed, (...). Plutarc. (...). ^.
The constitutions indeed of public estates may be violated, the general Law
of Nature cannot. But from it, as from a common source, proceeds in some sort
the whole stream of moral virtues, which, as the Law, are what they are, by
the rule and square Rectae nationis, of a directive reason. So that Plato Plato
de legibus lib. 12.
stepped not much awry, when he would have (...) the Law receive its Etymology
from (...), or (...), the mind, considering the Law is indeed dictarnon nactae
rationis, the constitution of Reason, the proper faculty of the discoursing
mind. This Law of Nature then is the image of the Eternal, and from it may
arise the principles of moral virtues. S. Amb. in epist. ad Romans c. 5.
Saint Ambrose in other words says as much, if not more, dividing this Law of
Nature into three parts. The first teaches to give, and so to give honor to
our Creator, as not to impart or share it to any of his creatures. The second
part is moral, instructing us to live by the rule of modesty and virtue. The
third, Preceptiue, commanding us to furnish others with the knowledge of our
Creator, God, and season them with the precepts of virtue and morality. And so
the Gentiles which had not the Law, did by Nature the things contained in the
Law, and having not the Law, were a Law unto themselves, Romans 2. 14. Now
because, by reason of the imperfect estate of our depraved nature, our passions
will swell to perturbations, and can receive such strength from the Law of
sin, that they are able impetuously to rebel against the Law of Nature, it
is necessary that from the common precepts of Nature (as particular and
unknown conclusions are drawn from common and apparent principles) man's
understanding should deduce and enact other several Canons for the more
particular disposition of the community in order: which should deter those
from vice by fear of punishment, whom the instructions of Nature cannot
persuade to be good by love to virtue. And such like particular constitutions
drawn from the Law of Nature, which is derived from the Eternal, receive a
third denomination, distinct from both the former, and are entitled, Lex
Humana, or Positiua, the Humane, or Positive Law. Such as Rud. Com. Graec. fol.
1033.
were amongst the Heathen, Draco's Decrees, which (as Budaeus notes) were more
especially termed (...), Theses, Positions, settled or determined ordinances:
which though in regard of the Law-giuers, and the acts of men, to which only
they are a rule, they may be termed Humane; yet after just and due enacting by
the authority of Postellus de Magistrate. Athen. cap. 5.
the public assent, or public person, and the open receipt of the^ after
promulgation in the time and place of concourse, as amongst the Athenians, and
Die trinundino in Foro, in the open Market place amongst the Romans; then
Religion tells us, that Lex the Law takes its name from its own Etymon a
ligando from binding. So that whatsoever is subject to the superior power, is
consequently subject to the Law of that power. Which insomuch as it partakes
(though but mediately and remotely) of the eternal Law, binds the inferior
subjects to its observance, yea, in foro conscientiae, by the tie of Religion
and Conscience. There is no power but of God, Romans 13. 1. Wherefore ye must
be subject, not because of wrath only, but also for conscience sake, Verse. 5.
By me (faith the Lord) Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. By me Princes
rule, and the Nobles, and all the Judges of the earth, Prou. 8. 15, 16.
Whosoever then resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, Romans 13. 2. It
follows then, that none, no not the righteous are exempted from obedience to
this Humane Law, as it is a directive Rule, or guiding power; though in respect
of its coactiue authority they are privileged, as preventing compulsion by
voluntary obedience. And in this sense indeed the Law is not given to righteous
men, but to ungodly, 1. Tim. 1. 9. And Saint Paul may be an exegeticall
Commentator on this place in another: For Princes are not to be feared for
good works, but for evil, Romans 13. 3. Nor are we only bound to submit our
selves to the judgment of this Law, but Magistrates are as much required, to
frame and proportion their determinations according to this Law. The Xenophon
(...).
square then of our actions must be the rule of their judgments, and that
(...) must be as definitive of their censures as our deeds. Xenophon tells, that
Cyrus learnt of his Tutor, that there was no difference betwixt (...) and
(...), lawful and just, and as little betwixt (...) and (...), lawless and
violent; so that he seemed to confine Justice to Law, and would always
proceed according to Law, lest at any time he should seem unjust. Such force
then is in the Law, that it binds all process in Justice to be according to
the Law. So that he which in the administration of justice strayes Postellus de
Mag. Athen. c. 6.
from the order of the Law is as much an offendour, as he whom he condemns as a
transgressor of the Law. And therefore the Athenians thought it a small
conuenience to their Commonwealth to provide (...), Law-giuers unless they had
also appointed (...), a sort of superior Governors to receive an account from
the Judges Plato de leg-Dial 111.
of their common and ordinary proceeding according to the Law. Plato would have
the Law as a picture, by whose proportion, as by Varro de ling. Latin. lib. 5.
a pattern and exemplar, Magistrates should Christoph interp. Philon. Iudaei.
de offic. Iudicis.
form their censures. Iudex, the Judge is but In^ dicens, not the maker, but
the speaker of the Law; Administrator Iudicij (as an interpreter of Philo) The
judgment is Gods, he is but the pronouncer; and amongst the Romans,
Suetonius ranking the most choice and honorable titles which the Emperor
Augustus bestowed upon his beloved Tiberius, registers Ducem (...), That he
was a Governor precisely observing the prescript of the Law. And no less
honor might Foelix seem to have deserved, who would not for favor deliver
Saint Paul to death against the custom of the Romans, Act. 25. 16. And
Ahashuerosh might have been an example to them both, not giving sentence
according to his own angry humor, but the Nations decrees; What shall we do
with the Queen Vashti according to the Law? Ester 1. 15. Sure I am that such a
one was Nicodemus, who asks not in my Text (...) Does the Judge? but (...),
Does our Law judge? As if the Judge could not decree, but the Law; or if the
Judge, yet as only directed by the Law. Or if the Heathenish Romans, under
whose dominion they then were subject, had had such a barbarous Law, as to
judge a man before accused or heard: yet since the Jews were under the
Covenant, and immediately directed by the Law of God, he inquires further,
(...); Does our Law so? which is the next considerable.

(...), Our,
The Law of the Lord is an undefiled Law: Psalm. 19. 8. Moses might hear it
from God, as accepted for holy; Israel might hear it only from Moses, as but
only called to be made holy. Israel must not touch Mount Sinay, no not touch
it lest they die, though it be to hear the Law, by the performance of which
they should live. Gods Majesty would promulge it in thunder and darkness, that
all might hear and tremble: his Mercy would ingraue it in Tables of stone,
that all might see and rejoice. Here Ius Gentium becomes Ius Iudaicum, and the
inviolable decree of Nature made stronger by the promulgation of God. False
witness is a fault against Nature, yea, and a sin against God. Thou shall
not bear false witness against thy neighbor: Exodus 20. 16. God is truth;
falsehood is his enemy. God is Judge: Psalm. 50. 6. And shall not the Judge of
all the World do right? Genesis 18. 5. No man must be condemned by his Law indict
a cause a, his offense not proved; but at the mouth of two or three witnesses
the matter must be established: Deuteronomy. 19. 16. Moses delivered this Law to the
Jews when they dwelt in tabernacles, and Iosep. de Antiq. Iud. lib. 4. c. 8.
it was yearly repeated by the High Priest, faith Josephus, at their Feast of
Tabernacles. Lo then how malice may pervert Justice! This Law was delivered by
God to Moses, by Moses to their forefathers, by the High Priest yearly with
folemnity to themselves, and by themselves daily according to Gods precept to
their children, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. and might not Nicodemus then justly wonder, that
being Masters in Israel they knew not this? Let them then but check their
heady choler, or shake off their lingering malice, and they may through
halfe-closed eyes perceive, that God forbids false-witnesse, not witness.
Probabilities indeed may be the ground of a suspicion, but they must prove ere
they can judge; which is the next considerable, (...), Does our Law Judge, etc.

(...), Judge.
Varr. de ling. Lat. lib. 4. and Non. Marcel. de prop. Sermon.
Virtus a vi, say the Latin Critickes, (...) from (...) as the Greeks. Both
Rome and Sparta so honored warlike prowess, that they esteemed it as the
Sovereign of Virtues: yea, so much, as that they would have the name of Virtue
in general to be deduced from strength and war. Yet Agesilaus, a Spartan
Prince, no less honorable for Prowess then Justice, would notwithstanding
measure his greatness by Justice, not Prowess. For hearing some name the
Persian Monarch according to his affected title, (...), the Great King, he
taunts the swelling title by a question of comparison, (...); Plut. (...).
I pray you in what can he be greater then my self, if he appear neither
wiser, nor iuster. And although he knew well enough which way the stream
would go in the Lacedaemonians judgments, honoring valor above all virtues,
yet being demanded which was the Nobler, Fortitude or Justice, he gave sentence
on Justices side, and showed his reason in his answer, (...), Fortitude is but
the guard of Justice; and were Plut. (...).
there no Traitors that would violate her, we needed no Ambr. de offic. lib. 1.
cap. 28.
valor to maintain her. Saint Ambrose makes good her excellency by comparing,
if not preferring her to another virtue, of no less eminency in a Christian,
then valor in a Spartan* Beneficence. Dividing the whole frame of humane
society into two parts, Justice and Beneficence, of the two (says he) Iustitia
mihi excelsior videtur, Liberalitas gratior: illa censuram tenct, illa
bonitatem. They are not unlike the two sisters, Leah and Rachel; Birthright
preferres the one, Nature the other: Justice is royal, Liberality beautiful.
A Scepter becomes the one, Mercy adornes the other: Authority is the Crown of
Justice, Bounty, Bern. Sermon. paru. Ser. 11.
of Liberality. S. Bernard anatomizeth Justice some what more curiously;
dividing her, not as a sister from Beneficence* but as the whole into her two
parts, Beneficence and Innocence. Now, says he, Innocentia Iustitiam inchoat;
Beneficentia consummat. To do no wrong is the beginning of Justice; to do
right the perfection. It begins in Innocence, it ends in Charity. So that
Agesilaus Xenophon. (...).
his (...), To abstain from oppression, was but Justice in its Innocence: it
must be the Suum cuique tribuere, to give each man his due: to help the
oppressed that can crown it with Beneficence. And indeed Justice in this her
perfection, is the Queen of Virtues, excelling all the rest, by how much a
common good which she only respects, exceeds a private, or personal, in which
the acts of all, (at least, the most of all) the rest are terminated. But this
Theme of Justice is too large a field to run over in the few remaining
minutes of an hour: wherefore we will pass by it to view, and but view its
act, Judgment. Briefly Aquin. 22. q. 60. ar^. 2.
then, the Learned have as sufficiently, as concisely determined, and confined
just Judgment unto three conditions; by the defect of any of which, the
Judgment becomes unlawful. First, it must be according to the rule and square
of Justice; otherwise it is perverse, and so unjust. Iudicium Iustum iudicate;
Judge righteous judgment: Ioh. 7. 24. Secondly, it must proceed from just
authority; else it is usurped, and then the party accused may justly demand of
such a Judge, as the Egiptian did unjustly of Moses, Quis te constituit
Iudicem, etc. Who made you a Judge over us? Exodus 2. 14. For he can have no
power, except it be given him from above: Ioh. 19. 11. Thirdly, it must be
secundum rectam rationem prudentiae, by the approbation of reason and prudence:
else if it proceed from suspicion or doubtful, and not manifest proofs, it is
unlawful, because rash. And in that sense our Savior forbids us at all to
judge: Matthew. 7. 1. and the Law in my Text agrees with the Gospel; Does our
Law judge a man before it hear him, and know what he has done. But because
this may seem to conduce to the office of the Ivdge, it may lead us to the
second part of my Text, the second necessary requisites to a good Magistrate.
Which because according to the Apostles grant, I may exhort an Elder as a
Father, I will touch: 1. Tim. 5. 1.
and again, lest by a rude petulancy, or indiscreet presumption, I might seem,
against the Apostles rule, to rebuke an Elder, I will but touch, and so draw to
an end. First then of the first; (...), he must hear; the Judge must

Hear.
Diligence.
The order of Nature in the manner of our sensitive knowledge seems to me to
be a pattern of the order of Justice in Judgment. Let then common sense be
Queen in the part sensitive, the utmost confines of the world of man. The
outward senses are the witnesses infallibly presenting their objects unto her;
of which after evidence presented from them, and not before, she can only
judge. It Is easily applied by the terms in the similitude. It Is the witness
that condemns the man, the Magistrate can but judge after witness; yet must
he make diligent search: Deuteronomy. 19. 18. He must stop one ear with Alexander
against the witness, and reserve it for him that is (...), and stands accused.
Neither must he only hear, but hear (...), from him. His ears must not be
in his hands, that so by receiving bribes, against the Ambr. de of fic. lib. 1.
cap. 28.
rules of Nature and Justice, he should confound Hearing with Feeling. Quomodo
potest esse iustus alteri, qui studet eripere alteri quod sibi quaerat? Saint
Ambrose would feign have been resolved how it could possibly be, that a
covetous man should be just, since his care is only to enrich himself, no
matter by whose goods. Wherefore Gods command is, that they take no gifts,
Exodus 23. 8. Again, neither must his ears be in his eyes, when he reads any
of my great Lords letters, either to the favor or prejudice of the prisoner.
Cato was not more severe then just, when he would have Iudicem nec pro Justice
orandum, nec pro iniastis exorandum: A good Magistrate need not be entreated
to favor the guiltless, and should not be ouerintreated to succor the
guilty. Wherefore if for fear of any great Ones the Magistrate pervert
Justice, he is in Josephus opinion injurious to the Almighty, and blasphemous
against God. Quasi Joseph. Antiq. Iud. lib. 4. cap. 18
vero (says he) is infirmior sit habendus quam illi, quorum potentiae metu,
praeter ius fertur calculus. Nam Dei potentia est iustitia. Gods Justice is his
Power; they then which less fear to oppose it, then displease men, fear men
more then God* and consequently esteem them greater then God. Nor may the
poor, if guilty, claim a pity. It is due to his adversity, not to his
sin. Qui autem sua Philo Iud. de offic. Iudicis.
sponte se obstringit sceleribus, is non infoelix sed iniustus censendus est:
He which voluntarily mancipates himself to iniquity, must not be pittyed
because poor, but punished because wicked. So Philo Iudaus instructs and
receives his warrant from the Lawgiuer; Neither shall thou countenance a poor
man in his cause: Exodus 23. 3. Ye must therefore decree (...), according to
Gods judgment, 1. Pet. 1. 17. and according to his command; Respect not any
person: Deuteronomy. 16. 19. Again, he must not only hear (...), from him that is
accused, but also (...) before he proceed to sentence. Set. Munster. Cosmog.
de Vngari^.
Not according to that barbarous custom reported of Clagen, a Town in
Carinthia, where upon suspicion they condemn the man, and after try the
carcass: but according to the laudable manner of the Romans mentioned in holy
Writ; It is not the manner of the Romans for favor to deliver any man to
death, before he that is accused, have the accusers brought before him, and
have place to defend himself concerning the crime, Act. 25. 16. But of Budaus
com. Grac. fol. 1349.
this before. To return then: Budaeus notes two other significations of (...).
The first is, Interpretari, to interpret. Notwithstanding, indeed the Law
written has been heretofore said to be (...), for the most part the guide of
Judgment; yet because men's actions by their several multiplicity may seem to
be infinite, and from thence may arise sundry particular cases, which the Law
in its general mandates seems not directly to aim at, nor foresee, by reason
of diverse circumstances, perchance extenuating the nature of the fact, it would
seem harsh, that these should Aristot. Eth. 5. c. 15.
be censured by the rigor of the letter. Wherefore in the Judges breast there
may rest an (...)* or middle equity, tempering Justice by the milder
interpretation of her Law, lest she should seem severe, yea, even to injury:
yet so proportioning the Law to the fact, that it may not seem Esth. 1. 19.
violated, but mitigated; not neglected, but perfected. Artaxerxes could not
recall his sentence by the Persian Law, but he would oft-times assuage
Erissonius de Regibus Pers. lib. 1.

Tertul. Apol. aduers. Gent. cap. 4.


it, cutting off the head-tyre for the head. And no less humanity was in the
Emperor Seuerus, whom Tertullian testifies, Suffundere maluisse sanguinem quam
effundere; He had rather punish rubore, then morte, by shame then death; and
it was esteemed a better tempered justice for a light offense, by a blush of
shame to bring the Hugo Card. in Eccles. 7. 18.
blood into the offenders face, then by the axe of execution to spill it on the
ground. And this equity the Preacher approoues, by disallowing its contrary; Be
thou not just overmuch: Eccles. 7. 18. he showed his reason in the precedent
verse; For there is a just man that perishes in his justice: Verse. 17.

The other sense of (...) is Intelligere to understand, or know which leads me
to the next general requisite to a good Magistrate:

Knowledge.
Knowledge.
How necessary knowledge is to a Judge, may be somewhat evident by the meaning
of the word (...) in my Text, which is to Judge; but has a nearer
signification, secerno, to separate, or divide one thing from another by
election or refusal, which intimates a knowledge. After God had promised
Solomon his request, 1. King. 3. 5. he answers by asking in the ninth verse,
Give unto thy servant an understanding heart, that I may discern between good
and evil. Wherefore because experience is the mother of knowledge, and age
most grounded in experience, the Jews Governors were the Elders of their
Cities. Not unlike which Magistracy, was the Athenians (...), not to be
better expressed then by a third example, the Romans Senate. But, not to walk
upon this beaten tracke, my Text briefly appoints two things most especially to
be known. The first is (...), what it is that is done; whether an easy
slip, or a foul transgression; and (as Hugo Cardinalis comments) Hugo Card.
in. S. Job. c. 7. v. 51.
ad quem finem, for what intention, for that measures the action. The second,
(...), what is done, in act, not intention, for that makes the intention
complete. But the time checkes. A word of exhortation, and so an end.

To the Judge Justice Hutton
Though I doubt not (Right Honorable) that your wisdom may prevent my
admonition, yet I know a vocal warning, especially from a Pulpit, the Oratory
of God, has its special force and peculiar energy. Philip of Macedon knew well
enough that he was a man, yet he would every day be told so. Wherefore I
beseech you, and not only you, but all the inferior Judges, even to Jurors,
and the like, to whom the whole scope of my Sermon is as applicable, as unto
your self, that you will bear a few words of exhortation. They are but a few.
To day is Dies Criticus, a black and gloomy day of Judgment: a little
Doomesday, a type of the great one. When ye therefore judge, consider with
your selves seriously these few particulars. First, what you are that judge.
Sure you will blush when you call to mind: Dust of dust, a clayie lump, a heap
of Psalm. 82. 6, 7.
ashes. Terraterram iudicat, Earth judges earth. Now ye are gods, but you
shall die like men: to day you take away life, to morrow you may lose your
own. Nor are you exempted from the common lot of humane misery. Now is the
prisoners course, very shortly may be the best of ours. If then you pervert
justice while the staff is in your hand, expect a deserved misery; (...), Him.
(...).
God will punish you, legetalionis, by a just Law of paritie. Vae qui pradaris,
etc. Woe unto thee that destroyest: When thou have made an end of doing
wickedly, they shall do wickedly against thee: Esaias 33. 1.

Go too then, grind the face of the poor; accept persons in judgment,
oppress the widows and fatherless crying for justice; shed innocent blood.
But stay, and hark, the Preachers trumpe summons thee before God by a
fearful Scito, Know that for all this thou shall come to judgment: Eccles.
11. 9. Thou may indeed kill the innocents body, but ex ore tuo
condemnaberis, thy sentence shall rebound, and by a mortal recoyle pierce
thine own soul. Secondly, consider in whose place you sit. In the seat of
God, the just God, and the merciful God. Sing therefore with David in your
actions both mercy and judgment unto the Lord. Destroy betimes all the wicked
out of the land: Psalm. 101. 8. yet be merciful also as your Father is
merciful: Luke 6. 3. 6. Thirdly, remember in whose presence you judge: again,
in the sight of God, a just God, a jealous God, a terrible God, a God that will
avenge unto the third and fourth generation. Hearken then unto the caveat of
Malachies memento; Remember ye the Law which he commanded, with the Statutes
and Judgments: Malach. 4. 4. For it is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God: Heb. 10. 31. Neither deceive your selves with a vain
secrecy, saying, The Lord shall not see, nor the God of Jacob regard. Shall not
he which planted the ear hear? or he which formed the eye, shall not he see?
His eyes are ten thousand times brighter then the Sun; darkness is to him
as the noone day; yea, the righteous God searches the heart and reins: Psalm.
7. 9. Justice is Gods honor, and the Lord is jealous of his glory. If
therefore you transgress, he will surely find it out. The offenders indeed
of man's Law may escape the punishment, says the Heathen Xenophon) Xenop. (...).
(...), some by a privileged greatness; some by a subtle priuacy: but they
that transgress against Gods Law, must needs undergo the censure, (...),
Wisd. 16. 15.
(as the same Author) which a man can by no means avoid: for it is impossible
to escape Gods hand. Can any hide him in secret places, that I shall not see
him, says the Lord? Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord? Ier. 23.
24. If therefore ye are rebellious, and companions of thieves, every one
loving gifts, and following after rewards; if ye judge not the fatherless,
neither suffer the widows cause to come unto you, Thus says the Lord, the
Lord of Hosts, the mighty One of Israel; Ah, I will ease me of mine
adversaries, and be avenged on mine enemies: Isai. 1. 23, 24. Fourthly and
lastly, think seriously whom you judge: the answer to which brings me to a
point in my Text, hitherto of purpose ouer-passed, that the Law and Justice
might be handled together. (...), A man. (...), etc. Does our Law judge

A man? etc.
A man? Nec amplius dicam, nec opus est; I can say no more, nor need l. A man;
the Image of God; a walking world; the work of a Trinity: Let us make Man,
Genesis 1. 26. A man: thy brother the begotten son of thy natural father Adam;
thy brother, the politic son of thy Civil Father, the Prince; and again,
thy brother, the adopted son of thy heavenly Father, God. Vespasian had a
combat between his Office and Nature: Justice supplicijs illachrymauit and
ingemuit, as Suetonius; He was an Emperor, therefore must needs judge and
condemn; he was a man too, and therefore by as great a necessity he must
sigh and pity. Learned Athens, was not void of a moral piety, and even that
is always attended with mercy. Suet. in Vespas. Postellus de Mag. Athen. cap.
25.
Their chief seat in their (...), their iudgement-hall was (...), Iouis
liberatoris: Their chiefest God was their pardoning God; the crown of
sovereignty is mercy. Holy Scripture honors it as much, nay more, making it a
title of the true God, yea, and that a great title, for, His mercies are above
all his works. Himself will be styled, Pater misericordiarum, the Father of
mercies, 2. Cor. 1. 3. And to induce us Patrizare, to be like our Father in an
easy clemency, he leaves us mercy as an inheritance, and reward of our mercy:
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy: Matthew. 5. 7. Yet, as
man indeed bears the Image of his Creator, and ought therefore to be
seriously tried before condemned; so also a notorious malefactor bears the
mark of Satan: he has defaced the Image of God in himself, and ought
therefore to be punished. Vice corrupts his Nobility, sin depriues him of
pity; Thine eye shall not spare him. Deuteronomy. 19. 13. For he which justifies the
wicked, and he which condemns the just, even they both are an abomination to
the Lord, Prou. 17. 15. To conclude. Blessed is that soul which can be the
seat of God. Which is that, says Saint Bernard? Himselfanswers, The soul of
the just: for Justice and Judgment are the establishment of his Throne: Psalm.
89. 14. Do justice therefore in these three things; Read superiori, Read
inferiori, Bern. de Aduen. Dom. Sermon. 3.
Read aequali, cuique quod debes and digne celebras aduentum Christi parans in
Iustitia sedem suam: Give to thy superior, give to thy inferior, give to thy
equal; to every of them what is their due: so shall thou religiously welcome
the graces of God into thy heart, and thy self in justice be established the
holy Temple of God. Where if thou prepare him a residence in this life, he
will provide an eternal mansion for thee in his new Jerusalem of the World to
come, whither he of his infinite mercy bring us. Amen.

Deo Trino Vni Gloria.
FINIS.
Errata.
In the Latin Epistle, the second page, line 4. for sololes, r. soboles. p. 3.
l. 9. r. well. l. 12. r. lo^, p. 5. in the marg. r. Gillibertus in Cantic.
Sermon. 30. p. 10. l. 7. r. (...).


