THE MIRROVR of Created Perfection.

OR The Life of the most Blessed VIRGIN MARY Mother of God.

Written by the R. Fa. J. F. of the Society of JESUS.

Permissu Superiorum. 1632.

TO THE VIRTUOUS AND RELIGIOUS SISTER, AGNES ROSENDALE NOW CALLED Sister Agnes
of S. Albert, native of Brabant, and Religious in the Monastery of English
Carmolites at Antwerpe.
GODS gracious goodness in calling you not only to a Religious life in general,
but to this particular Order, so eminently flourishing in Christ's Church, and
very House likewise where now you live, co^seruing it self in the primitive
fervor, and exact observance of your holy Mother S. Teresa her Rule, to edify
by your holy example, and help also by your temporal means poor Exiles, and
Strangers; seems equally to argue Gods fatherly care of them, and special
love to your Self: clay ming withal thankful respects from their English
friends, and from my self in particular, as having had the favor affoarded me,
of holding your Heavenly spouse in my hands, whilst by your Profession, you
espoused your self so joyfully, and devoutly unto him, as to me and others
then present, the joy of your Nuptials, seemed to have been, in heaven, and in
earth, celebrated together.

And indeed the divine Author of your vocation seemed then to have much pleased
himself, in beholding his Graces so effectual in you, as it may well be
doubted, whether you embraced them more feruorously at first, or put them in
execution more heroically afterward, when deaf to contrary persuasio^s of
your worldly friends, and dexterously freed from that domestical, and unjust
Captivity, whereby they had for some months together, forcibly restrained you,
getting alone to the Monastery, and well assured, that the door thereof would
not, but with some better allowance of your powerful friends, be opened to
receive you (as the Reverend Mother and Religious of themselves exceedingly
desired) with an heroical resolution, scarcely to be exemplified, you pulled
of your secular rich clothes, put your self into a small Wheel, serving (as
the manner is) to take in and out things needful for the enclosed, left at
that time by a rare chance unlocked, and so turned your self into the place you
desired, by such a strange means, as it no less amazed the Reverend Mother,
and Sisters to see a person of your known quality, kneeling almost naked
before them, with flowing tears begging their holy habit, then it ioyed your
self to have gotten in so among them.

For surely to me, and others since, this entry of yours seemed almost
miraculous, the straytnes of the Wheel, divided into four parts, and your
tall stature considered; the devise at least, and your manner of executing it,
was (I doubt not) divinely suggested and not without a mystery performed, as
the Religious man preaching the day after your profession, in a great Auditory
of your own friends, and other principal persons, well noted, when as he
told them, that Christ in his spiritual espousall of you, was pleased to
observe in a sort, what he had formerly commanded to the Jewish Captains, and
souldiars, in marrying their beautiful captives, Deuteronomy. 21. by not admitting
you, captiued by love unto him, amongst his other pure spouses, there lovely
and beloved by him, but stripped first of secular garments, and made ready to
have a holier Habit put upon you, exteriourly course, but interiourly gracing
you, in the eyes and heart of your divine Lover, with the hidden bewties of holy
souls chiefly delighted: wherein, I dare say, you are not mean, amongst such
as are excellent, so far, as an immaculate purity of mind and body, with an
ingenuous candor of Nature, innocence of Life, admirable Humility, and a
continual ardour of divine love, often interrupting, and hindering whole nights
together, the needful repose of your senses, may argue deep foundations laid
of high buildings likely hereafter, by the heavenly Architect, to be raised in
you, and his Blessed Mother, a continual Leader and Helper of such pure souls
into the brideroome, and inmost bedchamber of her son, there to be embraced
graciously by him.

Wherefore I have purposely here collected her Life, a clear Mirror and Rule
of all perfection, as S. Ambrose calls it, and dedicated it, as a sincere
testimony of my Religious respect, unto you, and that holy family; that English
gentelwomen also, happening by this occasion to read this history of your
exemplar Vocation to Religion, and feruourous prosecution thereof (rather
touched by me indeed, then fully related) may learn thereby, how to leave
worldly friends, and temptations behind them, to enjoy abroad, such sweet
retyrements, and strait imbracings of their Heavenly Spowse, as their own
Homes cannot now affoard them.

Neither have they to this purpose, your Example alone, but the like also in
many other eminent Gentle-women of our nation, who have trampled secular
Braueryes, neglected Worldly contentments and preferments, left their Country,
and forsaken the delicacyes of their Parents houses, to enter into several
Monasteryes abroad, as into so many Bride-chambers of their heavenly spouse,
temporally first to serve, and eternally afterward to enjoy him; who lightneth
his burden laid on them so by abu^dant graces, and sweetneth his yoke by
heavenly consolations, as they feel not almost the apprehended austerities of
a Religious life; but contrarily find such a peaceful sweetness of conscience,
in the practice of them, as S. Bernards saying is truly verifyed in them, who
speaking of secular judgments made concerning the paynefulnes of Religious
discipline, Cruces vident, consolationes non agnoscunt; they look upon our
crosses, but know not our co^forts: this being (says S. Gregory) the
difference, inter delicias cordis and corporis between the delights of the
soul and the body, that these latter are vehemently apprehended, but by being
experienced quickly come to be loathed: whereas contrarily the other, are dully
apprehended, but delighfully tasted, tantoqueue a comedente amplius esuriuntur,
quanto and ab esuriente amplius comeduntur, and by being more greedily eaten,
they come to be more hungerly longed after: so as the Prophet bids us first
to taste, and then to see, how sweet God is, to his children and servants.

I may well ra^ke your self among the happy enioyers of such heavenly delights,
since your living in that place has been as a continual sitting at a full
Table of them; and austerities there apprehended indeed to be far greater,
then young tender gentlewomen in experience find them, have (as I have been
certaynely informed) been no more felt by you, then bitter pills wrapped in
sugar, come to be tasted by such as suddenly swallow them.

Shall I say (and perchance truly) Gods gracious favors to have bin the greater
toward you, for leaving in a sort your Country and friends, as your companions
have actually done theirs, by living so amongst strangers in it, as if you were
quite out of it? If it be so, you are worthily to esteem (as to my knowledge
you do) your pregnant Vocation to that House, a singular grace of God; and your
Admission therein, a particular favor, commonly denied by the Religious of our
nation, who are known in all places to refuse strangers, albeit very worthy
persons, amongst the^, as I for my part thereby conceive the odor of their holy
Example to be very sweet, and pleasing to God, it being able so to attract
strangers, divinely also guided, unto them.

Your devoted poor Friend, and Servant in Christ JESUS. I. F.

The Authors Preface, to the B. Virgin.
O Most pure, and gracious Mother of my heavenly Redeemer; whilst in these
Papers, I have sought to express thy Greatness, I have seemed to my self, as
one sailing, with a small Cock-boat, in a vast Ocean, or laboring with single
sands, to raise a high mountain: He indeed, knowing the least who thinks
himself able to comprehend thee, Perfect in thy nature, Sacred in thy Office,
Complete in thy Graces, and now Wonderful in thy glorious Perfections;
imitating thy Sons Virtues most, as being more, then all other Saints,
stored with his Goodness, ablest to see our necessityes, readyest to ask
remedies for them, and powerfullest from him, who will deny thee nothing, to
obtain them.

I offer here, the slender fruits of my poor Prayers, to thy Self, the
gracious subject of them; aiming at no other end in them, then some increase of
Devotion toward thee, in such, as shall read them. Which J ask also for my
self, as a far greater blessing, then J can merit any ways by them.

The Authors Petition.
VAst Sea of Glory, who art blessed
With an Eternal Calm, raise in my breast
Tempests of Sorrow, storms of sighs,
Let waves of tears break through mine eyes,
That they may quench, ere life is done,
The dreadful wrath of thy dear Son.
THE LIFE OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY.
Of our Blessed Ladies high, and holy Pedigree.
CHAP. I.
THOSE texts of the new Testament, wherein the Mother of God is mentioned, are
not unfitly, by a grave Author, compared to deep grounds in music, so
cu^ningly laid, as no discant of humane praises, can nearly express them.

Her lineal descent from David registered by two of the Evangelists, and her
being Cousin to S. Elizabeth (as the Angel called her) do sufficiently assure
us, that her high and holy Pedigree was of Patriarchicall, Prophetical,
Priestly, and Princely Progenitors jointly composed.

These four sorts of Persons therein contained, were as four roots, out of
which, this flourishing branche of Iesse his tree, happily issued.

They were like to the four Rivers flowing in Paradise, from whose clear
streams, meeting together, this inundation, and full of sea of heavenly
graces (as we may rightly call this sacred Virgin) was derived.

They were as four Wheels, on which this royal Chariot of Majesty, and Love,
was brought unto us, prepared for the King of Heavens triumphant entrance into
this world, to conquer Sin, Death, and Hell for us.

She was (as S. John Damascene from an Apostolical tradition assures us)
conceived of barren and aged Parents, that Grace might prevail above Nature,
and Lust have no place in her holy Conception. S. Ioachim and S. Anne (says
this holy Father) were great Almes-giuers, and very devout persons, both to
deserve at Gods hands, the blessing of such a child; and that sanctity likewise
(as S. Ambrose writes of S. John Baptist) might descend, as it were,
hereditarily on her, in whom the Author of sanctity was to be contained.

An Angel is said to have fortould her birth, by whom, the ruins caused in
heaven by the fall of Angels were to be repaired.

Her Patents, having in pious uses, given away, the greatest part of their
worldly substance, and living as they did in a remote Province of Palestine,
and that poor Village of Nazareth, prepared, as it were, the way to our
heavenly Redeemers poor Nativity, and humble life, lead afterward among us.

Of our B. Ladies immaculate Conception. [Chap. 2.
AS Almighty God had elected this sacred Virgin, to the highest office, and
greatest union with himself, which a pure creature could be assumed unto: so
did he no doubt, singularly prepare her thereunto, by conferring on her
proportionable graces.

For as from our Saviors high title, of being called the Son of God, S. Paul
collecteth his infimite excellency above the Angels, only called Gods
Ministers, and servants: so may we in like manner from this B. Virgins
sovereign title of being the mother of God, well gather her graces to have
been far greater, then her divine Father, Son, and Spouse had at any time
before bestowed upon the greatest of their servants.

And, as she concurred in an especial manner, to redeem the world by
communicating flesh, and blood, to the heavenly Redeemer thereof, the high
prices of our redemption: So did she (no doubt) singularly partake the fruits
thereof, and holiest manner of being by him redeemed. That whereas other souls,
in their first creation and union with bodies, contracte the hateful foulenes
of original sin; she by her sons sweet blessing, was from that foul
infection graciously preserved: so as Nature, and Grace began together in her,
and happily conspired to make her co^plete, in natural, and supernatural
perfection.

As a bright star of the sea, according to the mysterious signification of
her name; a heavenly splend our in her first rising did wonderfully adorn her.

(...), out of which the flowing spring of all graces was to rise; no filth of
sin did ever defile her.

As a lively, and most lovely tabernacle of the highest, she was no sooner
raised, but the seauen-headded lamp of the Holy Ghost did flame in her: and as
a mysterious Arc placed in the beautiful Temple of her body, her innocent
soul, was with Cherubims wings, acts to wit of heavenly knowledge and love,
graced and protected.

Syria's King had no power to cast any of his deadly darts, into this ever
holy, and divinely guarded Jerusalem.

This lovely spouse of heavenly Assuerus, was from the rigourous penalty of his
laws, made not for her, but for ordinary subjects, graciously exempted.

The natural, and immediate union which this sacred Virgin was to have
afterward with her divine son, preuay led far more with graces to enrich
her, then her remote deriuation from Adam, sinfully to infect her.

Eues oldnes, had no place in this new woman's co^ception, ordained to be the
gracious helper of the son of God, in our heavenly regeneration, and in
graces therefore to be likened unto him.

And surely, that particular enmity, which Almighty God promised to place
between her and Satan, in the hearing of our first parents, imports her, to
have been dearly united to the gracious Author of that promise, and never by
any kind of sin enthralled to him, over whom by her Son, she so
gloriously triu^phed: Pious ears, and hearts abhorring to hear spoken, that
this sacred mother of their heavenly Redeemer inherited sin (as other
children do) for her birthright in this world, and became thereby her enemies
slave, a child of wrath, hateful to her divine spouse, and guilty for a time
of eternal damnation. No certainly it could not be, but that he, who by
abundant graces preserved her (as all Catholics believe) from venially
offending him, by a like, and indeed far less privilege of his love, freed
her also, from all mortal, and sinful contagion.

Of our B. Ladies Nativity. [Chap. 3.
THis dawning of our Eternal Day, (as the Church calls the sacred Virgin)
being cleared in her first rising, and brightly ma^tled with that suns
beams, which to illuminate the whole world, rose afterward in her, S. Annes
womb, became as a quiet Oratory, for her to pray in, and render humble thanks
to her divine Lord, for his gracious favors newly then conferred on her, with
such an infused kind of knowledge, as S. John Baptist had, when in his mothers
womb, at his Redeemers presence, he joyfully exulted.

Her first graces actual and habitual, were such (no doubt) as well became so
divine and liberal a Son, to bestow, for her first welcome into the world,
upon so deserving a Mother, as he foresaw, she would be unto him.

The Eternal Father likewise, began even then, as his humble handmaid,
graciously to respect her: and the subsisting spirit of Love and Bounty as his
designed spouse, by wonderful graces, to indeare her unto him.

Angels, as their Lords future Mother, highly honored this gracious Infant,
and Gabriell a chief Prince amongst them, was then appointed, and most gladly
accepted to be a Guardian unto her, by whose happy birth, and holy life, all
mankind was to be graced and blessed.

Her Infancy, was (as we may well call it) a holy Exercise of Charity toward
God, brought into the earth with her, dutiful Love to her Blessed parents, and
glad Patience in sustayning all infirmities common to children; resembling then
in her innocent, and holy demeanures, the like carriages of her divine Son,
in his childhood afterward: so as she had no way ward fancyes, or childish
passions, ordinarily proceeding from the use of reason, and actual graces,
wanting in other children: but Innocence graced her, from her first entrance
amongst men, Purity consecrated her to her divine spouse, Sanctity enriched
her, Humility prepared her to receive from him frequent and wonderful favors,
Modesty did set out her rare bewtyes, and made them more graceful to such as
beheld her.

Of our B. Ladies Presentation, and life in the Temple. [Chap. 4.
THE mother of God, was in her tender years, to her own great comfort, and the
merit of her holy Parents, planted (say the S. John Damascene) as a fruitful
Olive in the house of God, to become fatned there, and to flourish with all
graces.

As another Hester, she was translated, into heavenly Assucrus Palace, to be
adorned there, sweetened, and made ready for his future imbracements; where not
Egeus the Eunuch, but Gabriel a chief Angel with his glorious companions,
tenderly regarded her by the appointment of their Lord, and familarized
themselves with her.

Her life there (as S. Ambrose describes it) was such, as she became therein,
a mirror to others of virtuous perfection. To her superiors (says he) she
was humbly obedient, courteous to her inferiors, and mildly sweet to her
equals; not eating oftener, or more at any time, then natural necessity
enforced her unto; praying much, sleeping little, and never so, but that her
heart was waking in a manner the while; often interrupting, with holy thoughts,
the repose of her senses.

Her bodily beauty, was like a flower, sweetened with internal graces, and
blown forth to the fulness of corporal perfection, never faded much in earth,
and in heaven now gloriously repaired.

Her holy Parents having enjoyed themselves, and yielded to the world, the
blessing of such a child, happily departed this life (as great Authors have
coniectured) during her abode in the Temple, because there is not in the
Evangelical History any mention at all of them; as certainly there would have
been, had they been living at, and after our Saviors Incarnation.

Of our B. Ladies Espousalls to S. Joseph. [Chap. 5.
THis sacred pure Virgin living amongst a carnal people, far more respecting
the blessing of children by marriage, then virginal integrity, and perfection,
was about the 15. year of her age by the will of them, who were Rulers of the
Temple, espoused to a man of her own Tribe, fitly chosen, first by God, and
afterward by them, as a husband for her; ripe in years, chaste in the
profession of his life, and far excelling (says S. Bernard) as well in the
future dignity of his office, as in heavenly sanctity, that holy Patriarch, and
best beloved son of Jacob, whose Name also he mysteriously enjoyed; a true
heir of David's virtues, whose Son the Angel called him, and a man according
to Gods own heart, much more then he; worthy as a mortal man could be, to
divide the name of a Father with God himself, and to have, as a good and
faithful Steward such heavenly treasures, as were the Incarnate Word, and his
gracious Mother, recommended unto him.

Her being so espoused, was (says S. Hierome) for the legitimation of our
Saviors birth to the Jews, and help of his education needfully required: and
that also his being borne of a spotles Virgin, might be concealed from the
devil. Which reason alleged by great Jgnatius, who lived to know her and our
Redeemer himself, seems to infer, that neither in the miraculous
Conception of her child, or at any time after, infernal spirits dared to
approach her, Angelically guarded, and like an Army ranged for a battle,
terrible unto them.

Holy Joseph was before marriage (as may be most probably ghessed) made
acquainted with her virginal vow, and being himself a Virgin purely and
piously disposed, most willingly yielded thereunto, and resolved gladly to
accompany her in the observance thereof.

They lived to geather at her poor house in Nazareth S. Ioachims Sheepcote (as
S. John Damascene calls it) first graced with the B. Virgins happy birth, and
afterward more highly dignifyed, by the divine Words Incarnation, and life
lead there from his return out of Egypt, till after his Baptism: so that, as
a sacred monument of Christianity, and a sure testimony of of our Saviors
poverty, it was first by the Apostles themselves, converted into a Chapel,
and since, not only preserved in the miserable ruins of Palestine, but from
place to place, likewise for the greater veneration thereof, by Angels
translated. Devour people come from several Countries thronging unto it;
Princes have with their votarie gifts and Donaries enriched it; miracles have
wonderfully graced it; and where now it remains, it is as a most precious
Jewel, cabbined in a curious Covering of white marble, and has besides a fair
Church built over it, wherein it stands as a most holy Sanctum Sanctoru^,
breathing sanctity into the pious visitours thereof, and delighting (I doubt
not) heavenly Creatures to behod it.

Of our B. Ladies salutation by the Angel. [Chap. 6.
THe sacred Virgin, and her holy Spouse, had not lived long together, but the
fulness of time was come, (as S. Paul calls the happy instant of our Saviors
Incarnation) when the divine persons, sent a chief Prince of their Court, as a
Paranymph, to salute this pure Maiden from themselves, and obtain her consent,
to be divinely fecundated by the holy Ghost, and have the Eternal Word
Incarnate within her.

Who, knowing the wonderful Excellency of her to whom he was sent, saluted her
with the highest Titles, which could be given to an unglorified Creature,
saying, Hayle full of grace etc. and he had further perchance dilated himself
in her praises, had she not by her humble fear, sweetly interrupted him.

Calling her Mary, familiarly afterward (which at first for reverence he did
not) he made her to know him, with whom, she had often, and familiarly
conuersed before (as great Authors have supposed, and is gathered from the
Evangelists words) affirming her to have been troubled not as his sight, but at
his speech, and high Titles, therein given unto her.

Fear not (said he) thou have found grace with God; such a Grace indeed, as
Hester found in Assuerus eyes, and heart together, when as a lovely spouse, and
Queen he meant to exalt her: Telling her further, that she should conceive in
her womb, and bring forth a Son promised by God (as the rest of his words
do import:) foretold by his Prophets, Jsay especially, whose very words he
used unto her; divine in himself, glorious likewise, and eternal in his
kingdom.

How (said she) shall this be done, because I know not man? Which question had
been idly made (as sundry ancient and great Fathers have observed) had she not
been debarred, by her virginal vow, from knowing her husband.

When the Angel had cleared her difficulty, and told her, the divine and pure
manner of her sons conception; with great humility and devotion, she threw
herself, as it were, into the opened arms of her omnipote^t gracious Spouse
to be purely embraced, and fecundated, with admiration and love yielding
herself unto him: Behold (said she) the handmaide of our Lord, be it unto me,
as you have said.

O Happy Turtles voice (says S. Bernard) sweetly uttered here in earth, yet
working wonders in heaven, by causing forthwith Gods eternal son, to descend
from his Fathers bosom, into her sacred womb, and therein to assume humane
Nature personally upon him.

Of the Eternal Word in her Blessed womb. [Chap. 7.
IN this miraculous Conception of God, and Man, our heavenly Redeemer, not the
Essence, but the manner only of humane generation was many ways altered, and
of the Virgins pure blood a humane body was suddenly, and perfectly framed, but
not united with a gracious, and glorified soul, then created also, before they
were by the divine Word personally assumed, that she maternally concurring in
her sacred womb to unite them, might be the true mother of him that was
perfect God, and perfect man, in one Person united.

This Celestial Babe, behoulding himself at that happy instant, by created
graces, and a divine greatness, above all creatures infinitely exalted, adored
likewise by all the Quires of Angels, and orday ned to redeem mortals,
amongst all the designed children of glory, then presented before him; he
first, and most especially beheld his holy Mother, in nature nearest, in
dignity chiefest, and in love dearest unto him, actually then prepared in an
humble ardour of heavenly love to receive, what graces he would give her, whose
gifts no doubt, equalled his measurelesse love toward her, and abundantly
requited the hearty welcome she gave him.

And that her love toward him naturally, as to her son, and supernaturally
as to her God, might then and afterward become happly increased; he is
conceived by great Authors, to have at that instant infused into her soul, a
clearer sight of his personal Majesty and greatness, then Moses, or any other
Saint before her, enjoyed, lying in her womb as a lovely Bride in his marriage
bed sweetly reposed; as a tree of life newly planted in this heavenly Paradise;
as a fragrant fair flower out of her flourishing branches graciously budded;
as a precious Margarite in a clear motherpearle safely enclosed; finally as an
amourous lover sweetly lulled in the Virgin-lappe of her, his chiefly beloved,
corporally growing in her nature, and liberally communicating his spiritual
gifts, and graces unto her.

Of our B. Ladies visit of S. Elizabeth. [Chap. 8.
THis mayden-gracious-Mother was no sooner wakened out of her sweet trance of
love, and divine fecu^dity, but Humility prepared, and fervent Charity incited
her to undertake a paynfull journey of 3. days travel, over the craggy
mountains of Iewry, to visit her aged Cosen S. Elizabeth in Hebron, and to
sanctify S. John her sons Precursor, by the breath of her salutation; of
which not the words, but effects are by the Evangelist declared, to have been
heavenly light, and abundant graces, divinely infused into the child first,
and mother afterward; which he with exultation, and she with outcryes of joy
and love, prophetically uttered, conioyning in her blessings this sacred
mother, and her divine son; as in nature then and love she beheld them
graciously united: Blessed (said she) art thou amongst women, and blessed is
the fruit of thy womb.

Blessed indeed in herself, as having the height of all created blessings
bestowed upon her; and blessed in her son, the flowing fountain of them. He,
as the fruit of life growing in her womb was blessed, and she was blessed as
the tree that bore him: and surely such a heavenly fruit, as the Incarnat Son
of God was, could not but have a tree of rare goodness to produce him, since the
goodness of trees are by their fruits to be chiefly discerned. This divine
grain of corn falling from heaven into the earth according to his own words
in the Gospel had no doubt, a fat, and fertile soil to fall into; this
precious margarit of Heaven, had a clear mother-pearle to breed it; this
bright son of Justice finally had a fair dawning to rise in by his most
resplendent beams, before other Saints mantled and adorned. Whence is it (said
this Saint, admiring the B. Virgins Humility, and grateful for her charity in
coming to a person so much in dignity and graces inferior unto her) that the
mother of my Lord, is come unto me?

S. Elizabeth was a great Saint, canonized and commended highly with her
husband by God himself; yet being humble and actually illuminated to know the
dignity and wonderful graces of her Cousin, she saw her own sparcles by the
others huge flames incomparably exceeded; her small light by the others su^ny
brightness ecclipsed; and the mother of a Creature, by the blessed Parent of her
Creator and Redeemer himself, incomparably excelled.

Then gladly, and thankefully she acknowledged the holy effects in her child,
and her self; of her salutation, praising her belief yielded to the Angels
speeches, and prophetically assuring her, that all should be fulfilled, which
he had told her, concerning the greatness of her son, redemption of the world
by him, and glory of his kingdom.

Of our B. Ladies Canticle, and stay with her Cousin S. Elizabeth. [Chap. 9.
SAint Elizabeth is said to have been newly replenished with the Holy Ghost,
before she spoke to the mother of God; so were Zachary her holy husband, and
Simeon, before they brake out into their prophetical Canticles. But before the
B. Virgin entered into hers, no new inspiration is mentioned; to let us thereby
know, that she did no more therein, then a little open the enriching Treasures of
divine Love, and knowledge, humbly by her before hidden, and ever concealed,
but when in gratitude to the liberal Author of them, she was sweetly enforced
to discover them. And as her Cousin had magnifyed her, so did she for them
magnify her Lord: and as S. John exulted in the womb, so her spirit likewise
exulted in God her Savior: an humble Prophetess afterward (says S. Basil)
of her own future greatness, and a devout Preacher in the rest of her high
Canticle of her Creator praises, and mercyes, especially in sending his son
graciously to redeem us. Behold (says she) from henceforth all Generations
shall call me blessed, because he that is mighty has done great things to me
etc. giving us to understand, that holy souls even to the worlds end, should
admire Gods gracious goodness toward her, and bless not only him the Giver,
but her also the Receauer, of such wonderful blessings.

Then sweetly delighted to utter Gods merciful love to men, and dreadful
severity in tumbling down the proud Angels from their high seats for
offending him, she concludes her sacred Canticle, with a fervent and
grateful acknowledgement of that high Blessing of Blessings, which by her, he
intended to his people.

She is said, to have stayed, about three months with her Cousin, that this
holy family, might lastingly enjoy the comfort of her presence, whose first
approach had been the cause of such blessings unto them; and that the little
Champion (as S. Ambrose calls S. John) might be the more fully anointed, and
in the lap and arms of this maiden, and gracious Mother of his divine
Redeemer, have new graces breathed into him. For by the Ecclesiastical order,
of celebrating the feast of our Ladies Visitation the day after S. John's
Octaue, we are given to understand, that she stayed with her Cousin, until the
childs circumcision.

Holy Zachary likewise, no stranger in his own house, nor unworthy to have
these secrets of heaven imparted unto him, may well be supposed, to have heard,
in his own miraculous silence, the prophetical outcryes of his wife, and
mysterious Canticle of his Cousin, po^dering them devoutly in his heart, until
with his tongue in the circumcision of his child his speech was restored, and
himself newly inspired to add his own Ca^ticle unto them.

Of our Saviors Incarnation manifested to S. Joseph. [Chap. 10.
AS the Mother of God, had eminent graces, and favors heaped from heaven
continually upon her; so had she two excellent virtues, Humility to wit, and
Taciturnity to hide them, which after her return to Nazareth she holily
exercised. For in a short time the happy grouth of her divine Babe, appeared in
her womb, and her sacred breasts, as pearly-bottels, tipped with rubyes, and
filled from heaven, to nurse God himself, in humane nature, plainly
discovered that to S. Joseph, her loving and beloved Spouse, which she desired
not to have hidden from him.

Her known sanctity, and vowed purity of life, caused him not to suspect on
the one side, any adulterous sacrilege to have been committed by her, more and
more still appearing gracious unto him; yet seeing on the other side evident
signs of her being with child, ignorant (says S. Hierome) of this high
mystery, and holily resolved not to live perplexedly with her, or to expose her
to infamy, and death ordained by the Jewish law for adulterous women, with a
grief (no doubt) proportionable to his great love toward her, and unspeakable
delight, which he took in her sweet society and presence, he resolved
secretly, to leave her: and she the while, though dearly respecting him,
resolved not to satisfy him in his doubt, by revealing, without a divine
warrant, such heavenly secrets reserved indeed by a heavenly messenger to be
related unto him.

Joseph son of David (said the Angel unto him in his sleep) fear not to
take Mary to thy wife, for that which is borne of her, is of the holy Ghost:
she shall bring forth a Son, and thou shall call his name JESUS, for he shall
save his people from their sins; ouerioying him (no doubt) by so happy a
tidinges, and comforting him far more, then his intended departure from so
dear, and gracious a spouse, had formerly afflicted him; for then he foresawe,
and with due thankfulness acknowledged such wonderful favors, and divine
blessings, as by being husband to such a wife, and foster-Father to such a
child, as was the Incarnate Son of God himself, and Redeemer of the world,
would be heaped upon him; making many fervent resolutions, with an awful love,
and glad diligence from thence-forth to serve them; and uttering them in a
joyful and loving manner to his Blessed spouse as humbly and thankfully
accepting them. Such calmes after storms, Almighty God is wont, for their
trial, and merit, to bestow on his servants, and children dearest unto him.

Of our B. Ladies Expecting, and longing for the birth of her Child. [Chap. 11.
THe Indian Oysters use to shut up within their shells, Pearls which they have
bred, so fast, as without violence they open not themselves, to yield up such
treasures: But it was not so, in this sacred mother-pearle of Heaven, for as
she had in her Virginal womb, for the worlds redemption, divinely conceived
her son; so was she for this high end, desirous to produce him. Whom she
well knew to lie, as a rich treasure mined within her body, which should no
sooner be brought to light, but other holy persons, the sheephards for example,
the 3. Kings, old Simeon, Anna, and many with them, would together with her
self, come to be enriched holily, and happly by it.

Or like a burning cole buried under hot embers, he was enclosed in her womb,
which bared and laid open, would sparcle, and send forth flames, with which the
whole world was afterward to be fired, lightened, and purged, according to his
own words in the Gospel; J came to send fire into the world, and what will
J, but that it should be kindled? Or like a rich Jewel he lay cabbined until
his birth in her, with whose gracious luster, when it came to be exposed, men
and Angels, were to be exceedingly and equally delighted: or finally like some
delicious wholesome fruit, he lay shelled, and untasted, until he came by holy
souls, to be relished, and fed upon.

For her own comfort also, this sacred Mother desired her sons birth, with
unspeakable longing, to see him, embrace him, and perform all motherly duties
unto him, which whilst he lay in her pure womb she could not. All that she
could do there for him, was to adore him in his humility, yield the Enclosure
of her body freely unto him, embracing him as he lay within it, eating chiefly
to sustain him, esteeming herself happy in bearing him, and willing with her
heart blood, if she could, to have yielded nutriment unto him. Who was not dull
the whilst, or careless in requiting her affectionate intertaynement; but as the
sun is wont more and more to mantle, and clear the Eastern part of heaven,
before his rising therein: so did this divine fountain of heavenly charity,
illuminate, inflame, and adorn with his brightest beams, the soul of this
sacred Virgin, before his rising from her, in our earthly Horizon.

Of our B. Ladies journey to Bethleem. [Chap. 12.
Caesar's Edict hastened odedient Joseph and his humble spouse toward Bethleem,
there to be enrolled, then a ruinous poor Village, and far different from
what it had been, when great Solomon, as his fathers birthplace, with high
walls, turrets, and stately palaces guarded graced and enriched it, yet never
dignifyed the same so much, as did these poor strangers, by entering into it,
and bringing with them Isreal's heavenly King, and great Captain, to be borne
there, as long before Micheas had prophesied; so as it ioyed in an unspeakable
manner this holy couple, to know that they were now arrived, at the designed
place of their Sons and Saviors nativity.

Weary of their foot-iourney friendles, and as poor persons rejected at the
Inn stored with richer guests, humbly and patie^tly they betook themselves to
a poor stable, or Cave there (as S. Hierome calls it) to beasts and beggars
equally exposed; fitly chosen by the Son of God, notwithstanding, as
mysteriously represe^ting the worlds estate darkened by insidelity, and with
horrible sins abominably defiled, at his entrance into it. Expressing
withal, the obscurity, and uncleanness of souls, before he come by heavenly
graces, to be borne within them, when of foul stables, they become clean
tabernacles for the divine persons to remain in.

The poverty likewise of the place, and want of all things therein, aptly yield
exemplar documents to holy souls, of contemning for his sake, palaces, po^pes
and worldly commodities, which this heavenly King for our merit and example, as
in his birth, so throughout his whole life, utterly wanted.

Of our B. Ladies Childbirth. [Chap. 13.
SAint Bonaue^ture, in a holy co^templation of this sacred mystery, conceaueth
the B. Virgin being come to Bethleem, and entered into the stable, to have been
excessiuely replenished with joy that the long desired hour of her Divine
Sons Nativity so nearly approached: and whilst prostrate on her knees in
prayer, she delighted her soul with holy apprehensions thereof, and longing to
behold him, he miraculously ascended out of her vnopened pure womb, into her
blessed arms, ready to embrace him.

This high privilege (says S. Bernard) of being a mother, yet remaining still
a Virgin, having been for her singularly reserved, whose child was God and Man
personally united, able in his power, and willing in his love to preserve his
Mother from all pain, impurity, and corruption: in so much as learned Suarez
conceaueth the pure Nest, in which this divine Phoenix and heaueuly Bird of love
was hatched, and ripened for his birth, to remain entirely yet preserved, as
it was at his going out from it, that Angels intellectually, and Saints
corporally also may transparently in all eternity, and delightefully behold it.

Instead of midwife, and women to help her, Angels in their kings birth, gladly
became his Adorers, and her Attendants; so that a poor stable, by the happy
birth of this divine Babe therein, was suddenly converted into an Empyriall
heaven; a hard crib in which she laid him, became this humble Kings bed of
State to repose in; poor cloutes in place of purple robes served to inuest
him; and the papps of a poor maiden, filled from heaven then, as her womb had
been before, served to give him suck, who fed the birds of the air at that
instant, and attyred the flowers of the field in their fair and various
beauties; never greater, then in being so lessened; never more glorious then in
being so obscured; never more exalted, then in being so humbled; never more
lovely, then in humane beauty assumed; never more powrefull, then in our
infirmityes sustained. Mercy moved him to undertake the painful task of of
our Redemption, Wisdom guided him, Fortitude hartned him, and Charity moved
him arde^tly to embrace whatsoever he saw needful, or expedient to be done, or
suffered therein for us.

Of our B. Ladies intertayning the shepherds in Bethleem. [Chap. 14.
THe Angels of heaven having joyfully themselves adored their king, hastened
into the fields of Bethleem, to make the poor shephards, there watching their
flocks, sharers of joys with them. Fear not (said the chiefest of them,
appearing singly, and gloriously unto them) for J come to, tell you a joy which
shall be to all people, because a Savior is borne unto you this day in
Bethleem; and forthwith to second these happy tydinges, the whole Host of
heaven, was seen trooping in the air, and heard to sing, in a mysterious
canticle, the fruits of our Saviors coming in earth and in heaven: Glory in
the highest to God, and peace to men etc.

And they were no sooner mounted up to heaven, but the shephards hasted to
Bethlee^, where at the cribbe of Christ, they joyfully uttered what the Angels
had told them. And our B. Lady, is said mysteriously by the Evangelist to have
conserved, and conferred all these things in her heart, as well to illuminate and
delight her soul, by a high, and amourous conte^plation of them, as she did
all the passages of her sons life afterward: as also to be able, for the
good of others, and instruction perchance of this Evangelist himself,
afterward to relate them: who professing (as he does) in the beginning of his
Gospel, to have collected the sacred verities thereof from such, as had been
ministers from the beginning, and witnesses of them; we may well thence infer
him to have received from this sacred Virgins mouth, all such particulers of
our Saviors Incarnation, and infancy, as she alone could testify unto him,
having been the chief, and happy actour in them, called therefore by sundry
holy Fathers, the Mistress of the Evangelists: and S. Cyrill before his
Thesaurus upon S. John, wondreth not, that like an Eagle he soared above his
fellows, having had from his Lords Cross, this sacred Arc and rich treasury
of heavenly knowledge reco^mended unto him, who having lived with her divine
son, as his most inward, and wise secretary 30. years together, was all
that time sitting, as it were, at a continual ba^quet, gustfully feeding, and
delighting her soul, with the heavenly viandes of his mysterious speeches, and
actions, conserved still in her heart, and devoutly considered.

Of our Blessed Ladies nursing, and serving her divine Son. [Chap. 15.
AS it is certain that our Savior was complete in the graces, and glory of
his soul, from the first instant of his humane conception, wanting only that
experimental knowledge, which was by degrees (as in us) to be gained by the
use of his senses: so are we to conceive this divine Babe, to have been wholly
free from all waywardness, uncleanness, violency of passions, fancyes, and
other childish imperfections, intuitiuely still behoulding those very objects,
which experime^tally he learned.

And whereas other children, by frequent aspects, come to know the faces of
their Mothers, and begin a natural love toward them, for continual favors
received; this divine child did not only exteriously know his Mother, but
interiourly also behold the humble thoughts and enflamed affections of her
soul toward him, her pure intentio^s, and hearty gladness in doing motherly
offices unto him; and according to the wonderful merit of them with heaped
graces presently requited them.

For surely they apprehend mea^ly the diuinesse of this child and Theandricall
sublimity of his actions, who conceive his huggings, kisses, and other like
expressions of filial Jove toward his B. Mother, to have been no more, then
fruiteles and naked signs of childish affections: whereas indeed they were
continual breathings of new graces into her soul, ever humble and prepared to
receive them.

Natural and supernatural love sweetly conspired (no doubt) to indeare them
to each other; He, as his natural mother, and most excellent Creature, humanly
and diuinly affected her; and she, as her God, and Son respectfully adored,
and delightefully served him. Which harmony of mutual love, between them,
never of her part sinfully interrupted, happily still increased; so as heavenly
Creatures themselves, were delighted to behold him recreated, and her
enriched, by their mutual affections.

Of our B. Ladies sorrow in her sons Circumcision. [Chap. 16.
THe son of God was upon the 8. day after his birth, in the pure parts of
his body, paynefully circumcised, that he might, as in the end, so in the
beginning of his life shed painefully his blood for us. For we are not to
conceive, that he who was above all laws, and the Author of them, suffered
this wound, because the Law commanded him, but rather he made this law, that
to fulfill the same, he might take an occasion, to be so wounded for us.

This bloody ceremony, and sacramental remedy of original sin in Male
children, (arguing therefore Christ's wonderful humility in undergoing it) was
usually performed in each parish by some Leuite, appointed by his office to do
it, and the house where the child was borne, was the ordinary place of
performing it; so as the Blessed Virgin may be conceived, co^passionatly to
have seen this first and painful wound, made in the tender body of her
son, as she did afterward behold his last woundinges, agonyes, and
torments, having been indeed not casually, but divinely ordained, to share in
sufferings with him.

Lust, the beastly and ouer-common vice of men, was so hateful to this
heavenly Author of purity, and Son of an immaculate Virgin, as in the very
entrance of his life, he seemed to proclayme war against it, by causing the
pure parts of his own body, to smart, and bleed, that from such a fountain
of grace opened in himself, his devout children, from raging heates and
impurityes in theirs, might become afterward cooled, and cleansed.

Neither was this wound only painefully made, but (as we read of Sichem and his
people) the stiffnes, and smarting pain thereof continued many days after: so
as we may well call this wound, a paynfull taste which our heavenly Redeemer was
pleased to take, of his bitter, and deadly chalice; and a sharp exercise of
patience with-all, in his loving Mother, dressing this wound whilst it
continued, and often bathing it, with flowing tears of tender compassion, as
she did afterward, his deeper, and deadlier wounds, suffering still in her
soul his bodily torments.

Of our B. Ladies imposing on her Son, the Name JESUS. [Chap. 17.
WIth the sacramental sign of Circumcision, children then were wont to be
enrolled in the number of Gods people; and because this name JESUS, imported
the salvation of mankind, he would not without shedding his blood, whereby he
was to redeem us, have it imposed.

This Name, holy and high above all Names (as S. Paul tells us) was
misteriously imposed upon two Iosua's, or Jesus'es, types of our Savior in
reducing Gods people from their first and second captivity; but commonly
afterward given to children, that the mysteriousnesse thereof, might not become
noted in him who was to perform the high office of saving mankind, chiefly by
it imported.

This name (JESUS) revealed by the Angel to the B. Virgin first, and to S.
Joseph afterward, with the comfortable meaning thereof, was as Oil powered
out, to mollify the grief of his wound felt in her heart, and still to increase
the gracious flame of her ardent love toward him. It was like sweet Music in
her ears, honey in her mouth, and a continual iubily in her heart, to name it
herself, or hear others name it. Her sons humane and divine greatness having
been mentioned by the Angel unto her, for this end chiefly that she might
conceive the mysteriousnes of it.

All virtues exercised by him in the work of our Rede^prion, his actions, his
sufferings, and fruits of them, in earth, and in heaven, were continually to
her by that holy name (JESUS) compendiously, and sweetly imported: so as we
may well affirm her, to have begun that Veneration to this holy Name here in
Earth, which is now to the same in heaven also yielded.

Of the Sages finding the Child with the B. Virgin his Mother. [Chap. 18.
THis humbled king of majesty, and greatness, was pleased to have his poor
birth graced by the coming of Gentill Princes, from the utmost ends of the
Earth, by the conductio^ of a mysterious and miraculous Star, in Bethleem to
adore him, not debased in their high thoughts, by his poverty, but appearing
therein, as a king of heavenly majesty and greatness; purposely so humbled, and
disguised in humane nature, afterward to redeem them more lovely and
gracious, whilst with adorations, prostrations, and gifts they testified their
faith in him.

And as the Child's greatness, so his B. Mothers Excellency was discovered, no
doubt, divinely unto them. Wherefore to intimate their joys, by behoulding her
also increased, the Evangelist my steriously tells us, that, they found the
child with Mary his Mother: viewing him as the bright Sun of heaven newly
appearing in our earthly Horizon, and her as that clear dawning which he had
chosen to rise in. His gracious beams adorned her, and she with her natural
bewty had sweetly attired him; so as her lively and lovely form, was in his
humane face delightfully resembled.

Who in the silence of her son, became (as we may conceive) his interpreter
unto them, and an humble relatour of such mysterious verities, as in love, and
dewty, they desired to know of him, concerning the miraculous manner of his
Nativity and Conception, and what the Angel had told her, of his own future
glory, with the eternal greatness of his kingdom: how likewise he had been
promised to the Patriarcks, Abraham, Jsaac, Jacob, and David her prophetical
Princely Father; foretold by the Prophets, and expected by faithful holy
souls throughout all generations, according to the words of her divine
Canticle for merly uttered.

She knew them to have made a long journey, and not likely to stay long with
her Son, esspecially after the Angel had warned them for their return.
Humility therefore, moved by charity, ever in holy souls (and most eminently
in her, then and afterward) conjoined, yielded to disclose such heavenly
secrets of her divine Son unto them, as might confirm their faith, and
increase in absence, their present love toward him. So as we may well think,
the day, and night which they spent in Bethleem, to have been a happy time, for
their comfort, and instruction.

Of our B. Ladies Purification. [Chap. 19.
THis facred Virgin albeit in the Conception and birth of her child rather
purified then defiled, went notwithstanding as other women did, to be legally
cleansed; carrying Christ into the Temple with her, there to be offered, and as
other children ceremoniously redeemed. Who as the Lord of the Iemple himself,
meant thereby to make the glory of this second house, greater then that of the
first, as had been foretold by his Prophets, by being more highly graced and
exalted by the corporal presence of himself in it: and that likewise such
holy persons, as Saint Simeon, and Saint Anne were, might happily enjoy the
promised and blessed sight of him.

Sincon is said to have entered the Temple (in spirit) divinely, to wit,
inspired, and taught to know, amongst so many children, as were there
continually presented, the bright Sun of heaven (albeit then in humaue nature
and poverty wholly obscured) ordained to be afterward a light to the Gentiles,
and the glory of his people, as he sung in his Canticle, whilst he enjoyed the
sweet comfort of holding Christ in his arms for a moment, which the blessed
Virgin and her Spouse, for many whole years together, happily enjoyed.

And as if in ardent imbracings, and kissings of this divine Babe, he desired
to have gasped out his holy soul into his sacred mouth, breathing sanctity
into him, he cried out to be dismissed, and let forth of this world, that he
might not live perchance to see this beloved and gracious Lord of his heart,
persecuted in his Infancy, toyled in his life, calumniated in his actions,
contradicted in his doctrines, hared by those whom he heartily loved, and
finally to be, before his Mothers eyes butchered and disgraced.

So as he could not contain himself amidst his rauishing co^tentments, from
sadly fortelling their joint griefs and sufferings; A sword of sorrow (said he
blessing the Mother of God, and her spouse) shall pass through thy soul;
metaphorically so expressing that killing-wound, or rather those many deadly
wounds, which should be made in her soul by behoulding, as she did afterward,
her sons agonies, and torments: and insinuating withal, that noble kind of
Martyrdom which she was to suffer, without other wounds, then such as Love
made, by uniting her so nearly, and dearly to her son, as to feel in her
very soul, by a strange kind of compassion, his corporal torments.

Of our Blessed Ladies flight with her Child into Egypt. [Chap. 20.
THe Sages entrance into Jerusalem to seek a new King, troubled Herod, yet
their private departure homewards another way, seemed to argue, that they had
not found him; but when such holy Prophetical persons, (as S. Simeon, and S.
Anne were known to have been) had so publicly proclaimed him, this bloody
Tyrant sent out his murderous guardes, to kill all male Children of two years
old and under, in, and about the Confines of Bethleem.

When the Angel had forewarned S. Joseph in the night, of this danger, Love
quickly awakened him and his B. spouse, to provide for the safty of the child,
by flying into Egypt, as the Angel had appointed them. Poverty eased their
care of carrying much with them, and the darkness of the night, served fitly to
hide them from dangers approaching. The strangenes of the Country which they
were sent unto, did not trouble them; the length of the way did not terrify
them; nor any other difficulty dismay them occurring in their journey, which
they made through a sandy vast Desert so blessed the^ (says Baronius) by our
Saviors presence as it became afterward a holy, and solitary retyrement of
innumerable Saints, gladly leaving worldly noyses, and contentme^ts, quietly
there, and holily to serve him.

Their manner of carrying the child so long and paynefull a journey, may be
supposed to have been no other, then beggars use, when trussed at their bosom,
or backs, from place to place, they carry their children. Idols are said to
have fallen down (as Dagon before the Arc) and oracles to have ceased, when
the incarnate Word and heavenly Author of Truth in that Country appeared.

Their entertaynme^t is by learned Suarez, conceived to have been no other, then
such as beggars are wont to receive amongst strangers, until S. Joseph by the
exercise of his poor trade, was toward their relief, able to gain
something. The place of their abode is said to have been near Ramasses, a City
built long before, by the Israelites hard labors, during their captivity: and
in that place is yet showed a well, wherein the B. Virgin is said have washed
her sons clothes, watring a valley of Balme-trees, only growing in that
part of the Country, as if from that sanctified fountain, the place had
received a singular virtue.

The chief, and unspeakable Comforts of these holy Parents in their exile, may
be thought to have been, the graceful grouth of their divine child, his wise
speeches after he could speak, and loving behauiours toward the^.

Of our B. Ladies return, with her Child out of Egypt. [Chap. 21.
TAke the child (said the Angel the second time) and his Mother, and return
into the land of Israel, for they are dead that sought his life etc. omitting
not to give the sacred virgin her highest title, to wit of being Mother to such
a child, and insinuating withal by this manner of speaking (as learned Suarez,
with other great Authors observes) that this Blessed Saint was to respect her,
not only as his wife, but as the Mother of his redeemer withal; who with a
reuerentiall and humble kind of glad love, yielded accordingly his ready
services unto her.

Herod (as Baronius gathers from Josephus, and other Authors) dyed the 7.
year after his murder of the Infants, at which time our Savior could not be
carried back again in the arms of his Parents, as he had been brought
thither, nor well undergo the travel of so long a journey, but that his
charity was such toward us, as for our greater example, and merit, he would
not in his very infancy from labors, and sufferings be spared.

His Parents returned with him to Nazareth a poor Village, seated in the
co^fines of Galile, where till his Baptism he lived so meanly, as he was
reputed no other then S. Joseph's natural Son, succeeding him afterward in
his poor trade, and laboring to make a plow, who was able without labor to
have created many worlds at that instant; praying with the Nazarites, and the
whilst, as their God, prayed unto by them; gazing with his humane glorious
soul on the divine persons, and intuitiuely behoulding all created Objects. So
as he gained no knowledge, but experimental from them, wherein with his years,
he is by the holy Evangelist said to have increased, and seemed exteriously to
men's eyes more and more gracious in his person, and behavior, not by any new
graces gained in his blessed soul, ever consummated in them, but in graceful
manifestations, and expressions of sanctity, and knowledge, ignorance being no
defect of humane nature, needful to be assumed by the son of God, to make
and increase for our sins his intended satisfaction; but wholly indeed
vnbeseming him, who was to be the heavenly teacher of souls, and to deliver
the highest verities, as a clear behoulder of them more then all the Prophets
before him, and able to secure and warrant, after an especial manner, the
infallible Authority of his speeches unto us.

With millio^s of holier thoghts, then ordinary Souls can conceive, did his
holy Parents continually behold him, and draw from all his gracious behauiours
and speeches (his B. Mother especially) as bees do gather sweet honey from
flowers, new motives and increase of love toward him; and he the whilst, was
delighted in no earthly object more, then to see the wonderful effects of
graces in her soul, and to behold modelled as it were, his own virtues in
her, as in Archimedes crystal Sphere, the vast Orbs of heaven, and their
several motions were wonderfully expressed: her gifts and favors continually
from him received, being no other indeed, then flowings of his fountain,
sparcles of his flame, and beams of his infinite brightness. Sin for example,
was repugnant in him, to the majesty of his own person, and she by her near
union with him, was from the same, or any inclination thereunto totally
preserved. Acts of virtue were Theandricall in him, and by the dooers person
infinitely dignified: and in her they were ever heroical, and highly enobled
by her wonderful graces. Finally, as in his bodily bewty he was like to her;
so did she in her soul resemble more and more his gracious perfections, that
so in both sexes humane nature might become graced and exalted, as it had been
before vilified by sin, and extremely debased.

Of our B. Ladies finding her lost son in the Temple. [Chap. 22.
IT was an yearly custom (as the Evangelist tells us) of Christ, and his
Parents to celebrate as other devout people did, their Easter in Jerusalem,
the son of God being pleased so to dignfy the Temple by his presence therein,
and grace those legal sacrifices, the types of his Passion.

The mysterious obseruances of that Feast ended, S. Joseph and his B. Spouse
returned homewards, conceauing their divine son, then 12. years old, to have
gone with their kinsfolks, and neighbors out of the city before them. Whom
when at night they found not, with wearyed stepps, and careful thoughts, they
returned back again, presently to seek him, and after much labor and
grief, they found him the third day, amidst the Doctors of the Temple, by his
wise demaundes wonderfully astonishing them.

His Mother, when she could come to speak conveniently with him, with an
humble expostulation of joy and love, asked him: Son why have thou done so
unto us? as wifely knowing he was not absent, but by his own will from them,
thy Father and I, sorrowing did seek thee: naming her Husband first, to
express her humble love, and respect toward him; and how her own sorrow, by
his afflictions had been increased, whilst S. Joseph by silence showed his
respect to them both, his aufull Reverence restrayning love, from any such
boldenes, as the B. Virgin with a greater right, and never but with his leave
and gracious allowance, used toward him.

Know you not (answered our B. Savior) that I am to be in the things of my
Father? Giving them so to understand, that for the service of his heavenly
Father he had so stayed behind them: to teach perchance those Doctors and
guides of his people by occasion of his wise questions, some profitable
verities, fit to be known and taught to others by them; and that as the Jews
then, so now, we might by such a glimse, conceive his sunny brightness, and
those enriching treasures, of divine wisdom and knowledge, which in his
tendrest years, were hoarded up in him.

We may also piously guess him, privately and alone in those 3. days of his
absence to have visited the holy places of his future sufferings, and with an
unspeakable ardour of love, and prompt obedience, to have made his primitive
offerings severally in them, and vented, in lasting prayers and prostrations,
the fervent longings of his gracious soul, afterward to undergo them.

His Parents are said to have wondered at his words, and the B. Virgin, to have
conserved and conferred them in her heart; that so we might come truly to know,
that she did ever do so, letting none of her divine Sons mysterious words and
actions to pass, but that by conseruing them in her fresh memory, and
pondering them devoutly in her heart, sheenriched and raised her illuminated
soul continually by them.

Of our B. Ladies life with her son until his Baptism. [Chap. 23.
THe Evangelist concludes our Saviors whole life, from his being found in the
Temple until his Baptism, in these words; He returned with his Parents, to
Nazareth, and was obedient unto them; to wit, by a voluntary submission of
himself, and a loving readiness to do what they would have him: who privy to his
hidden majesty and greatness, with a loving boldenes, so commanded him as their
son, that as God the whilst, and their Redeemer, they humbly in their
thoughts, and affections adored him.

Wherefore we may well conceive the blessed order of that family, wherein three
persons only lived, one of them divine, and the other two eminently holy,
exercising Humility, and Charity toward each other; he in obeying, and they in
commanding him, for the glory of his Father, and future instruction of his
servants, subjected unto them.

He with filial love respected his gracious Mother as the natural, and
isntrumental cause of his humane being, omitting at no time, the duty of a
child toward her: and to S. Joseph his reputed Father, he yielded a grateful
behavior for his many painful labors, and fatherly offices toward him, with
heaped graces (no doubt) and divine favors, from time to time, liberally
requiting them.

Their living with him alone, as his secretaries and servants, for 30. years
together (for S. Joseph may be thought, not to have dyed long before our
Saviors Baptism) was as a long harvest of heavenly merits plentifully by them
both (according to their abundant sowing) happily reaped. And as this sun of
heavenly brightenes, by doctrine, and examplar actions, did shine to others
with whom he conuersed after his Baptism, for 3. years together: so with the
like, and a far greater clarity did he appear lovely, and imitably gracious in
all his behauiours and speeches to these two only, knowing his greatness, for
30. years together, and conuersing domestically with him, who were neither
dull to conceive, nor hard to believe the mysterious verity of his speeches
unto them. And if that be true which Solomon says, that with the good, a man
shall be good; how good then were these two who lived with goodness it self,
and had their souls ever opened, and prepared to receive full streams flowing
from the fountain thereof, continually into them?

And if our Savior proclaimed the eyes of his disciples happy in having seen
him, whom so many Kings and Prophets had desired to see, and could not; and
their ears likewise blessed in hearing his speeches: how happy, and blessed
may we conceive his holy Parents to have been, who with eyes and ears of soul
and body together, more lastingly, clearly, and devoutly beheld their divine
Son, pondering his mysterious speeches, and in their hearts (as it is said of
the B. Virgin twice by the Evangelist) deeply, and delightfully considering
them?

Of the B. Virgins charitable sorrow, for S. Joseph's death. [Chap. 24.
WHen this Blessed man dyed, cannot out of the Gospel be any ways gathered:
Only it may most probably be ghessed, that our Savior sent him to a happy
rest, before he began his own preaching and labors. The place of his death is
likest to have been in Nazareth, where he lived, and the circumstances thereof
are unknown further, then that as he was a just man, advanced to a dignity more
then Patriarchicall, in being spouse to the Mother of God, and Foster-father to
the incarnate Word himself, so was his end no doubt blessed, and his merits
suitable unto it.

And whereas we read of many Saints, so divinely favored in their sickness
and death, as they had their good Angels visibly and comfortably attending
them; this Blessed man enjoyed a far greater privilege, when in his sickness
and death, the son of God himself, and his gracious mother, with a most
charitable diligence were ready to perform all serviceable offices unto him.

The disease of which he dyed, seems to have been old age, and the usual
infirmities thereof, increased perchance in him, by the hard labors of his
life, as Pomegranuts use to break and fall to the ground, by the ouer-filling
grouth of their sweet kernells, to rise again in a new spring afterward.

And whereas holy Men are said to dye in our Lord; Blessed S. Joseph, may be
said to have dyed in him after a higher manner; to wit, reposed in the arms
and imbacements (as we may conceive) of his heavenly Redeemer, his immaculate
loving Spouse not failing the whilst to close his dying eyes, to kiss his cold
cheeks and with flowing streams of tears, to take her leave of him by whom
living she, and her divine Son had been so purely beloved and faithfully
served.

His gracious soul was no sooner breathed out, but Angels there present
joyfully carried it to the holy troops of Patriarks, Prophets, and Saints
disceased before him, as their heavenly Redeemers Foster-father, to be
honored, embraced, and joyfully welcomed by them, whilst his Spouse and her
divine Son, caused his pure body, to be decently interred, and put into the
earth; where perchance, it was from corruption graciously preserved, to be
gloriously repaired in our Saviors Resurrection, with other saints bodies
then miraculously raised; since no Saint deserved more then he, to accompany
his God, and Son, at his first entrance into his heavenly Kingdom.

Of the Blessed Virgin, being in Cana with her son at a wedding. [Chap. 25.
AFter S. Joseph his death, the B. Virgin lived alone with her divine son,
flowing in heavenly delights, then without a partner, received continually from
him, until his going to be baptized by S. John in the River of Jordan: whence
after his Baptism, fasting in the desert, and calling of many disciples to
follow him, he returned into Galilee, and was with his B. Mother at Cana
invited to a wedding, mysteriously graced, and showed not to be sinful (as
some ancient Heretics affirmed) by the sacred presence of two such guests,
who pleased to be present at the same.

Whose wedding this was, is not known, but that the Brides were poor, may be
well gathered, from their want of wine before the Dinner was ended: which want
of theirs, being known by the mother of compassion, she came to her son well
knowing his divine power to effect, and her own graciousnes to obtain what
she meant to ask of him, saying, they have no wine, briefly intimating so
their wantes, and her own charitable desires of relieuing them, to him, who
without words did (she doubted not) know them before hand, and would in his
bounty there presently redress them.

His reply (woman what is that to thee, and me?) was not harsh (as Calvin
wickedly affirmed) but mysterious; to let us thereby know, that not her will
(albeit ever holy and pleasing unto him) but the decree of his eternal Father
did in doing miracles chiefly direct him. And by telling her, (that his hour
was not yet come) yet doing withal what she entreated him, he gave us
sufficiently to understand, that her request made him to exercise, sooner the^
otherwise he would have done, his miraculous power, in performing that charity
which she entreated so of him; and by going afterward to the wayters, and
bidding them do whatsoever her Son commanded them, she wisely and charitably
prepared them (as Cardinal Tolet well notes) not to hinder by their
unwillingness, what she knew he intended, as having been divinely inspired to
ask that miracle of him, and taught to know withal his manner of performing
it, by causing, to wit, water to be drawn by the wayters, afterward into wine
miraculously converted.

And the fruits of this first miracle so obtained by her, are said to have
been, the manifestation of her sons glory, and confirmation of his disciples.

Of our B. Ladies going to dwell at Capharnaum, with her Son. [Chap. 26.
Our B. Savior, intending when he began to preach, to transfer his dwelling
from Nazareth to Capharnaum, is said to have taken his B. Mother with him, that
mutually they might enjoy each others company, and withal that such persons as
were converted unto him, might have her a lively mirror of virtuous and
exemplar perfection, conversant with them.

So that this heavenly Sun of Justice, shining here on earth, had two Mary's,
bright stars indeed of the Sea (as their names importe) illustrated by him in
their several graces, and waiting lovingly on him; the one ever a clear
mirror of unspotted perfection, the other a lively pattern at length of hearty
Contrition: Graces were in the one, as a bright sunshine, never sinnefully
clowded; and in the other as a radiant sky from storms newly cleared. The one
was as a full fountain of living waters never defiled; and the other as a
deep well, freshly cleansed, and filled. The one never wanted a rich patrimony
of heavenly graces, still by her wonderfully increased; and the other had hers,
once wasted, graciously again, and with a great increase happily restored: and
both were to him in their sweet societyes especially delighfull, contemplating
his speeches, and noting his actions, to enrich their souls holily by them;
she especially, who from his childhood had been accustomed to do so; considering
his miraculous curing of diseased and miserable persons not only as acts of
gracious love and mercy toward them, on whom they were wrought: but as
misterious representations likewise, of the like spiritual wonders, which
then, and after he meant to work in souls, by his heavenly graces.

Honors likewise done, and thanks yielded unto him, for benefits received,
delighted her humble soul; not only because they were deservedly given unto
him, but for that wisely likewise she knew how liberally he meant afterward to
requite the^. As co^trarily, his disgraces much grieved her, not only as
injuries done unto him, who no ways deserved them; but as they were great
sins in such as did commit them, and means to increase their eternal
damnation.

Of the woman blessing the womb and paps of the B. Virgin. [Chap. 27.
IT cannot be doubted, but that such as believed Christ to be the son of God,
and their heavenly Redeemer, highly also respected his gracious mother, lovely
in her person, and exemplarly holy in her conversation amongst them; inso much
as a woman, ravished with the heavenly sweetness of our Saviors words, and
divinely raised in her thoughts to apprehend the blessedness of his Mother,
uttered first that mysterious outcry, Blessed is the womb that bore thee and
the paps which thou did suck; and since enlarged by the Church in that sweet
versicle sung by her: Blessed are the bowels of Mary the Virgin, which carried
the son of the eternal Father; and Blessed be the pappes which nursed Christ
our Lord: fulfilling therein her own humble prophesy, that all generations
should bless her.

Neither did our B. Savior in his reply to the woman, Yea but blessed are they
that hear the word of God and keep it, co^tradict the blessing of his mother;
but (says venerable Bede) was covertly pleased, to intimate a more high and
imitable commendation of his Mother, for that she had not only corporally, but
spiritually also conceived him; whereby she deserved not the woman's blessing
alone, but to have his own praises added unto it.

For as learned Interpreters note upon this misterious passage of the Gospel,
this sacred Virgin may after two manners be conceived to have been the Mother of
God; first barely, to wit, according to his corporal Conception and Nativity,
and so it was possible, for her to have been his mother, without any graces at
all thereby obtained: and secondly as she was singularly chosen, and prepared
with wonderful graces, to that high office, of giving a new nature, life, and
being to her omnipotent Creator, for the glory of himself, and redemption of
mortal Creatures; whereby she was raised to the highest dignity, and greatest
union with himself, which a pure Creature could be assume^d unto: Gods usual
manner having ever been as he raised his servants to high dignities, to bestow
on them suitable graces. And it were a most detestable wickedness to conceive,
that he dealt otherwise with his own most sacred, and beloved Mother, who as
in Nature was nearest, so in Love was no doubt, dearest unto him.

It is true, indeed, that as his creature, she was tied in duty to do all
motherly offices and services unto him, without any obligation on his part, in
justice to requite them: But supposing the gracious, and free tie of his own
liberal promises, not to let so much as a cup of cold water, given for his
sake, pass unrewarded, together with the dutiful love and piety of children
toward Parents, commanded by himself and accordingly, no doubt, observed,
may we not reasonably conceive, and piously assure our selves, that he was
neither in the piety of a loving child nor bounty of a gracious Lord, wanting
unto her, who not only gave him the integrity of human nature, but spent her
whole life afterward, in motherly offices, and services toward him, for which
other children can make to their parents no equal requital.

And supposing the son of God was able to raise his most deserving Mother to
what measure of sanctity, and heavenly nobility he would, for the good of her,
and glory of himself, to whom she so nearly appertayned; why should any
Christian, against the known goodness of such a Lord, and Son, doubt him
actually to have done so?

Of our B. Ladies expecting her Son, at the door of a house in Capharnaum.
Math. 12. [Chap. 28.
Our Savior teaching and doing miracles within a house at Capharnaum, being
told that his Mother, and Brethren (for so his Cosins are called in Scripture)
stayed at the door to speak with him; either not willing to be interrupted in
his holy discourses, or glad rather of the occasion, to teach his Auditory a
profitable lesson, to wit, how they also might spiritually become his Mother
and Brethren, he extended his hands toward his Apostles, asking, who is my
mother, and who are my Brethren? And then answering himself said, with an
earnest asseueration to the future comfort, and instruction of his servants, He
that hears my words and keeps them, he is my brother, my sister, and my
mother.

Insinuating so, in the very order of his speech, by naming a Mother last, the
especial neerenes of a mother to a child, and so consequently her dearenes to
him, who not only in her body corporally, but spiritually also in her soul,
had conceived, nursed, and brought him up, to a wonderful ripenes of heavenly
perfection; and was like to become in others a fruitful Parent, and Nurse
afterward of him, being by her examplar life, as a sweet odor to draw others
into the bedchamber of her son (says S. Ambrose) to be espoused, and
fecundated also divinely by him.

Her motherly power says an other devout Author, has been the protection and
helping of innumerables souls to grace and glory; her greatness their gain,
her treasures their enrichings, by being able, and ever ready, to obtain
favors and blessings for her sounes children, by himself therefore upon his
Cross recommended unto her.

So that they belong not to him or her (as children or servants) who have
vilified her in their thoughts, and debased her in speeches, so far as to
teach, that her divine Son, did in those former words blame her for
interrupting him unseasonably in his doctrine, and plainly to renounce her for
his mother: whereas the Evangelist only affirms her, to have stayed at the
door expecting him. And it proceeded out of the respect rather of others
toward her, that he was could of her being there, then that of her self, she
sought to speak importunely unto him.

And should she for just causes or not, have done so, had it not been against
the very duty of a child toward a Parent (as she was known to be unto him,)
common discretion also, and morality it self, for so small a fault
scandalously and publicly to renounce her?

O monsters of men and viperous brood of him whose head she crushed happily for
us, that dared (as some modern heretics have done) to utter such horrid, and
groundesse blasphemies against her! Whom according to the humble prophecy of
her self, all generations, of holy souls, were to call, and account eternally
Blessed, as well for those great things, which Almighty God, did unto herself,
as for those many and unspeakable blessings likewise which by her he bestowed
upon us.

Of our Blessed Ladies suffering with her son. [Chap. 29.
AS Eve (says S. Austine) was made to help Adam, in man's natural
propagation; so was the B. Virgin ordained, to help the son of God in our
supernatural regeneration. Those two were our old, and these two our new
Parents: they, threw us miserably down, from the happy estate of innocence to
sin; and these, to more then lost graces happily raised us. Humane nature was
in them by sin vilified and debased, in both sexes; but contrarily by these,
wonderfully dignified and exalted.

The son of God by his passion soly redeemed us, as Adam by his fault only
condemned us: yet withal, as Eve our old Mother by eating the forbidden fruit,
and causing her husband to do the same, occasioned our ruin; so Mary our new
Mother, by beholding the fruit of her womb fastened to the tree of the Cross,
happily co^curred to our raising; and by sustayning deadly sorrow, with her
divine Son in his death, recompensed, in a sort, the others fault, and
satisfied for Eues sinful sensualities, by her innocent sufferings.

For albeit she shed nor her blood, nor had the fair Temple of her body, by
wounds (as her Son was) lamentably defaced; yet suffered she a higher kind
of Martyrdom, when love so united her unto him, as his agonyes became hers, by
a tender compassion, his griefs her dolours, his torments her tortures, his
corporal woundings paynefull rendings of her very soul, and sharp thrusts of
that piercing sword of sorrow, which good old Simeon had foretold her. So that
she could not have lived to the end of them, had she not been supernaturally
assisted, to offer jointly with him to his Eternal Father, that redemptory
Sacrifice.

Iacobus Acosta in his book de Christo reuelato, affirms the Royal Psalmist
to have sung the 19. Psalm in the person of this B. Virgin, standing under the
Cross of her son: Let our Lord hear thee in this day of thy tribulation;
the name of Jacobs God protect thee. Let him send help unto thee, from his
sanctuary; and from Syon defend thee. Let him he mindful of thy whole
sacrifice; and thy holocaust become a fat one. Let him give unto thee according
to thine own heart; and confirm all thy counsel. We will rejoice in thy
salvation etc. So that when in the Antiphone of Aduent (says this devout
Author) the Church ordayneth me in her office to say before that Psalm, Maria
dixit, I seem to be thereby, warned, as in the person of this sacred Mother,
and with a sad memory of her sufferings, under her sons Cross, devoutly to
pronounce it.

Of our B. Ladies last leave taken of her Son in Bethania the evening before
his Passion. [Chap. 30.
WE find not any where expressed in the Gospel, that the Mother of God, was
with her son the day before his death in Bethania, as we read of S. Mary
Magdalens being there, and his Apostles with him: yet is there an insinuation,
that other guests likewise were there present, amongst whom we cannot
reasonably conceive his B. Mother, dearest above all unto him, to have been
excluded; or that he omitted his affectionate and last respect unto her,
appointed to share the next day in deadly agonies with him.

But piously rather and prudently we may conceive him to have armed her for his
farewell, against griefs then approaching, by manifesting, first his Fathers
holy will unto her, and the mysterious causes of her sufferinges; secondly by
telling her the happy fruits which were in heaven, and in earth to redound
afterward of them; and thirdly how she was with himself to be glorified
Eternally for them: Counselling, and enabling her by heavenly graces withal,
to carry her self, (as she did) manfully in them, when without outcries,
soundings, or other passionate, and unseemly expressions of her griefs, she
stood by his Cross (as the Evangelist tells us) letting down silently into
her soul, the whole bitterness of his Chalice, and opening as it were her
breast, to receive the saddest, and deadliest strokes which affliction could
lay upon it.

His last words to her, were (as we may conceive) uttered with tears, and
sad expressions of love and compassion toward her for those innocent
sufferinges which were to be by his torments soon afterward occasioned. And
she for her last farewell to him, may be thought to have uttered some such
words as these, with motherly and affectionate imbracinges: Go my gracious
son, and heavenly Redeemer to pay on thy paynefull Cross, the high price of
our Eternal Redemption, wisely no doubt, and justly by thy divine Father
exacted. Let this goodly Temple of thy sacred body, framed of mine, and
miraculously raised, with blouddy wounds in sight also of me thy loving
Mother, and obedient Creature, be (as thy cruel Adversaries shall please)
lamentably, and painefully defaced; for now I can do no more motherly offices
and services for thee: I offer here my self willingly, to suffer all
extremities with thee.

Of our B. Ladies several griefs in her Sons passion. [Chap. 31.
AS our B. Lady is expressly said to have stood near to her sons Cross in
the time of his passion: so is it most probable, that she sadly beheld him in
all his other public torments, and disgraces, fearing not as the other Jews
did to be defiled, by entering the Pretorian, and Courts within it, sanctified
by her sonns presence, and sacred streams painefully in them effused.

So that the accusations urged by the Jews to Pilate, and joined with outcryes
against him, were as doleful and deadly summons of her sorrow. Disgraceful
cueltyes done by Herod afterward and his soldiars against him were as
vnsheathings of that sharp sword which afterward pierced her heart. The loud
blows and bloody stripes lame^tably tearing all parts of his body, were as
wide rendings of her soul, and deadly piercinges of sorrow.

His thorny Crown did sharpen the swords point, and make it enter more
deeply; and finally Pilats sentence, was as the stroke of a deadly thunderbolt
unto her.

Her journey after her Son to Mount Caluary, was to them both, mutually
grieved for each other, a doleful processio^, where the gaul given him, did
increase the bitterness of her sorrows; and when she saw his clothes plucked
off, and rags of flesh cleaving unto them, the smart of his wounds became in
her soul freshly renewed; and when she saw him mercilesly thrown down on the
hard bed of his Cross, she also was cast down into the lowest depth of grief
with him; and had even her heart pierced with those very nails, which entered
into him.

Those bloody streams which she saw running from him to the ground, and there
trodden under the Hangmens feet, did make the wounds of her soul bleed
freshly; so, as she became cooled at that sad spectacle, and had instantly died
(as persons do, wounded in the heart) had she not been, to see her sons
sacrifice fully ended, supernaturally preserved.

The Jews were mysteriously forbidden by their law, to boil the Kid in his
Dams milk: yet here they did more, when they caused the child to be crucified
in the sight, and heart of his Mother, by love, and compassion so nearly, and
dearly (as she was) united unto him.

Of Christ's speech to his mother and disciple, upon the Cross. [Chap. 32.
THis God of love and mercy (as we may well call him) lying bent like a bow on
his Cross, was no sooner lifted from the ground, but he began to dart upwards,
toward the bosom of his Father, fiery and flaming arrows of love to him, and
men together: first charitably excusing and praying for his enemies, who at
the same instant blasphemed, and derided him, Father forgive them for they know
not what they do. Secondly, of tender and dear compassion toward his B.
Mother, dying together with him, woman (said he) behold thy son, meaning S.
John standing by her; and then to him, Behold thy Mother.

He called her, woman, least by naming her Mother, he should have moved the
Jews to outrages against her, and mysteriously insinuating her withal, to be
that woman which was ordained to crush the Serpents head long before, and
utterly to vanquish him. And he so commended her for a Mother to S. John, as we
also had a share (albeit after him) in this mysterious adoption; so that we
have reason to glory, and thank him for a double adoption: whereby he
vouchsafed to make us, as by his Father, so by his Mother likewise, brethren
unto him; that, to the dewty which all owe her, for being Mother unto himself,
we might add filial piety also, and serviceable love, to her who was even as a
Mother from his Cross recomme^ded, to obtain graces of her son, and
Motherly blessings, temporal and eternal for us.

Who indeed, if we consider the sad time, and circumstances of our adoption,
whilst he with torments, and she with griefs were together languishing, we
may be rightly called, as Benjamin was by his dying Mother, Benoni, Sons of
sorrow; yet children of her love withal, if we consider, well that ardent
Charity, with which her divine son bequeathed us for children unto her; and
that humble Love, with which she accepted us from him, actually dying then with
herself, graciously to redeem us.

Of our B. Ladies particular sorrow in the death, and burial of her Son.
[Chap. 33.
Our B. Savior having hung silently on his Cross for almost three hours
together, to taste more quietly, and feelingly the extremity of his torments
(much increased through the coldness of the air, darkened about him) awakened
himself, and his blessed Mother buried as it were in a trance of deadly
sorrows, together with him, by a loud complaint made to his eternal Father of
being forsaken, and in the sensitive part of his humane nature, left comfortles
by him, O my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and roused himself up
withal to dye as it became him, breathing out his euer-blessed soul into the
hands of his Father. And when his body was dead and cold, more new anguishes
were added to her former griefs, by beholding even his dead corpse not spared,
but with the wide piercing of a spear wounded then again, and more then
before lamentably defaced.

When he was taken down from his Cross, so as she might more nearly he hold
his wounds, kiss, and bath them with her tears, sorrow seemed to be brought
nearer to her heart, and his mangled cold body to have been buried therein before
it was embalmed, and laid in the sepulcher; leaving it when others did, but
carrying home with her a lively, and sad memory of all his sufferings, in
silent and deep thoughts mournfully reuoluing them; wanting not, whither she
went companions of affliction, and sorrows to attend her.

So as Christ's mother and friends returning from mount Caluary together, made
a most doleful procession to S. Marks house seated under mount Syon, where the
B. Virgin wasted with sorrow, received such comforts, as that afficted family
of friends could affoard her. And S. John not unmindful that he had been adopted
her son by his loving master, offered no doubt, with all love and duty,
filial services unto her.

Of our Saviors first apparition to his B. Mother. [Chap. 34.
ALmighty God is said to wipe away tears from the eyes of his servants; which
he does no otherwise, then by manifesting unto them objects of joy, contrary to
the causes of their sorrows; which also he performed toward his B. Mother,
early in the morning of his glorious Resurrection, when according to the
multitude, and greatness of her griefs, he rejoiced her heart, with divine, and
unspeakable comfort.

She is noted by holy Authors, not to have gone with the other devout women, to
embalme her sons Body, as faithfully no doubt persuaded, that he would rise
again the third day, as formerly he had assured her, and confident withal so
soon as he was risen, to be visited by him.

His apparition to her, is not by any Evangelist recounted, because a Mothers
testimony of so great a mystery, might have by n suspected, and the
circumstances of his apparition unto her, were ouerhigh withal to be
historically related, especially if learned Suarez conjecture thereof be true;
that as she had sadly beheld, and accompanied him in his greatest humiliations,
and afflictions; so likewise she joyfully saw him in his highest glory and
contentments, with a double train of Angels, and Saints triumphant,
attending him; amongst whom we may conceive her gladly to have seen, bodily
also perchance raised, her beloved pure spouse S. Joseph, her holy Parents
likewise, and others whom she had known before happily disceased: yielding
likewise gratefully unto her amongst the rest, as to the gracious Mother of
their Redeemer, due honors and praises.

His five greater Wounds in his body still retained, did shine then as rich
Rubyes, by their color to adorn the lovely candor and transparency thereof,
and their depth therein did show them to have been flowing fountaynes of graces,
for us once opened on the Cross, and never again closed. The tearings
likewise of the thorns and whips she saw beautifully in him, and gloriously
repaired.

By his loving imbracings he caused heavenly languishings in her soul, and by
kisses of his sacred mouth, he breathed new feruours, and graces into her: and
as he appeared first after his Resurrection unto her, so was he during his stay
on earth, most frequently with her.

Neither had she at any time (as is said of others when he appeared unto them)
the eyes of either her body or soul restrained from knowing, and delightfully
beholding him.

Finally, as the world from her womb, by his nativity, received him: so did he
in the day of his Ascension from her arms and imbracements ascend toward
heaven.

Of our B. Ladies receiving the holy Ghost. [Chap. 35.
AMongst the Apostles, and disciples remaining in Jerusalem, expecting, and
preparing themselves to receive that Divine Paraclete and Spirit of truth,
which our B. Savior had promised to send to them after his Ascension, S. Luke
affirms the B. Virgin to have been one, saying after he had named the Apostles;
All these were persouering with one mind in prayer, with the women, and Mary
the Mother of JESUS; numbering her last as the humblest amongst them and naming
her alone with her soueraygne Title, of the Mother of Jesus, to grace that holy
assembly the more by the presence of so sacred a person amongst them.

That divine Spirit of love and goodness, came to the rest, first with eminent
gifts and graces to possess them; but he had come to her, twice before, to
wit, in the Co^ception of her self, and her Son, and was both times abo^da^tly
replenished by him. This heavenly builder came to raise in them as from the
ground a heavenly habitation for himself, and the other divine persons; but he
came to adorn her soul as a stately palace already raised, and accomplished
by him.

This divine Painter and beautifier of souls, began only to draw in them a
lively and lovely image of their gracious Redeemer; whereas he perfected his
former draughts in her, and made her an admirable, and matchles maister-peece
of heavenly perfection.

That working fire which Christ longed to kindle, and make to flame in the
world, according to those his words, J came to send fire into the world etc.
descended on the Apostles and disciples, to consume those drossie imperfections
for which their mild Lord, had frequently blamed them; but on her, ever pure
and clean, the gracious effects of his divine presence were clear
illustratio^s, inflamed affections, and the highest gifts, which for any end
he cold bestow upon a Creature.

They finally as lesser vessels, yet great in respect of us, were suddenly and
happily filled from the flowing sea of all goodness; but she who had already
contained within her, the ever full, and flowing fountain of all graces, was
as by a deeper tide, and larger Channel which it bad to run in, made a full
sea, and a blissful depth of heavenly waters, flowing fully into her.

If any one should curiously ask me, what kind of graces were heaped so on
her? I can only tell him, they were such as in the happy Course of her life
afterward, might be useful, and as the Mother of God, serve singularly to
enrich and exalt her.

Of the abode and manner of our B. Ladies life, after her receiving the holy
Ghost. [Chap. 36.
S. John speaking of this sacred treasure recommended by his dying Master unto
him, tells us, that he took her into his own: not that he had any worldly
fortunes to bring her unto, but that he had a loving care to perform all
filial duties unto her; so that, till the Apostles dispersio^ abroad she lived
for the most at Jerusalem with him, sustained by common alms, with other holy
widows, and greatly delighted in her poverty, as formerly she had been: where
it ioyed her no less to see the zealous and fruitful labors of the Apostles,
in converting souls to the knowledge of her divine Son, then it comforted,
and edified them all, to behold her humble and examplar conversation amongst
them, blessing her pure womb which had miraculously conceived their heavenly
Redeemer, her Paps which had nursed him, her Hands which had clothed him, and
the other parts of her lovely body, which had been serviceable unto him. And
the more they were illuminated to conceive the divine majesty of their Lord,
the more highly they apprehended her excellency, and with a reuerentiall love,
accordingly respected her.

Afterward when S. John with the other Apostles left Jerusalem, he took this
B. Virgin to Ephesus with him, (as the Fathers of the first General Counsel
holden there, traditionally affirmed) where she was no doubt holily delighted,
to behold Jews and Gentills together with her sonns graces happily, and
equally enriched; helped, no doubt, in their first conuersions, and much
recreated to behold this model of perfection, and second light, ordained to
shine in heaven, conversant most humbly, and examplarly amongst them.

Neither were the holy places of Palestine so visited (as she is said to have
been) by other devout Christians; repayring thither to behold the mother of
their Lord ready with an humble gladness to welcome them, and to confirm them
in their faith, by relating many mysterious speeches, and passages of her
sons life, which none, as an eye and ear witness, but her self, could
deliver unto them. And especially she is said, sweetly and frequently to have
repeated unto them these words of her divine son, Be you perfect, as your
heavenly Father is perfect. A high lesson indeed, and by her fitly taught, who
next unto the heavenly Author thereof practiced the same, and lived so long
after him for the comfort, and instruction of such holy souls as were by his
Apostle ( S. John especially) converted unto him.

Of our B. Ladies manner of prayer. [Chap. 37.
PRayer (says S. Augustine) is as the breathing of holy souls, whereby they
draw the pure air of heavenly graces into them. Light and Love are the chief
fruits thereof, and best means to perfect the same in us: for Light increases
Love, and Love when it is ardent augmenteth that heavenly Clarity, whereby it is
produced; and by mutually intending each other, both of them grow in holy souls
to such perfection, as the one is seldom darkened, or the other cooled at any
time so but that like Ouens frequently and thoroughly warmed with new fyres,
they ever retain great warmth, and holy fervor in them.

Their fancies in sleep often imitate their Understanding, and borrow as it
were from the rich storehouses of their memories, holy Objects, and
Discourses, which as heavenly alarums do easily waken their wills, and make
them interrupt often the repose of their senses, by breaking forth into holy
aspiratio^s; as dry wood is with slender sparkles soon kindled, and inflamed.

This great gift of Prayer arrived in the mother of God, with her other
graces, to a wonderful perfection: so as her Soul therein, was with a
heavenly splendour, next to Beatificall Clarity it self, continually raised;
and her Love natural and supernatural, to her God and Son, like two fiery
wings, mounted her thoughts and affections more and more toward him, by whom
they were inflamed.

An immaculate innocence of life added a most gracious sweetness to this rising
rod of all heavenly perfums and spices sweetly composed. Humility raised it, a
pure Intention made way for it, and a constant perseverance therein did surely
obtain what by her prayer she intended.

The high Attributes of God, and the sacred mysteries of her sons life and
death, still conserved in her memory, and conferred in her heart, as the
Evangelist twice tells us, were the usual subjects thereof; and her
discourses therein, were free from all manner of distractions, and by heavenly
illuminations cleared so, as like Eagles mounted to their high pitch above the
clouds, she soared with little labor, and became in them, ever sweetly, and
divinely inflamed.

Of the wonderful merit of our B. Ladies actions. [Chap. 38.
LEarned Suarez writing of this fubiect, from certain grounds of faith and
Philosophy, gathered so strong a conclusion concerning the B. Virgins
wonderful manner of meriting, and redoubling, by each act, her former graces,
as he dared not to publish his doctrine, until the learned Divines of Spain,
had with their opinions approved it. The sum of his discourse is this.

As natural habits are produced by natural acts, when they are intense and
perfect; so supernatural habits are by the divine infuser of them, conferred
on holy souls, according to the perfection of those supernatural acts, whereby
holy souls merit an increase of them. Wherefore since the B. Virgin, did in
each holy act done by her, cooperate with former graces given her, fully, and
according to their whole intension, as having no sinful inclination to hinder
her: so did she still merit, according to the full intension and perfection of
her acts, to have new graces infused into her, and consequently to have former
graces redoubled, by each one of them; so that she heaped in her soul hourly,
treasures of merits, and by them in the end of her life arrived to an immensity
of graces.

Sinful Ignorance did never darken her illuminated soul, Error seduce, or
Malice corrupt her. Sense never rebelled against Reason; and Concupiscence the
root of sin, was according to S. Thomas ever kept from growing, and totally
at length extinguished in her. Whereby this heavenly Sulamite, became ordered in
all virtues so, as a high Wisdom guided them in their several operations, and
Charity commanded them; whereby she came, as weighty things remain in their
Center, to be in them immoueably fixed.

Pride did at no time raise her, or Pusillanimity deiect her. Passions did not
perturbe her, or sensual Appetites disorder her. Sanctity did clear, like a
rich pearl, her gracious grouth; and an Angelical Purity of mind and body,
did for her divine spouse consecrate and spotlesly conserve her. Humility to
conclude, made her ponderous in all actions, Obedience rounded her, and other
graces smoothed her, in such sort, as finally she became in the^, a rare, and
matchless union of Created Perfection, doing all her actions in the substance,
and circumstances of them, so, as it is a Catholic point of faith to believe,
she never offended, by omission, or commission venially in them.

Of our B. Ladies Sacramental graces here gained. [Chap. 39.
GReat Authors ( S. Clement and others) have affirmed our B. Savior himself
to have baptized his Mother, as well to beautify her soul by the fairest
character of that Sacrament, as to take an occasion thereby, besides the
wonderful merit of her own actions, to heap in his own bounty, on her
soul, vnconceauable graces.

The descension of the Holy Ghost upon her in the day of Pentecost, was as an
eminent unction, and Confirmation of her graces therein received, and the most
holy sacrifice, and sacrament of her sons body and blood daily with other
Christians received, was as an euer-full, and flowing fountain of heavenly
blessings running into her.

Her oblation thereof in the Apostles hands, and preparation to receive it, was
suitable (no doubt^) to the immenfity of actual and habitual graces in her
soul: their Clarity did illuminate her, their Fervor inflame her, Humility
prostrated her, Piety disposed her, and faith made her so firmly to believe
her sons glorious, albeit invisible, presence therein, as if she had
apparently beheld him; humbly thanking him in behalf of her self, and us
also, for that second annihilating, as it were of himself, to communicate the
fruits of his passion to faithful souls worthily receiving him; frequently
enjoying glimses almost of beatificall Clarity it self, as often as she
sacramentally received him; he recompencing so, in a sort, the wonted, and
desired Comforts of his visible prefence with her.

And if S. Mary Magdalen in her holy retyrement near Marsills in France, had
bodily rapts, Angelical visits, heavenly melody, and greater favors, by her
loving and beloved Lord, daily affoarded her; can we reasonably doubt, but that
in higher and more delightful manners he expressed his love to her, graciously
above all Creatures indeared unto him?

Or do so many authentical and undoubted histories mention his glorious
apparitions to other Saints, men and woomen, for yielding them, yet alive,
particular comforts, and instructions; and may we not justly conceive him to
have been more open-handed, and liberal, in showing his love to her, who best
deserved such favors, and had as a gracious Mother, from a loving Son, most
right to receive them?

Of our B. Ladies death. [Chap 40.
SAint Denis not converted by S. Paul at Athens before the 16. year after our
Saviors Passion, (as Baronius, with Suarez, and other great Authors have
collected) and writing as he does of his having been at Jerusalem with S.
Peter, S. John and others as well Apostles as chief disciples of our Savior,
at the death and funeral of this sacred Virgin, conuinceth her to have lived
well nigh 20. years after her Sons passion, to gain no doubt a long and
happy harvest of heavenly merits for her self, to comfort likewise the
Apostles themselves in their holy labors, and to edify others by them
converted by her graceful person, exemplar life, and conversation amongst them.

Her happy end may be thought to have been prophetically revealed to the
Apostles, and disciples, that besides their mutual comfort of seeing each
other, they might also enjoy so contentfull a blessing, as to be hold the
joyful passage of this sacred Mother to her divine Son, take their last
leave of her, here in this world, and celebrate her funerals with due love
and veneration.

The sickness whereof she dyed may be thought to have been a rauishing excess and
sweet languishment of heavenly love, and longinging to hasten to her son,
calling her unto him, Come my beloved from Libanus, thou shall be crowned:
which freely yielded unto by her, might cause such a concurrence of vital
spirits, to raise the thoughts and affections of her soul, as they failed, to
conserve a needful disposition for life, in her bodily members and senses.

So as lying sweetly reposed on her bed, with all the Apostles, and many chief
Disciples of her Son kneeling about her, having newly before, for a happy
viaticum to heaven most deuoutely received him, whom first in her womb, she
had divinely conceived, with an inexpressible ardour of love, giving her
blessing, and farewell to all present, she breathed out her gracious soul into
her Sons hands, there present to receive it, waited on by the most glorious
Princes of his Court, gladly attending him their Lord, and her his beloved
Mother, in their triumpha^t procession.

Of our B. Ladies Assumption. [Chap. 41.
PIous ears, and hearts worthily abhor to hear spoken, that corruption
(says S. John Damascene) invaded, and worms devoured that sacred flesh, a
part whereof the Author himself of immortality had assumed: or that this
stately branch of Iesses root, ever rotted in the ground, whose flower was in
Heaven so gloriously ripened: or finally that this lovely Tabernacle of the
Highest became in the bewtifull frame thereof, after death, utterly dissolved.

No surely, as the same had been whilst it was alive, many ways graced by her
divine son: so was it, being dead from loathsomeness, and corruption totally
preserved, as for many reasons it was fitting. First, in that it had not been
with sin originally infected, as other bodies are, when souls void of grace
are first united unto them. Secondly for that it was ever a most pure
habitation of her gracious soul, never by it actually defiled, or viciously
inclined. Thirdly, because it had been the subject of heavenly wonders for her
Creatours glory, and man's eternal salvation, wrought happily in it; and each
part thereof made sacred, by immediate touches, and services done to the
Eternal Word Incarnate within it, and nursed by it.

Her womb for example was (as the Spouse, for the wonderful purity, and
fertility thereof, calls it in the Canticles) a Heap of heavenly Grain, to
nourish souls eternally, with lillyes environed: a pure Nest, wherein the
celestial Phaenix, and Bird of Divine Love was hatched: the Tyring-house
wherein the son of God was for high ends humanely disguised; finally a
Bedchamber, richly prepared for the celestial Bride, to become therein, to our
nature first, and to all holy souls afterward, eternally espoused.

Her sacred breasts, were as two Pearly-bottels, tipped with rich rubies, and
filled once from heaven, sweetly to nurse him, by whom (as the Church sings
in her Office) birds are fed, and all Creatures sustained.

Her lap was as an easy Couch wherein the son of God lay near to her
loving heart contentfully reposed.

Her arms and hands had been for many years together, holy instruments fitly
made and moved, to embrace, and serve him.

Her lips were as two Ruby gates, at which her soul and her divine sons had
often met, and parlied with mutual significations of love, and new breathings
from him of heavenly graces into her.

Her eyes had been as clear windows, for her soul, delightfully to behold,
for 33. years together, his corporal bewtyes and deeply to imprint in her
heart a lively, and lovely image of him.

To conclude, all other parts of her virginal pure body, for serviceable acts
done to the omnipotent Author thereof, were by him after her death, highly
respected (no doubt) gloriously perfected, and wonderfully exalted.

Of the glory of our B. Lady assu^pted. [Chap 42.
HEr sepulcher is said to have been placed in the garden of Gethsemani, wherein
by the Apostles and other chief disciples of her Son, her body was solemnly
and devoutly intombed. And as flowers do smell sweetly in their first buddings;
so this fair flower, about to open it self in its immortal beauty, yielded to
all present a heavenly fragrancy (as S. John Damascene from Apostolical
tradition recounteth) and sweetened that stony receptacle, and part of the
earth, whence it was soon after into her sons heavenly garden, to be
gloriously transplanted.

So that when the Apostolical intombers thereof had left it, Angelical
spirits, as a sacred treasury co^serued it, and atte^ded it until the third
day, when it was by their Lord, and her Son joyfully raised, and with such a
glorious change, as those celestial Princes wondered to see again in her, as
before they had seen in their Lord, a clodd of earth so curiously molded, and
graciously transformed, asking each other, not as ignorant who she was, but
admiring her greatness: Who is she that ascends from the desert, in delights,
leaning on her beloved? Delights indeed (says S. Bernard) abounding in her,
and flowing still in earth and in heaven graciously from her, which can be no
more expressed, then her glories described: suitable no doubt to the graces of
her soul, and such (says he) as well beseemed so divine a son to bestow
upon so deserving a mother.

His heavenly Father was likewise openha^ded at the same time in heaping
gracious favors on her, who had been Mother of his eternal son, and
ioint-parent with himself of him, and the holy Ghost was effused no doubt in
his bou^ty then to her, whom here on earth he had singularly espoused to
himself, and made mother of a divine child, first from him (says S. Leo) in
her soul, and afterward in her womb most graciously conceived.

And as they had raised her in the holy merits of her life far above all
Creatures: so was she at her entrance into heaven highly in throned, and
supremely exalted for them.

Of our B. Ladies Coronation. [Chap. 43.
THe Diadem with which this Queen of Heaven was crowned by her son, at her
glorious entrance into his Kingdom, was in the riches thereof, suitable (no
doubt) to her wonderful merits, and graced with twelve such Stars, as adorned
the head of that mysterious woman mentioned in the Apocalypse, importing twelve
peculiar Graces, conferred by the divine Persons on her.

The first of them was, her maternall dignity, and office of having the
eternal word incarnate within her, whereby she came to have a singular
neerenes, and dearenes unto him.

The 2. was, her immaculate conception, happily therein beginning a rich
harvest of heavenly merits, brought out of her mothers womb into the world
with her.

The 3. was, her preservation from venially offending afterward, whereby she
alone of all Adams natural children equalled Angels themselves, in the
unspotted innocence of her life, as in the graces of her soul, she
incomparably excelled them.

The 4. added an Excellency to the former, and arrived to the happiest effect
of original justice itself, which was to feel no Concupiscence, or rebellion
at all in her members and senses, but to have nature and grace ever in her,
harmoniously composed.

The 5. was, her virginal vow of Purity, whereby she consecrated herself to
her Heavenly spouse; and before the Gospel of her son, in this, and other
graces arrived to the highest top of Evangelical perfection.

To 6. was, the pure Conception, and manner of her sons Nativity, a
Privilege indeed (says S. Bernard) for Gods mother alone graciously reserved.

The 7. was, her having besides Faith, and continual Illustrations of heavenly
Graces, in a most affectuous clear manner, an experimental knowledge of many
chief mysteries of faith wrought by her Son; so as her self was with him an
actour also in them, as his miraculous Conception, Nativity etc. happily
serving to illminate and inflame her.

The 9. was, natural and supernatural love toward him, as to her God and
son sweetly conjoined, and like two fiery wings, ray sing her soul
incessantly toward him.

The 9. was, her life led for 30. years and more, inseparably with him,
affording her hourly occasions of doing motherly services immediately unto him.

The 10. was, her great sufferinges for him, and martyrdom finally with him,
caused by Love, making his wounds and torments her own by a most tender
Compassion.

The 11. was, her happy end, graced by the Apostles present thereat, and much
more highly honored by her Sons personal readiness to receive her blessed
Soul, reco^mended unto him.

The 12. was her bodily Assumption after death, whereby she prevented the
raising of other Saints bodies in the general resurrection, and came to be
with a complete fulness of blessed joys, eternally possessed.

Where I leave thee (O sacred Virgin, and gracious Mother of my heavenly
Redeemer) in the bright Noone of thy glorious Clarity never setting; in the
ardour of thy love ever flaming; and in the flowing of thy delights never
ebbing, but increasing still; so as helped by thy powerful intercession, I
hope, albeit a far of as men gaze on the stars, to behold thee on a
stately Throne, near thy sons right hand gloriously exalted: purposing in
the mean time during my mortal and miserable life, in all I may, next to thy
divine son, my Lord and Savior himself, to honor and serve thee.

FINIS.
FASCICVLVS MYRRHAE.

OR A brief Treatise of our Lord and Saviors Passion.

Written by the R. Fa. I. F. of the Society of JESUS.

Permissu Superiorum. 1633.

Chap. XVII. Of our Saviors third speech uttered on the Cross, to the good
Thief page 92. Chap. XVIII. Of our Saviors mysterious silence on the Cross
for three hours together. pa. 98. Chap. XIX. Of our Saviors Fourth speech on
the Cross. page 104. Chap. XX. Of our Saviors fifth word uttered the Cross,
expressing his thirst. page 109. Chap. XXI. Of our Saviors sixth Word on his
Cross, It is consummated. page 113. Chap. XXII. Of our Saviors last cry, and
death. page 118. Chap XXIII. Of the Consequences of our Saviors death, and
opening of his side. page 122. Chap. XXIV. Of our Saviors Burial. page 126.
FINIS.
THE TABLE OF CHAPTERS.
CHap. I. Of our Blessed Ladies high, and holy Pedigree. page 1. Chap. II. Of
our B. Ladies immaculate Conception. 4. Chap. III. Of our B. Ladies Nativity.
9. Chap. IV. Of our B. Ladies Presentation, and life in the Temple. 12. Chap.
V. Of our B. Ladies Espousalls to S. Joseph. 14. Chap. VI. Of our B. Ladies
salutation by the Angel. 18. Chap. VII. Of the Eternal Word in her Blessed
womb. 22. Chap. VIII. Of our B. Ladies visit of S. Elizabeth. 25. Chap. IX. Of
our B. Ladies Canticle, and stay with S. Elizabeth. 28. Chap. X. Of our
Saviors Incarnation manifested to S. Joseph. 32. Chap. XI. Of our B. Ladies
Expecting the birth of her Child. 36. Chap. XII. Of our B. Ladies journey to
Bethleem. 39. Chap. XIII. Of our Blessed Ladies Childbirth. 41. Chap. XIV. Of
our B. Ladies intertayning the shepherds. 44. Chap. XV. Of our B. Ladies
nursing, and serving her divine Son. 48. Chap. XVI. Of our B. Ladies sorrow in
her sons Circumcision. 50. Chap. XVII. Of our B. Ladies imposing the Name of
JESUS. 53. Chap. XVIII. Of the Sages finding the Child with the B. Mother. 56.
Chap. XIX. Of our B. Ladies Purification. 59. Chap. XX. Of our B. Ladies flight
with her Child into Egypt. 63. Chap. XXI. Of our B. Ladies return with her
Child thence. 66. Chap. XXII. Of our B. Ladies finding her Son in the Temple.
71. Chap. XXIII. Of our B. Ladies life after her Sons Baptism. 75. Chap.
XXIV. Of the B. Virgins sorrow for S. Joseph's death. 79. Chap. XXV. Of her
being in Cana with her son at a wedding. 83. Chap. XXVI. Of our B. Ladies
living at Capharnaum. 86. Chap. XXVII. Of the woman blessing the womb of the B
Virgin. 89. Chap. XXVIII. Of our B Ladies expecting her Son, at a door in
Capharnaum. Math. 12. 92. Chap. XXIX. Of our Blessed Ladies suffering with her
son. 96. Chap. XXX. Of our B. Ladies taking leave of her Son. 99. Chap.
XXXI. Of our B. Ladies several griefs in her Sons passion. 103. Chap.
XXXII. Of Christ's speech to his mother. 106. Chap. XXXIII. Of our B. Ladies
particular sorrow in the death, and burial of her Son. 109. Chap. XXXIV. Of
our Saviors first apparition to his Mother. 111. Chap. XXXV. Of our B. Ladies
receiving the holy Ghost. 115. Chap. XXXVI. Of the abode, and manner of our B.
Ladies life, after her receiving the holy Ghost. 119. Chap. XXXVII. Of our B.
Ladies manner of prayer. 122. Chap. XXXVIII. Of the wonderful merit of our B.
Ladies actions. 125. Cha. XXXIX. Of our B. Ladies Sacrame^tall graces here
gained. 128. Chapter XL. Of our B. Ladies death. 132. Chap. XLI. Of our B. Ladies
Assumption. 135. Chap. XLII. Of the glory of our B. Lady assumpted. 139. Chap.
XLIII. Of our B. Ladies Coronation. 142.
FINIS.

