THE WIDOWS PETITION, Delivered in a Sermon before the Judges at the Assizes
held at Northampton, July 25. 1633. by ANTONY FAWKNER, Parson of Saltry
All Saints, alias Moygne in Huntingtonshire.

Jeremiah. 22. 3. 4. 5. Thus says the Lord; Execute ye Judgment and
Righteousness, and deliver the oppressed from the hand of the oppressor, and
vex not the stranger, the fatherless, nor the widow, do no violence, nor shed
innocent blood in this place.

For if you do this thing, then shall the King (sitting upon the Throne of
David) enter in by the gates of this house, and ride upon charets and upon
horses, both he and his servants and his people;

But if ye will not hear these words, I swear by my self, says the Lord,
that this house shall be wast.

OXFORD Printed by John Lichfield, and are to be sold by Elias Peerse, at his
shop in St Mary's Churchyard. Anno Dom. 1635.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, MY MVCH HONORED PATRON, Sr LEWIS WATSON, KNIGHT
AND BARONET, His Majesty's High SHERIFF in the County of Northampton for the
time being, Grace, Mercy, and Peace etc.
Right Worshipful
TO three Benefactors are we of the English Priesthood principally engaged. To
God for his providence over us; to our most Gracious King for his protection of
us, and to our bounteous Patrons for their munificence unto us. God gives us
what is his own and from no other, the King what is his own but yet derived
from God, but the Patron calls to that portion which is neither his nor any
others, save only Gods. So that God is our Grand Patron, which gives us our
maintenance, our good Prince his vicegerent to defend it, and our Patrones (to
whom by their and the Laws permission belongs the right of advocation or
calling) are his stewards to dispense it. To every one of which by the Law of
gratitude belongs both the Dication of our selves, and the Dedication of our
Christian labors. In this my poor piece though I cannot find enough to
satisfy all, yet something out of it I may share to each, so (of what it is)
not defrauding any. To God then I dedicate that sufficiency it has; for from
his spirit and assistance it came; to my Sovereign the benefits of Peace,
Justice, and Obedience therefrom accruing, for to him in the first place they
belong, and to you the Book, for to you it appertains, as occasioned by your
Command. Truth only therein I can promise, eloquence I dare not: it agrees not
with our Site, where the daily object Aristoph. (...).
of our ears are the Comedians (...) and the frequentest Prototypes of our
imitations, the obstreperous cadencies of gnats and froggs. Plain it is, and
so, like my self; and indeed ceremonious I would not be, because I would be
what I should be, Real. For ceremonies are but supplements in the place of
realities, a tissue coat to cover a black skin: and therefore I have
always esteemed their immoderate use superstition, as well in the expression
of love and duty, as in religion. I think I need no Apology to the reader: For
though my endeavors be weak, yet are they honest. Wherefore if he be good,
he will pardon me, and if he be bad, I will neglect him. Accept them I
beseech you, Noble Sir, what they are. The best I can say of them, is to say,
they are the emblem of your servants duty; and with them you shall receive the
zeal of

Your observant Chaplain ANTONY FAWKNER.
Saltry All Saints, alias Moygne. July 30. 1633.
To day is a day appointed for the administration of Justice, and a fit time
therefore to prefer petitions. I have one (Right honorable) to present unto
your Lordships acceptance. It is the Widows in the Parable.
LVKE 18. 3. Do me Justice against mine Adversary.

1 And he spoke a Parable unto them that they ought always to pray and not to
wax faint,

2 Saying: There was in a City a Judge which feared not God, neither reverenced
man.

3 And there was a widow in that City, and she came unto him, saying, do me
Justice against mine adversary.

4 And he would not for a time; But afterward he said with himself, Though I
fear not God nor reverence man;

5 Yet because this widow troubles me, I will do her right, lest at last she
come and make me weary.

6 And the Lord said hear what the unjust Judge says.

7 And shall not God avenge his Elect, which cry day and night unto him,
yeathough he suffer long for them?

8 I tell you that he will avenge them quickly; But, when the son of man
comes, shall he find faith on Earth?

And there was a Widow in that City, which came to him, saying, (...), Do me
Justice against mine Adversary. THough God has made man in his image, yet has
he not framed him his statue. Some lines indeed of his figure he has given
him, but the pitch of his stature in the whole extent of infinity, he has
justly denied him. Like a skillful painter, who shows the curiosity of his
cunning in purtraying the Lanskip of himself: which like a dwarf stands a
loofe off, shadowed in a mist or cloud, bearing indeed some resemblance of
his feature, but no proportion at all, nor parallel to the size or bigness of
his body natural. So that, as the eye of man, which is the Sun of the lesser
world, though it represent the eye of heaven, the Sun of the firmament, yet is
so disproportioned in regard of excellency, that it is not only eclipsed, but
also dazelled by the greaters glory: our understanding likewise, the clearest
eye of the soul, and the best pourtraitures solis justitiae, of that Sun of
righteousness, Almighty God, in man, is but oculus noctuae, the dim sight of
a purblinde owl, which waters at the Majesty, at the brightness, at the sun
of his countenance: and sees him best after sunset when he declines the luster
of his face: (...), his back-parts, Moses saw no more. Exodus 33. 23. (...) in
the dark, in twilight; St Paul saw him no clearer 1. Cor. 13. 12. If then Gods
essence be of so inscrutable a secrecy, it is but fitting its revelation
should be hallowed with mystery. Wherefore Satan (who was always ambitious to
usurp and counterfeit the magnificence of his glory) ever hooded his Oracles
with the reverend veil of sacred obscurity. The Priests must interpret what
they alone could hear in their secret Adyts: and Sphinx in porticu, the Sphinx
painted in the porch, was the infallible Emblem of divine riddles, and holy
mysteries in the temple. And in all this Satan is but Gods Ape, arrogating unto
himself by a presumptuous imitation, what is only due to the Almighties
perfection. (...), Heb. 1. 1. God spoke of old in diverse manners etc. by
Dreams, P. Fagius in Exodus 28.
by Prophets, and by Vrim; but all obscure: Vrim requires an accurate
observation, Dreams their interpretation, and Prophets their exposition. They
were all (...), Parables, high Sentences: so the Prophet expounds the former by
the latter: I will open my mouth in a Parable, and declare high sentences of
old. Psalm. 78. 2. Yea and Christ too (who came after him though he was before
him) preached the doctrine of his Kingdom to the multitudes in Parables, and
without Parables spoke he nothing unto them. S. Mat. 13. 13. For as we cannot
see the Divinity but only (...), winking and with infirmity, apprehending
rather what he is not by the negation of his creatures, then comprehending what
he is by the position of his Nature: so also (for otherwise then our selves
know him we cannot reveal him) we can only tread vestigia, those footsteps
which he has imprinted in his creatures, and so, ex pede Herculem, conjecture
the brightness of the creator, by the glimps of his glory shining in the
creature. The divinity which the man heard in the third heaven, were (...),
words ineffable. 2. Cor. 12. 4. And the doctrine S. Paul taught on earth
contained (...) some things hard to be understood. 2. S. Peter 3. 16. So
transcendent is the subject, that its expression must needs be difficult. The
chamber of his Majesty is (...), Light inaccessible. 1. Tim. 6. 16. A light
that illumines the humble back-standers, and a light that dazels the saucy
intruders. The disciples could see. S. Math. 13. 16. The multitudes could not
see. verse. 13. Ioh. Maldonatus in S. Math. 18. 23.
and (...) (says the text) therefore spoke he to them in Parables. In all
which Parables Maldonate observes two things remarkable: Parts ad
necessitatem, and Emblemata ad ornatum: the necessary parts of which they are
composed, and the emblematicall Accident with which they are garnished. The
necessary parts (to instance in the Parable we have in hand) are the Judge,
and the Widow; without which could not consist in the Parable, the Analogy
between the^, and God, and his Elect. The ornament are the Accidental
concomitants; as the City, the form of the Judges selfe-communication, and the
set composure of the Widows petition. Which had they been omitted, yet had
not the Parable in its substance been at all unjointed. The Parts as
respecting the Allegorical scope we pass by, as not proportioned for this
occasion. But stay with me a while (I beseech you) upon part of the ornament,
viz. The set form of the Widows petition. For, by reason that Quod
significativum Dom. a Soto paru. Log. in Significate.
est alterius cuiuspiam in sensu tralatitio, primo significativum est sui
ipsius in sensu primaeuo; whatsoever signifies another thing, first signifies
it self. Nero first expresses the Emperors person in his own name, though
secondarily any barbarous, or inhumane tyrant. Though this petition in sensu
Allegorico, in the Parabolicall scope and figurative sense includes the prayers
of the Elect to God: yet in sensu Primauo, in its first and literal sense
(salua ad Scriptur as sacr as Analogia) without violence at all to holy
Scripture, it expresses what it self is: the supplicacion of a distressed
Widow for relief unto the Magistrate, (...): Do me Justice against mine
adversary. Evil I know it would agree both with this place and my calling
(Right Honorable) if I should perform, what some (I question not) promore
suo, according to their ill wont, may expect, S. Augustine. sermon. 36. de verbis
Domini in S. Lucam 2. lib. 2. qq*Evangelic.c. 45.
in converting the reverend modesty of a Sermon, into the snarling petulancy of
a Satyr. The unjust Judge in the Parable, administers noe matter to cavil
against your equity, nor covertly to traduce your undoubted innocence: S.
Augustine absolues me from the suspicion, and frustrates their expectation, in
his judicious warrant of the Parables interpretation. For the scope of this
Parable includes an argument, a Minori ad Maius, or a Dissimili, from the
disproportion S. Luke 18.
of an unjust Magistrate to the just God. The gradation is this. If a man sold
to injustice and obdurate, hardened in cruelty, yet at length by incessant
cries, and continual suit be mollified and inclined to lenity, and a just
commiseration of the Orphans misery, and avenge upon the oppressor, the wrong
of the poor orator; if he, if such, if so bad a man do so, (...), will not
God? The words are equivalent with, (...), yea much more will God avenge the
cry of his Elect. verse. 8. Let then the sense be (as we take it) literal If an
unjust Judge happily usurping, happily abusing his lawful power, yet overcome at
length with importunity of petitions and requests, do Justice to the Widow,
and deliver her from her oppressors; if he, if such an one do it, (...) will
not God? will not you who are Gods? yea (...), much more, will you do so; You
who are the worthy substitutes of a most Religious, and indeed a matchless
Prince, who himself is the vicegere^t of the most righteous God. Dixit
Dominus, Dij estis, God has said that you are Gods, the protectors of his
poor, and the Judges of his people, to whom then but to you, should the Widow
cry? Do me justice against mine adversary.

Concerning the words (beloved) poyze them but judiciously, and you shall
apprehend a whole court of Assise in the Church, before you come to the Bench.
First then let the order of words and construction, give place unto the order
of Legal process in trials: and then plainly see Actorem the plaintiff in
the person of the Widow; and under it comprehend the necessary supporters,
Testes or witnesses, (...) Guli. Bodaeus com. graec. col. 195. lin: 29.
ME, do ME justice: In the second place view, Reum, the defendant; Qui
litiganti se opponit, which opposes the Plaintiff (so Budaeus interprets
(...), or Adversary) and under that title again implie, (...), the Advocates,
counsel, pleaders or defenders of the cause. And when all these have spoken
what can be expected, save a Verdict from the Jury, and sentence from the more
eminent Judge, (...), doing Justice according to the petition: (...) do
Justice: Lo six requisite persons to this grand-Court in three words are
eminent, (...), Do justice; there is the Judge, and the Jury: (...), Me,
there is the Plaintiff and the witness: (...), or Adversary: There Is the
Defendant, and his causes patrons his counsel. Of these God assisting, and
first of the Plaintiff and her witness, in the person of the Widow, expressed
in the Pronoune

ME, ME.
I begin with the Plaintiff, for indeed she begins the suit, or action:
and insomuch as she is oppressed petitioneth, but as she is a subject,
challenges the privilege of Justice. (...), Vidua, A Widow though the
plaintiff be, yet a natural liege-woman she is: and our laws are no less
comfortable then were Solons, removing (...), the burden of oppression, from
the shoulders of the innocent. If those (...) in the commonwealth of Athens,
the Great ones, intruded upon the aunciently most wretched (...), the poor
Plebeians right, the Tribunal of Solon was immediately their Sanctuary: and the
glory of his wisdom, was the wisdom of his government: (...); he weighed
Justice equally unto them all. The honor of great persons might indeed
challenge a reverence; but in foro Iustitiae, in the court of Assise there was
no difference. As the offensive poor were never pitied, neither were the
injurious Potentates ever privileged. If then the Widow be wronged, she is
privileged to complain without leave: I say no more in the behalf of the
Plaintiff, then what a great Justice, Adrian the Emperor himself Pompon
Festus de Magistrate. Roman. c. 25.
has taught me, in the case of the Defendants; who, craving license to
answer, received this answer: Hoc non peti, sed praestari solere, that their
petition was frivolous, since they might demand what they craved. For indeed
that is the armor which God left us, when he disarmed us of private revenge.
He keeps that to himself: vengeance is mine says the Lord. Deuteronomy. 32. 35.
But liberty to complain he grants unto us: When they have a matter, they come
unto me, says Moses Exodus 18. 16. yet though God gives us leave to complain
of our oppressors, he does not grant us liberty to be Baratours against our
neighbors. An humble Plaintiff, is a term expressing an injured innocence:
but a common quarreller, or accuser, a note of infamy. Abel was a Plaintiff:
Clamavit vox sanguinis, etc. The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me Genesis
4. 10. But the Devil himself is no worse then a common sute-monger: it is one
of his hateful names; (...), The accuser of our brethren. Rev. 12. 10. Two
things therefore Pyrrh. Pe^ottus in Mart. Epigr. lib. 1. Epi. 10. Col. 639.
lin. 53. Ioh, de sacra quereu. in verb. obsolet Iouo. Guli. Lindwodus provin.
constit. tit. de consuct. cap. statutum est.. quod si duo verb vidua.
are to be enquired in the Widow complaining. 1. whether she be (...) Vidua, a
Widow at all, 2. whether she be (...) a Widow indeed. For the first then, if
we examine the Quid nominis, the definition of the Latin name, from that
Etymon we shall easily express the nature of the thing. Vidua quasi a viro
idua, from Iduo (Hetrusco verbo) an obsolete word, for which both Gellius and
Varro are quoted authors; signifying to divide, separate, or part. So that
Vidua is mulier a viro iduata, a woman separated from, or deprived of her
husband. And such a one, if a Widow at all, must the Plaintiff be, one so
within the virge of the Judges dominion, that she is S. Gregorius in Deuteronomy. 23.
si* intraucris segetem. etc.
utterly destitute of all other protection. For else if his tuition belongs unto
another jurisdiction, Quis te constituit Iudicem? Who made you a Judge there?
Falcem iudicij mittere non potes in eam rem quae alteri videtur essecommissa.
S. Gregory determines it a main error in Judgment, to put a sickle in another
man's harvest; to wrest and scrue that cause unto a lay inquisition, which
properly pertaines to the civil Jurisdiction. The plaintiff here is no widow,
no, no more the^ that wife is, a wdow which is not forsaken, but forsakes her
husband. A protector she has, but she reiects his aid; and a Widow if she
seem to be, she does indeed but seem so to be; or at least (...). 1. Tim.
5. 6. a lascivious widow she is, who delights, as in multiplicity of courts,
so in plurality of husbands; and so can never be, (...), a widow indeed, 1.
Tim. 5. 3. which is the second quaerie. And here again the Apostle helps us.
For (...), a widow indeed, is expressed by (...) verse. 5. that is, desolate,
or left alone: and is farther noted in the same verse by works of piety. So
that, to make the Plaintiff, (...), a widow indeed, two things again a re
requisite: a desolate Poverty, and an oppressed innocence. For Poverty of it
self alone as a Species of misery, is the object of compassion and mercy.
Misericordiae seeds Miseria est: St Bernard tells us, S, Bernardus de conuers,
ad Clerum. cap. 10,
that mercy looks not so much upon what is unjust, as upon what is unhappy; but
Justice on the other side takes little or no notice of general calamity, and
wholly fixes its impartial eye, upon an indifferent equality. So that misery
in its community, as not pertaining to Justice, is only the motive, and Object
of mercy: but where calamity complains of oppression, there even Justice has
bowels too; and with mercy to the innocent avengeth in equity. Thus the poor
in the eye of Pity, is in general every one that wants: but the poor in the
sight of justice, is he and only he, that wants his Due. So that often times the
rich man becomes the Widow; and a poor snake of far meaner fortunes, is
justly entitled the oppressor. For in the estimation of Justice, he only is
the Widow, not which has the least estate, but the most wrong. If therefore
the Plaintiff be an unjust caviller, he does but usurp the widows place; he
is not so, (...), Indeed. And then though his misery plead never so
pathetically for Pity, yet Sua sponte se obstringens sceleribus, Philo-Iudaeus
lib. de officio Iudicis.
non infelix, sed iniustus censendus est (says Philo) having both voluntarily,
and unjustly accused the innocent, he is not so much to be commiserated,
because unhappy, as punished because unrighteous. And therefore God himself
excludes his poverty from mercy, Thou shall not esteem a poor man in his
cause. Exodus 23. 3. As then the Widow indeed is to be relieved, so the
counterfeit petitioner is to be rejected. 5. Thom. Aquinas. 22. q. 68. art. 4.
The schooleman alots a Talion for the one, and that from the great Bishop
Adrians decree, qui non probaverit quod obiecit, paenam quam intulit ipse
patiatur: let him that accuses, and cannot prove what he suggests, undergo
that punishment, which the defendant should have suffered, if the suggestion
had been proved. A just sentence no doubt it is, as well in controversies, as
criminalls. And to this end wisely, Guli. Postellusde Magistrate. Athen. c. 1.
though more gently did the Athenian Magistrates demand (...) ab Actore and
Reo: Mony-pledges proportioned to the quality of the cause, from both demand,
(...) ab Actore and Reo: Mony-pledges proportioned Guliel. Poste^ lus de
Magist. Athen. cap. 7.
to the quality of the cause, from both the Plaintiff, and the Defendant, at
the beginning of each suit. Vt qui causa caderet, etc. says my Author, That he
which after the trial, was cast, might by this over plus of loss, be taught
never after, saucily to trouble the Judge, or perversely to molest his quiet
neighbors with causeless suits, or frivolous complaints. And again, the
Apostle prescribes an honor to the other; (...): Honor those that are widows
indeed. Honor them with the honor from the husband due unto the woman, the
honor of Protection; So the wise man counsels in the widows, in the
Plaintiffes case. Deliver them that suffer wrong from the hand of the
oppressor: and be not faint-hearted when thou iudgest. Be as a Father unto
the Fatherless, and as an Husband unto their Mother; so shall thou be as the
son of the most high, and he shall love thee more then thy mother does.
Ecclus. 4. 9. 10. Observe (I beseech you) the unparalleled reward of
Assimilation. In being tanquam Pater, as a Father to the poor, they shall be
sicut Filius altissimi, as the Son of the most High, who is the Father of the
Fatherless, and the ludge of the Widows. Psalm. 68. 5. And so I descend unto
the second part of the Assise, contained under the Widows Title,

Testes: the Witnesses.
All Demonstration, and consequently all perfect knowledge, we must confess to
be Derebus necessarits A^^t. Postet. Anal. lib. ^
and aeternae veritatis (as the Philosopher instructs his school) about those
things which are in themselves of an invariable constancy, and (...), or
materials in propositions of eternal truth, and consequence infallible. So
that in those things, without the aid of external information, reason can
easily conclude the necessity of the effects and acts, from the constant
influx, and unchangeable operation of their cause. But in all free Acts (and
such are all man's Actions) there is such a variable contingencie, that a
certain knowledge of their particulars can never be attained, themselves
continuing Pro libitu for ever so uncertain. Things that must be done, all men
may know; but to those things which either may, or may not be done, only the
Actors, in whose liberty they are, are conscious. Wherefore (because of all
humane actions, about which Justice principally is conversant, there can be in
the Judge no certain knowledge demonstratiue) God, for the better process of
equity and right, has allowed (...), a kind of notice of their outward Acts,
from the probability of external testimony. There is indeed above every man,
Test is intuens, a great and cleere-eyed witness that viewes the heart and
reins, and fore-sees our secretest actions before they come to Act. And there
is too in every man, Testis internus, an inward witness, which we can no more
eschew, then we can run from our own selves; That Conscientia, that intimate
and ioynt-knowledge, or conscience of our Good or Evil, so soon, yea in the
first instant it is done: And these two commonly, though they know most,
speak least: God of his mercy forbearing, and Conscience bridled by him (in
whose liberty for a time it is) for that time not openly convincing or
accusing. But the third witness is Extra Hominem, without the man: who,
because the spirit of man is only conscious of what is in man, (according to
the Apostle) can engender no certain knowledge in us, but a probability of
truth by his accusation; God frequently expresses this his knowledge, in
Vindication; conscience hers, in Confession; and our neighbor his, in
Accusation. God from his most infallible science, both accuses, so he did Ely.
1. Sam. 2. 29. and condemns, as in the blaspheamers case, Levit. 24. 14. and
avengeth without either accusation, or conviction. For first he punished
Israel, and after told the cause, Josh. 7. 11. Then conscience is the best
evidence next God, and both accuses, as S. John. 8. 9. and condemns. Romans
14. 22. But the outward witness, the neighbor, only can accuse. So then, God
is Witness, Jury, and Judge; Conscience, Witness and Jury; but Man, the
witness S. Th. Aquin. 2a 2ae. q. 70. art. 2.
only. Wherefore, because the witnesses accusation, as being most infirm,
breeds only the uncertain evidence of probability, God gradually betters and
confirms the truth of this probability, by the persons multiplicity. If one
only accuse, and one defend, it is probable the defendants answer may be as
true as the Plaintiffes objection: but if two, or more witness, and but one
deny, the probability inclines to the part of the plaintiff. Wherefore, at the
mouth of two or three witnesses shall the matter be established. Deuteronomy. 19. 15.
Two or three witnesses, says the old Testament, in the generality of cases;
and two or three witnesses, says the new, in an Elders accusation at the
least, 1. Tim. 5. 19. And sure I am, that if one had served the turn, Susanna,
who is now so celebrated for her virtue and chastity, had for her goodness
died, branded with the disgraceful note of sin, and advoutries. One man has
but one soul; and therefore as conscious of his own thoughts, may be
irreuelably constant to his own villainy: but two or more men have as many
souls, and those souls, as diverse thoughts, and those thoughts, as various
expressions. So that what one falsely averres for truth, the other as ignorant
of his thoughts, may contradict. For if both those witnesses against Susanna
had had but one soul, and had consequently been conscious each to others
thoughts, both surely would have stood to one tale; and the second would never
have called that a Prime tree. Dan. 13. 58. which the form had before averred
to be a Lentiske. verse. 54. And therefore One witness shall not testify
against a person to cause him for to dye, says that first, greatest, and
justest Lawgiver, The Lord. Number. 35. 30. It is a Negative Sr Walter Raleygh
hist. of the world, part. 1. lib. 2. cap. 4.. 16.
precept which in Morals binds Adsemper: and the Author of our English History
of the World, quotes Fortescue, speaking of a great Justice an acquaintance of
his, who kenned well enough the common distinction, of a general
inconvenience, and a particular mischief, yet confessed unto him, that upon
the conscience of omission of this negative precept in one case of life, he
bare (I may say what himself confessed) the guilt, and consequently the
trouble to his grave. But all this we pass unto the discussion of the
Schools; only this caveat let me leave to those it may concern, That he who
carries his neighbors life, and fortunes, on so ticklish a point, as the tip
of his tongue had need be another Cato, and vndequaque rotundus, a very perfect
honest man. Or if one witness be good, which in some case, and especially when
the defendants evil life is an evidence against himself, I may not altogether
contradict, as persuading obedience to the Law; yet this I may be bold to say
without the least suspicion of a crime: In this case, if in any, Two are better
then One, Eccles. 4. 9. But a threefold cord is not easily broken, ver. 12.
From the quantity then of the Witnesses, if we descend unto their quality, we
shall easily observe, that their testimony only ingendering a probability, (as
you have heard) whatsoever defects may impair that probability, detract, by
consequent, from the evidences sufficiency; As the defect of reason in
children, mad, or distempered men, inferres a probability, that their evidence
is but vanity. And again, the defect of moderation in his passion or
affection, makes an enemy justly suspected of malice in his accusation. And if
I should say, that a moderate respect ought to be had to the Mercenary
baseness of the penurious, and the both fawning and revengefull nature of the
servile persons Thom. Aquin 2a 2ae. q. 71. art. 3. 4. Boethius de consol.
Philos. pros. 4.
condition, I could both urge the Roman Laws for my defense, and the Schoolemans
Thesis, together with Boethius his complaint, for my protection. Si minus
accusati innocentiae, at accusantium vilitas pudori esse debuisset. If
Theoderick would not be persuaded that the Defendant was innocent, yet well
might he have blushed at the baseness of the complainant. And indeed if we
do but look into our own Courts of Justice, we may two plainly (God knows)
conclude, that it is not so rare for men of mean condition, to be Mercenary in
this accursed kind; when we so daily behold the fraternity of the Post, who
almost hourly in their seasons, make no bones of morgaging their souls to be
knighted of the Devil. A knighthood they call it, (wretched Caitiffes as they
are) and indeed it wants not some ensigns of the order: for their Periuries
are their Spurs, which prick their guilty souls Post, Post have unto Hell. I
pass by the infidelity, and infamous course of life in the witness, both
impairing his evidence in the judgment of the meanest Jury. But let these
mercenary perjurers to their terror know (...): Hesiod. (...)
He that swears false has a sharp tongue, that with one word murders his
neighbors body, and Plato de Legum Iatione. dial. 6.
his own soul. Morte plectatur, was Plato's sentence, Let him die the death;
But Gods judgment of Talion in parity of case is juster, though not much
easier, Do unto him as he thought to do unto his brother, Lev. 19. 19. It Is
worthy the observation, that, notwithstanding by Vrim and Thummim, Exodus: 28, 3.
the general Philo Iud. de 10. Praeceptis.
stream of Interpretors construe Light and Perfection; Yet Philo Iudaeus
renders them, (...): Truth and its manifestation. For indeed, Truth is Light:
and he that was the Light, S. John. 8. 12. Was the Truth Horat. carm. lib. 4.
od. 9.
too; cap. 14. 6 Now, Paulum sepultae distat inertiae Celata virtus -- valor
without expression, has no more honor then sluggish dastardy: and A simili,
Truth, that is silent, loses its own, both reward, and beauty. No man puts a
candle under a bushel, S. Matthew. 5. 15. Manifestation then, is Perfection too,
Truths perfection: and witness is no more then Manifestation, in Salv. de
guber. Dei, lib. 2.
Salvians opinion; Testimonium esse dicitur, quo rerum veritas approbatur;
Evidence is nothing but an approbation of Truth. So that in Aarons garment, God
made expression of his love to Truth, and her manifestation, placing them in
Loco Sacerrimo iuxta pectus Philo Iud de 10. praecept.
(faith my Author) vbipars animi est, qui principatum obtinet; upon the most
sacred part of that Hallowed person, and the chief mansion of his soul, his
Breast, as the most precious ornament, and most proportioned to that part,
which above all others is esteemed most precious. Hear therefore and tremble,
who ere thou art, that have whetted thy enuenomed tongue with falsehood to thy
brothers prejudice; learn, I say, with trembling whom thou have grievously
offended, and whom therefore thou must answer in the most dreadful Isid. de
summo bono. cap. 59.
day of the last judgment. Isidore tells thee thou must answer three: Deo, quem
contemnis; Iudici, quem decipis; Innocenti, quem laedis: Thou must answer God,
whose ninth great Commandment thou have violated; Thou must answer the Judge
too, whom by thy falsehood thou have deceived, and thou must answer thy
innocent Brother, whom by thy calumny thou have wounded. But when Perjury is
added to thy Philo Iudaeus de 10. praeceptis. Plutarch. (...).
Lie, Scelus prorumpit ad impietatem (exclaimes Philo) Sin breaks forth into
shameless impiety. (...), etc. Pericles loved his friend withal his heart,
and was his servant too, Sans complement, in what he might, to be commanded;
yet this friendship had an honest limitation too: (...): you shall give him
leave to love God best: he will be a friend unto his friend; but not perjured
for him, no nor for his own father. Erubesce Christian, Blush O thou Salvian*
de Gubern* Dei* lib 4.
false Christian: This Infidel, this Heathen man in reverend Salvians
judgment, is better far then thou, Qui sub tam magnae professionis nomine
vivis, and positus in religione peccas. He never heard the precepts of the
Gospel; thou art taught them: He never saw the Law of Life; but thou have
read it. In the midst of life thou art in death. Perdidisti vim tantinominis,
Thou have lost the glory, the weight of so great a name, as Christian; Ezekiel.
18. 21. 22.
and art worthy to be beaten with many stripes, S. Luke 12. 47. Who ever thou
art therefore that have offended, knock thy breast, and petition with the
Publican for mercy. At what time soever, etc. Ezekiel. 18. 21. Remember the rest,
and despair not of remission. But Thou whose purer soul is clear from this
offense, this bloody crime, go on in the peace of God, and good luck have thou
in the name of the Lord. Speak the troath, and so honor God: speak the whole
troath and so preserve thy hurtlesse neighbor; and speak nothing but the
troth and so help thee God. Make not a lie of nothing, as did the sons of
Belial* against guiltless Naboth. 1. King. 21. 13. Make not a lie of the
truth, as did the witnesses against our spotless Savior, Matthew. 26. 61. This
man said, I can destroy the Temple of God: and build it again in three days.
For truth it was indeed that he did say, Destroy this Temple, and in three
days I will raise it up again, St John. 2. 19. Yet were those witnesses by
the infallible testimony of the holy Ghost (...), False witnesses. Mat. 26. 60.
And S. Origin. S. Chrysostom. S. Hieron. Beda. Theophylact. Euthym. etc.
Fortescue lap. 53.
for their falsehood, three reasons by the Fathers are alleged. First, because
they gave their evidence Malo animo, with a malicious intent, and for reward,
and not for manife station of the Truth, and benefit of the common wealth,
which was evident by their long concealment. Secondly, they did it Alijs
verbis, in other and not the same words which he spoke himself, as by
comparing places may appear. Thirdly, and principally, they did interpret what
he said, Diverso sensu, in another sense then that which himself meant, which
is the greatest injury of all. For in the order of Nature, Eius est exponere,
cuius est componere: Words are but the signs of thoughts, and he that speaks
them, knows his own thoughts best, and therefore in a rational consequent
should be his own interpreter, as best knowing to expound them truest. They
expound his words of the great Material Temple of Jerusalem, but he meant
them of the Temple of his Body, John. 2. 21. (...), therefore, False witnesses
they were; and so are all such as do the like. But punishment has overtaken
them; Gods vengeance sticks fast unto them; they are ceased from being a
nation, and according to their desperate imprecation, St Mat. 27. 25. The
better part of this two thousand years, His blood has been upon them and
upon their Children. Nor need we wonder, for otherwise it could not be. The
wisdom of God has spoken it, A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he
that speaks lies shall not escape, Prove. 19 5. Long (Beloved) I know I have
insisted upon this Point of the Witnesses, and not without some cause. For the
most instructions belong properly to those who are the Keys of all
controversies, opening or shutting at their own consciences direction. Now the
Defendant, I know would have his place too* but seeing the time hastens Us,
and we have been busied so long about the Plaintise, as in course of Law he
answers by his Counsel, it will not be amiss if in the process of this
discourse we comprehend him in his Counsel, Pars 2. D. Th. Aquin. 2a 2ae. q.
69. art. 1. 2, 3. 4.


(...): From my Adversary.
A long thread we might easily spinne, if we intended to weaue the Schoolemans
web in the enquiry of the lawfulness of the Defendants selfe-protection by
Falsehood, Calumny, App^ale, or open Force, all concluded unlawful in some
case, as repugnant to the ordinance and glory of God. The time therefore
preventing any long discourse, and Your weighty affairs calling to the
Practick part of what in this place you are to learn, as in the Texts division
we intimated the Counsel under the Defendants title; here verso ordine, we
will include the Defendants instruction in his Counsel, or Advocats. Whose
right of living by their D. Th. Aquin 2a 2ae. q. 71.
deserving Faculty, was never yet in my small reading called to question, save
by the Schooleman, and that for no other reason, the^ that (for which all truth
is questioned) S. August. ad Maced.
its farther illustration, S. Augustine yields, (...) the Honor of maintenance,
as well as to any, to their lawful calling; neither can the honor of
Reverence be by any means denied, which all nations Aeschin. cont. Ctesiphont.
have justly paid to their protecting Advocates. (...) the Orator styles them,
the Guard and Army of defense unto their Clients: and therefore in my
judgment, that Lex Cincia Muneralis, the Law that M. Cineius preferred amongst
the Romans, cutting from Counselors their lawful Fees, argues the Law
propounder himself to have had but a gouty fist. Mart. Epig.
Nil patrono porrigit, haec Chiragra est. Surely his fingers ioines were knit
with that covetous discase, that he could never open his hand with a reward of
gratitude, to his protecting Advocate. S. Augustine with a more impartial
sentence, both decrees to them, and S. August. ad Maced.
confines them to their due. Extorta per immoder atam improbitatem repeti
solent, data per toler abilem consuetudinem non solent. What injuriously they
exact, they are bound to restore; but what just custom allows, they may with
conscience receive. Our Sav ours determination is Indefinite and Equipollent to
an Vniverfall: Iuv. Sat. 1.
The Labourer, that is, Every Labourer is worthy of his hire, Luke 10. 7.
Labor then they must, they must plead, as neither mute for fear, Vt.
Lugdunensem Rhetor dicturus ad aram: For so through the impotencie of his
cowardly passion, he betrays the justice of his Clients actions: nor silent
for reward; for indeed Plu^^ that blind mony-monger, has too often an imperious
power over an orators tongue, (...), Aristoph. in (...).
So the Comedian expresses it: He so stops and bungs up his mouth with a
morsel of clay, that there is not a cranie left for a sentence to crowd forth
to the defense of the Innocent. Speak then they must. And then again, two
things let them seriously observe in their office of pleading, and so shall
they well deserve the Laborers hire; and as an overplus of recompense, merit
that Grande (...) or general approbation of all their Audience. Now because,
Oratoris virtus Plato in Apolong. Socrat.
est vera dicere: An Orators best eloquence in Plato's judgment is to speak
the truth, these two things are requisite. First, That they speak that Truth,
Substantially: then, That they speak it Syncerely. In a word, That they
deliver it with a good tongue, and from as good an heart. To render the truth
Substantially, is to speak it plainly and succinctly, or briefly: neither
trifling away the Judges time, with too long, or too impertinent enlargements;
nor preoccupating hiseares Gasp. Contarenus de Venet. Repub. lib. 4.
with tinfoiled, or gilded sentences. In the Veneti^^ Iudiciarie Courts of
Controversies, a certain time is limited to the Advocates, Vltra quod
orationem protendere non possunt, (as a Gentleman of that City testifies) which
by Law they can in no case exceed. He that speaks Truth, speaks enough in
two lines: Sed tu, Gosconi, Mart. Epig.
dis^ica long a facis: But how many are there in our lists that are too too
tedious in but two lines? Philem. (...)
(...). A whole volume of solid expressions never wearies the hearers; but
nothing to the purpose is tedious, though but two words. If then a word be so
tedious, sure many of those impertinent scroles are burdensome unto excess,
that in a whole Centurie of lines co^taine nothing precious save their price,
which (God knows) so wrings the poor petitioner, that so long as he lives
after, he has experimental cause to approve our Saviors counsel, as well
in common Polity, as Divinity: Agree with thine Adversary quickly, Mat. 5. 25.
No bauling Act. 2. 24. Guil. Postel. de Megistrat. Athen. cap: 4.
Tertullus could be heard of in Athens, where their honest proverb, (...), as
mute as a Lawyer or Judge, condemns many of our Pleaders importunity, in the
proverbiall protestation of theirs, at least the Judges (their examples)
Modesty. Gasp. Contarenus de Rep. Venet. lib. 3.
Brawlings at the bar are disproportioned instruments of peace* Nam qui
maledict is indulget, potius inimici, and pravi hominis officium facere, quam
Reipub: causam agere videtur. Contarenus of Venice justifies, that malignant
words from an impotent, and passionate Advocate, are a pregnant witness that
he forgets his office, which is by manifestation of Truth to advance Peace,
not by contentious terms to kindle strife. The Second requisite is to speak
Syncerely, (...) (so did the Athenian Baristers) neither decking a bad cause
with Rhetorical flowers, nor procuring a perverse, and unjust pity to the
oppressor, by patheticall, or passionat expression. For the justification of
the wicked as much as the condemnation of the Just, is an abomination to the
Lord, Prou. 17. 15. Again to speak syncerely, is to speak Down night; without
either veil of Hypocrisy, or squint eye of prevarication: which we doubt not
but too many glance, their faces turned toward their Clients, but their eyes
bent back upon themselves alone, whilst they seemingly plead the Widows
cause, but without satiety gape at their own Iucre, worshipping their God, as
the Ephesians did Diana, Act. 19. 24. Then best when they see him in a: silver
shrine, and then are they easily seduced to mistake the Devil for God, when
he transformes himself into the shape of an Angel, 2. Cor. 11. 14. These be
those Iuris Coctiores, instead of doctiores, (so the Comedian Plautus in
Paenulo. Act. 3. Scaen. 2.
facetiously mistakes) qui lites lites creant -- and si nihil est litium, lites
emunt: those Non-proficients in the Law, who patch up their trewantly
insufficiencies with dishonest quirkes, and progging subtilties: boiling, as it
were, their own inventions to maturity of cunning, and mixing potions of fraud.
Baratry, to protract old, or forge new questions and suits among contentious
neighbors. Potions they are, like those of Circes, metamorphosing Homer. (...).
Men to Beasts. And Pottage if they be (for so the Poet by Iuris coctiores,
means) sure I am, they are as dear as Jacobs: and he that sups them has the
better fortune, if he buy them not at as dear a rate as did Esau his mess, at
the price of his Birthright. But let them that use this art of confection be
circumspect: For this is that subtilty which is fine, but unrighteous: and
these are they that wrest the open, and manifest Law, Ecclus. 19. 24. (...):
Philem. (...).
The Heathen says as much: Fraudulent Pleaders are the disgrace of their worthy
profession: and are indeed no Lawyers, but their enemies; wresting by the
secret violence of their too fine subtilty, that Law, which They defend and
keep inviolate* yea, and therefore, (...), etc. Woe be unto you Lawyers (I
mean those who are such* for ye lade men with burdens grievous to be borne,
and you your selves touch not the burdens with one of your fingers. S. Luke
11. 46. Dixit. The Orator, Defendant, or Advocate has done. The Iuries
verdict, and the Judges Sentence are the next. They are but short: so shall be
their Discourse.

Pars. 3. Iuratores.
(...): Do Justice.
The Jury have their name, and denomination from their Oath: and therefore as
often as they are called by that name, so often are they put in mind of that
bond between God, and their ownesoules, being Viri iurati, sworn men. The
weight and obligation of that oath, with the fearful punishments inflicted on
Blaspheamous wretches, for this guilt of perjury to the prejudice of the
innocent, I could willingly to my power express, did not the time prevent.
Something I have said thereof in the witnesses discourse; all which if you
remember not, yet keep in mind (I beseech you) this one menace of the
Prophet; I will come near to you in judgment, and will be a swift witness
against your Soothsayers, and adulterers, and against false swearers, and
against those that wrongfully keep back the hirelings wages, and vex the
widow and the fatherless, and oppress the stranger, and fear not me, says
Dominus exercituum, The Lord of hoasts, Malach. 3. 5. Remember this
denunciation of Gods judgment against your selves, if you fail in your duty
herein, and fear: For it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God, Ex Varrone Hotoman. in com. in orat. Cic. pro Q. Roscio.
Heb. 10. 31. But from this Denunciation, I pass unto the last and greatest
part of this Assise; The Judge: who, as the Jury receive their names from
their Oath by which they are bound, takes his also from the Law by which
himself is guided. Iudex the Judge; a co^pound of two languages, Ius, and
(...) (as my Author, none of the meanest Critics, will diduce it) intimates a
necessary respect from the Judge, unto the Law, which he receaues from a
superior Magistrate, as his rule and Judge Hutton at Okeham Assizes.
square: on which I have heretofore, before one of these Right Honorable
Judges, in another place upon the like occasion, more largely discoursed. When
also some precepts, Ex officio, I rehearsed, derived from the book of God,
concerning the Judges office, notwithstanding I did not doubt that his, as now
both your wisdoms, might prevent the necessity of my instruction. Yet give me
leave, Right Honorable, this once again to cast my Mite into your Treasury,
remembering too that it is the Widows Mite; whose petition this day I doubt not
but you will respect: that as you employ your five talents to a greater
increase, I also may in some sort too husband the but two committed to my
charge, to both yours, and my great Masters glory. I remember I have read that
Themistocles compares the Magistrates office, to a skillful Musicians art: who
must in his song, be ruled by his measure: I remember his application too, but
willingly omit it, because I had rather approve and follow the Prophets, then
his; who being a Magistrate as well as he, calls it a song too, and that
composed of two sweet airs; Mercy, and Judgment, I will sing mercy and
judgment, Psalm. 101. 1. And every Judge that will be David's like, must caroll
the same tune, if ever he mean to be a sweet singer in Israel. Now in the song
of Judgment, two Strains are of a transcendent Harmony, Equality, and Purity.
The one excludes acceptance of Persons, the other of Rewards. Against
violation of the first, God himself gives an express command: Thou shall not
favor the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty, but thou
shall judge thy neighbor justly, Levit. 19. 15. And against transgression of
the second, even moral heathenish polity has in all ages been especially
provident. Witness the Magistrates oath at Athens administered to him for more
caution, (...), once every Xenoph. (...), bib. (...) Guil. Postell. de Magist.
Athen. c. 14.
month: And again their (...), Magistrates of account for the administration
of Justice at the Session of each Judge in the period of his deputed time the
public Crier openly proclaiming, (...), If any man could accuse him of
injustice in the time of his commission, Aeschines in orat. contra Demost. and
Clesiphont.
he should be freely heard. And in the Commonwealth of Israel, Samuel (in whose
ever blessed and memorable integrity may all our Samuels, Judges, and
Magistrates depart) provokes the people to the trial of himself. Behold here
I am, bear record of me before the Lord, and before his Anointed: whose Ox
have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I done wrong unto? or
whom have I hurt? or of whose hands have I received any bribes, to blind mine
eyes with? and I will restore it you. 1. Samuel. 12. 3. And the people as
freely acquit him by a general voice* Thou have done us no wrong, nor hurt us,
neither have thou taken ought of any man's hand, verse. 4. As for the song of
Mercy; God forbid our Laws, our Christian Laws should be of Dracoes Crimsen
die: Non atramento scriptae, sed humano sanguine as not written with Ink, but
man's blood. For two things to all, both wise, and good men, Aquin. in Boet. de
consol. Philos. pros. 4.
are especial Motives to compassion and lenity; Metus ignorantiae in Iudicio,
and incertus eventus humanae fortunae. Fear, least they should err in
judgment, and so though unwittingly, stain their souls with the blood of the
innocent:: and Doubt arising from the uncertainty of all humane frailty; to day
glittering on the Pinnacle of honor, and to morrow sinking in the gulf of
wretchedness. For then must you only expect what your selves upon others in
your prosperity bestow: Blessed therefore are the merciful, for they shall
obtain mercy, S. Matthew. 5. 7. Come then, O come ye Judges of the earth, come
before the presence of the Lord with a song, with a song of Mercy and
Judgment: With a song of Pity, and Equality, mixing the Widows threnes, her
mournful dities, with your sweeter notes, and tuning and reducing to melody,
her harsh laments, by your harmonious skill in Doing her justice against her
enemy. Which if without Hypocrisy or Prevarication you perform, (...), shall
not God? shall not the Judge of all the World do right? Genesis 18. 25. Yea,
(...), much more will God respect your cause, when in that dreadful Assise, at
the last judgment, both your, and all our souls, all naked, shall be
summoned to appear, and stand before his Tribunal, at the bar of his
Justice, as poor guilty Defendants, trembling and shiuering, guarded by
thousands, and ten thousands Angels: Satan our Adversary accusing: our
transgressions witnessing: our consciences convincing: and God himself an
angry Judge, without the Mediation of our but one only Advocate Christ Jesus,
irrepealably condemning. (...)! O God, how fearful would that judgment be,
did not that Advocate assist us most unthankful Clients, satisfying for our
transgressions, and interceding for us to that Judges Mercy? To Thee therefore
O powerful Advocate we call: To Thee, O blessed Mediator we direct our cry;
not in the Widows petition, (...), Do us justice, for then our portion should
be in the fiery Lake: but in the guilties supplication, (...); Do us mercy O
Lord, Be merciful unto us against our adversary: and in the Hour of death,
and in that day of Judgment, By the mystery of thy holy Incarnation, by thy
holy Nativity, and Circumcision, by the Baptism, Fasting, and Temptation, by
their Agony bloody sweat, by thy Cross and Passion, by thy precious Death,
and Burial, by thy glorious Resurrection, and Ascension, and by the coming of
the holy Ghost.

Good Lord deliver us.

That so in the company of thy Saints Elect, we may sing a new song, a song of
Mercy, and a song of Judgment; a song of Thanksgiving, and a song of Praise,
Hosannaes and Haliluiahs to thee O blessed Lord God, with the Father, and the
holy Ghost, in the fullness of Joy for ever more. AMEN.

(...).
AMEN.

