A SERMON PREACHED AT ASHBY DE-LA-ZOVCH IN THE COVNTIE OF LEICESTER: At the
Funeral of the Truly Noble and Virtuous Lady ELIZABETH STANLEY one of the
Daughters and Coheires of the Right Honorable FERDINAND late Earl of Derby
and late Wife to HENRY Earl of Huntingdon the Fifth Earl of that Family.
The 9. of February. Anno Dom. 1633. By I. F.

LONDON. Printed by William Jones dwelling in Red-crosse street. 1635.

AN EPITAPH UPON THE EXCELLENT COUNTESS OF HVNTJNGDON.
THE chief perfections of both Sexes joined,
With neithers vice nor vanity combined.
Of this our age the wonder, love, and care,
The example of the following, and despair.
Such beauty, that from all hearts love must flow:
Such majesty, that none durst tell her so.
A wisdom of so large and potent sway,
Romes Senare might have wished, her Conclaue may.
Which did to earthly thoughts so seldom bow,
Alive She scarce was less in heaven, then now.
So void of the least pride, to her alone
These radiant excellencies seemed unknown.
Such once there was: but let thy grief appear
Reader, there is not: Huntingdon lies here.
By him who says what he saw FALKLAND.

A FUNERAL SERMON.
John. XI. XXV. He that Beleiveth in me though he were Dead yet shall he live.
THE hopes of those which are strangers unto the Covenants of promise, cannot
fix any settled aim, and expectancie beyond the short line of life: when that
is drawn out unto the utmost point, Death at the best is apprehended by them,
but as it was by Adrian, to be incerta Peregrinatio, a Race of very doubtful
issue, doubtful whether in the end thereof, the head shall be crowned or cut
off; so that of all men most miserable that they are, their hope is only in
this life. Tantisper sperant dum spirant; But the hope of the children of the
promise, does not vanish into emptines with their breath, etiam dum expirant
sperant; Though there be no more breath in their mouths and their nostrills,
yet their hope is laid up in their bosom. Job 29. Though we die, yet says
Job, We know, that our Redeemer Job. 29. 17.
lives.

Though we be hid and closed under the ground, like the seed in the garden bed,
yet he whom Mary saw Job. 20. 15.
like the Gardener, this Gardener, will look, that the seed shall have its
spring again: He will, says the Prophet, pour upon us a dew, like the dew of
bearbes, and the earth shall yield forth Es. 16. 19.
her dead And of thus much does he here ass^re the sister of Mary, who was
almost as deeply swallowed up of grief, as her deceased brother Lazarus was
of the Grave. Comfort thy self Martha, he shall rise again; and doubt not
Martha, I my self am the Resurrection, and the life, the issues of Death
belong unto me. The keys of Psalm. 68. 20.
the Grave are at my Girdle, and he that believes in me, Though he were dead
yet shall he live.

The words are in sum, a Stipulatio Conventionalis, consisting of a 1.
condition. 2. promise.


1. First, the Condition thus insinuated, He that believes. 2. the promise
thus proposed and pronounced, though he were dead yet shall he live.

First, The Condition upon which the promise is suspended, is faith, that (...)
that fullness of our hopes, that (...) that solace of our lives, as Philo
calls it, nay that our life it self, or at least that upon which our life
lies; for by it the just shall live, or by nothing, He that believes in me,
and he only that believes, he shall live.

And here seeing this Action is so properly specified, by its object; we may
observe, That the principal object of our faith, is God, considered in the
unity of his essence and a Trinity of persons, and therefore in the Symboll of
our belief, the Creed, is there a particular Credo, or at least the particle
(in) premitted apart before every one of the three persons, importing, that
upon them we fix, and build, our first assent, and assurance.

As for those other subordinate principles of our faith, such as concern the
Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, these being but Creatures, are not
assented unto for themselves, but for God, the uncreate, and first truth, and
therefore have no such Credo, nor particle set apart before them, but only
prefixed before one of the three persons.

Now, this object of our faith is considered diversely; either, as the Act of
belief and assent has respect unto the understanding, and in that
consideration, the object of faith is twofold, either formal, in which respect
the Act of Faith is credere Deo, we believing God as the first truth, and for
him fixing a settled assent upon all second and subordinate truths, they be the
maine Characters of divinity Power, and wisdom imprinted on them, apparently
manifesting, the hand, the finger of the Lord to have written them.

Or else it is material, and so the Act of faith is credere Deum; we that
believe believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of those that seek him.

Or secondly, the object of faith is considered, as the Act of belief and
assent has respect unto the will moveing the understanding to render its
assent, and in this respect the Act of faith is Credere in Deum, as it is here
delivered; for the will having pitched the end of all its hopes, in the
goodness of this exceeding rich and precious promise uncessantly plyeth the
understanding to give its assent to the truth of that which so much imports and
concerns its peace and satisfaction.

And these different considerations, do not importe any such various
difference of the Acts of faith, but rather signify the diverse respects of one
and the same Act unto the object of faith.

The sum of all may be collected thus. First, we believe that God is, and a
rewarder of all those that seek him: 2. We believe his counsels and Covenants
manifested, and dispensed unto us. 3. We believe in him, adhaere unto him,
rely on him; our Soul being with absolute Complacencie satisfied in him,
cries out, Pars mea Dominus, It is enough the Lord is my portion, how then can
I lack any thing? we give our assent unto his counsels, and Covenants,
because we are assured that in what he delivers, or promises, he is wise and
cannot be deceived himself, he is faithful and will not deceive us; Though we
discern a propension, and flexiblenesse in our selves to waver with every
contrary Air, yet let God be true, though all men Romans 3.
be liars. The Egyptians as Aquinas notes adventured to make the promise
alterable; I know not what feats they had, like unto those of their modern
counterfeits, to play fast, and loose with such a firm, and sealed knot as
this. But whatsoever they! we, says the Apostle, believe what we know, and we
know whom we have believed, and if we be deceived, certainly as the Prophet
says, Thou Lord have deceived Ier. 20.
us; But God for bid says Abraham the father of all believers, that the Judge
of all the world, should not do righteously; And unto this well-grounded Gen:
17.
assent, succeedes our firm adhaerence unto the covenants of promise, by which
we cleave unto, and close with our Redeemer in this manner.

The proposition of the promise is furnished by the Gospel; The Redeemer died
for those that are dead unto sin and rose again for the justification of them
which are planted into the similitude of his resurrection. Now an assumption
must be fitted unto the proposition by that assent which our understandings
give unto the truth, and that adherence which our wills fasten upon the
goodness of these exceeding rich and precious promises. If we be able thus to
limit the general proposition, I am dead unto the world by the Cross of
Christ, or I was dead, but now I am alive in Jesus Christ, the conclusion will
follow inevitably.

I do not always expect in such a limitation certitudinem Evidentiae: where I
find but certitudinem adhaerentiae, such a one as sometime feels some (...)
some declinations and abatements of its firmness, and fervor. Even that faith
howsoever it seem to come no nearer unto Christ then the very hemme of his
garment yet is able to derive virtue from him.

Thus have I in a very narrow model represented unto you the whole figure of
that grace, which gives us Title unto this promise. Give me then leave to
question you, as the Apostle did Agrippa, Beleevest thou the prophets? Believe
you in the Lord Jesus? I would I could answer for all, as he did for Agrippa. I
know that you believe.

But this I know: Many will make a boast of faith (says Solomon) but Prove. 20.
6.
where shall we find a faithful man? If you believe indeed, your faith will
give evidence of it self by the exercise of an adhering and an apprehending
virtue: By the first we are inserted into him; by the second we derive a
quickening influence from him

Do thou then believe in the Lord Jesus? show me then the power of the Lord
Jesus. The Angel gave a reason of his name, He shall be called Jesus, says
he, for he shall save his people from their sins. But art thou yet in thy
sins? I cannot then believe that thou beleevest: No! It is fitter for thee
(according to that elegant observation of St. Bernard) to fear the name of
Christ, then to be confident upon the name of Jesus. It is fitter for thee in
such a case to dread him as he is Christ, a King, a Judge, then to presume upon
him as he is Jesus, a Savior, a Redeemer.

Do thou believe in the death of Jesus Christ? show me then the power of his
death, whether it work in thee mightily, as it did in the Apostle to the
subduing of every corrupt affection. Do thou believe in his Resurrection?
show me then the power of his resurrection, Resurrectio Christi habet virtutem
in se, sed operationem in nobis, show me then what new effect it has wrought,
what new life it has quickened in thee. No man came unto Christ, that went
away in the same estate that he came in:

Some came lame, and paralytike, and went back restored to the integrity of
their limbs and strength; some came leprous and were dismissed clean some
came blind and deaf, and went went away restored to the integrity of their
senses, None were dismissed in the same estate wherein they came: And have thou
been so near unto Christ, as to say, I am in him, and of him, and yet art
neither cleansed, nor enlightened, nor healed, who can believe it? Whatsoever
thou boastest of believing, I cannot believe that thou beleevest at all, no
certainly thou never were so near him, as the very skirts of his clothing,
thou never came so near, as the very smell of the ointments of this our
Aaron, If thou had certainly that name, which is as an ointment powered
forth, that name, wherein thou pretendest to believe, would powerfully have
healed all these wounds and sores, and swellings

But do thou indeed believe, and art able to give evidence thereof by such
comfortable Testimonies, as are here implied? Then doubt not of the promise as
Christ said unto Martha. Beleevest thou this? why then he that believes in me,
though he were dead yet shall he live; and so I pass from the condition, to
the consideration of the promise suspended upon the condition, Though he were
dead, yet shall he live. The labor of man in this life, is, to turn up the
face of the Earth in the sweat of his own face, seeking for food and fuel
in her bowels, and in the closing up of the weary day of his Travel, the
earth receives man himself for a recompense into her bosom to fill up those
wounds and rents, But the earth receaveth back no more then it lent, (...).
Naz: Nazian:


The spirit breathed from above, returns to God that gave it. Dissolutio Aug:
corporis, est Absolutio animae. As the snare being broken the Bird escapes,
so the body being dissolved, evadit intus inclusa Columba, our soul is
escaped Col. 3. 1.
as a Bird out of the snare of the fowler; so that in our departure we suffer
but aliquid mortis, not a whole death. Our life is not lost, but hid. The
Serpent which has the power of death can do no more, but manducare terram
nostram, lick our dust; and indeed but lick it; devour it, consume it,
annihilate it he cannot, there must still be ex defectione refectio, after a
decay a reparation.

The Earth indeed receives the dust back again, which it lent, but yet it
receives it not as paid, but as lent; it must be given up, and returned back
again; It receives our bodies to make up those wounds and wants, which partly
our wants, partly our wantonness have made in her face, and womb; and it
retains them for a recompense of her sufferings and losses, till in the
general restoration, it self be restored. But then when it self is renewed,
when there is a new heaven, and a new Earth what need has the Earth to retain
our bodies any longer for satisfaction? In that day Oh Earth, Earth, Earth,
thou shall hear the voice of the Lord, and render up thy dead, and even the
dead themselves shall hear the voice of the son Ioh. 5. 25.
of God, and they that hear it shall live. This is the hope of Israel, and
indeed the hope of all the world, after al those evils which press and
persecute man to the last earthly evil death, there is yet this hope left in
the botteme of the Grave, as in the bottom of Pandora's Box But it is but
hope, not sight, and therefore the doctrine which concerned this hope, received
such slight intertainment; for whereas the Apostle says, hope that is seen
is not hope, clean contrary with him that looks only with the eye of nature,
hope that is not seen, is no hope at all. Hope that is not founded upon the
Evidence of reason is with him but a (...) a city in the clouds, a Castle in
the air; hence was it that the doctrine of the Resurrection, amongst the
Epicureans and Pithagoreans of Athens was receved Act. 17. (...).
but as a matter of mockery; though the Judgment seat were in the Arcopagus,
yet they sat down in the seat of scorners, not as Judges of Paul's Sermon;
But allowing that the Athenians had some reason to be ignorant, as perhaps, had
they not so much reason, they would not have had so little faith.

It is not strange that in the first 300. years after Christ, diverse even in
Christ should gainesay this hope of all the world being spoiled through the
same vain Philosophy. Many of those ages, having not seen any example of a
Resurrection, but only received it upon relation and reading, began to scanne
the possibility of such a restoration according to the principles of Nature,
and reason. It is well observed of Minutius non minoris est sceleris ignorare
quamsaedere

These men sin as highly by denying Gods Power through their ignorance, as if
by their disobedience they had resisted it: Male Deum norunt qui illum putant
non posse quod non putant; I may pronounce them ignorant which conceive, that
God is able to do no more, then they are able in reason to conceive. But though
they, though all the world gainsay this hope of all the world, yet this is the
victory that overcomes all the world, even our faith: we will not draw all
unto reason but leave something for faith.

Our contemplation of matters of this strain which are above the comprehension
of reason, and beyond the bounds of experience does not arrive at knowledge but
at wonder: which is nothing else but Contemplation broken off, or loosing it
self; It was aptly said by one of Platoes school, the sense of man resembles
the Sun, which opens and reveileth the Terrestiall Globe, but obscureth and
concealeth the Celestial, so does the sense discover natural things, but
darken, and shut up, those which are beyond the verge of nature: for all things
proceeding in the Invention of knowledge is by similitude, but those things are
only self like and have nothing in common with natural things otherwise then
in shadow, and trope. Give therefore unto faith, that which unto faith
belongs; for indeed it is more worthy to believe then to think or know;
considering that in knowledge the mind suffers from the impression of
inferior natures; but in all belief, the mind suffers from a spirit which
it holds superior, and more Aug.
authorized the^ it self; Nolumus igitur intelligere ut credamus, sed
credereut inteligamus, we will not therefore seek to under stand that we may
believe, but beleve that it may be given us to understand

The mystery of the Resurrection was delivered not by Pihlosophers, but by
simple fishermen: and here the most subtle of us, must leave to be disputants,
and learn to be disciples. And yet if any list to dispute, let me ask as St.
Paul did, why should it seem an impossible thing, to raise up one that is
dead? It was well argued by the Jew Pesisa, Si quod fuit, est, ergo, quod fuit
erit. whether is it harder to restore a body mouldred into the dust from whence
it was taken, then to creat all things out of nothing! Is it thought impossible
in nature? why, nature her self is a mistrisse able enough to inform us of
the contrary. Operibus Resurrectionem perscripsit antequam literis, viribus
praedicavit antequam vocibus: se we not the vicissitudes of night and day, the
revolutions of winter and summer, the riseing and setting of the Stars, the
wane and increases of the Moon, the Quickening of the dead grain under the
Clod, to bear a lively resemblance of this Restoration.

The whole Creation which groans for the general resurrection, practices a
yearly, a monthly, yea a daily Resurrection in its several parts. And all
this for Man! And shall man only not rise, for whom all these things rise in
their periods and seasons? what should withhold him from being restored? The
powers of the grave are shaken, and disabled, Christ himself has broken open
the Gates thereof, and loosed his Prisoners from the brinkes of the pit: death
it self has by his last conflict received its deaths wound: he had foiled it
before, by the ministry of his servants, by Eliah recalling the Sarephtans son,
by Elisha recovering the Shunamits son. So David foiled his enemies of Ammon by
the valor of his servants Ioab, and Abisha, but himself was feign 2 Samuel 12.
to appear before Rabbah for the perfecting of the victory and conclusion of
the war; so the Son of David appeared personally to give his Enemy the
last stroke to swallow up death in an utter victory. The victory is thus
atcheived. Death it self though he be the King of fear, and have as many
Provinces of his dominion, as there be pains, perils and snares of death, yet
has no more dominion over us, then what our sin betrayeth us unto. The
arrows of death are fledged with the feathers which grow upon our own wings.
Now therefore if we conceive man to be without sin, death has no more
dominion over him: Death then having seized upon our Savior, who was without
stain or guilt, it was found equal in the Judgment of God, that it should
loose all power over us that were sinful, because it exercised a power which
it had not over him that was innocent. For in regard of the injury offered unto
him and patiently sustained by him, God adjudged him all power over him that
had the power of death, giveing him liberty to restore unto liberty the
Prisoners of the Grave.

And indeed he has reason thus to restore them, for according to that of
Bernard, Christus solus resurrexit, sed non totus; Christ alone is risen, but
all Christ is not risen, till all that are of, and in Christ be risen likewise.
Thus though other Graves be the houses of death, this of Christ is unto us,
(now the stone is removed from it) the Gate of everlasting life; Although death
be the king of fear yet we see of his kingdom there is an end, he reigned
indeed under the law, but now the Scepter of righteousness is transferred unto
one, of whose kingdom there is no end. And observe the procession and Pomp of
his Triumph over his vanquished foe: Death, says the Prophet, shall go before
his face pale and trembling as a Prisoner before his Triumphall chariot. He
says no longer now as he did once, O Death, I will be thy Death, It is not
seasonable to threaten now, death has already felt his vanquishing arms, he
spares not now therefore to reproach him with this glorious insultation, O
death where is thy Sting? O grave, where is thy victory? Since thou did once
loose thy sting upon mine innocence, I have taken away the sins of the world,
so that now thou can not fit thy self with any new sting, to wound either
me, or mine. Thus death it self is dead, and the dead live again; death is
swallowed up, and the dead are rendered up: this is the hope of humaneflesh:
but he must be more then flesh, whosoever attaineth to the end of this hope,
for flesh and blood shall never inherit the 1 Cor. 15.
kingdom of heaven.

As there is a flesh which shall see the salvation of God, so there is a flesh
Es. 52. Es. 4. 1 These. 4. 17
which is as grass. Grass which grows to day, and tomorow perhaps is to be
cast into the furnace, there to be tormented in aeterno Dei, because it sinned
in aeterno suo. During the eternal pleasure of God, because of its own
eternal pleasure it took in displeasing of God; As there are some qui
rapientur in occursum, so there are some qui convertentur retrorsum. Those
which have turned their backs unto me, and not their face, those shall be Ps.
9. 17.
turned backward. They shall rise again, but it shall be for their greater
depression. Their bodies shall be delivered from the first death, but it shall
be to be delivered up unto the second death, their souls and bodies shall be
united, but both divided from God, in such manner that they shall wish the
body had been rather extinguished, then thus united. Sed ad augmentum Gr^g.
tormenti, ut hic de corpore nolens educitur, itidem et illic in corpore
tenetur in vitus. To aggravate the vengeance, as here the soul parted out of
the body against its will; so there its held in the body against its will.
Marveile not at it, though (...) be de suo optomus, yet he is de nostro Iustus.
As he is gracious by the Tertull:
propriety of his nature; so he is just for the necessity of the cause. And it
is equal and just, that if we taste of the sweetness of sin against the
will of God, we shall taste of the bitterness of punishment against our own
will. (...). etc. It is equal if we be here subjected unto that evil one,
that we should hereafter be possessed of him, says that excellent Homilist Hom:
Macarius. If we make our bodies Prostibula and not Templa, rather Temples of
Chemosh and Ashtaroth then Domus patris mei, they will become rather blocks of
hellfire then Pillars in the Temple and the Courts of the house of our God.
Let us therefore spare our Bodies (my beloved) and not use them as if they were
borrowed garments, we must give accounts of things done in them. And as the
scarrs of wounds, so the scarrs of sins will appear therein after death, which
will be Characters of evidence plain enough to testify their un^^^blenesse of
Glory, let us therefore here seek to take them away, by taking the Cyrill.
catech. 18.
(...) by being washed, by being sanctified here. Would we so rise from death,
that we may not sink into the second death, let us remember, that Corpora
nostra huic Resurrectioni per Regenerationem Spiritus Tertull:
inaugurantur, Our bodies must be here entitled unto the Resurrection of
glory, by the Resurrection of Grace.

Nature exposes us all dead, dead in the uncircumcision of the flesh, dead in
the dead works of the flesh; Man, who had not known sin, should have felt
no power of death in his Body, by sin contracted a death even of his soul,
for as the soul is the life of the body, so is grace the life of the Soul;
As then when the soul departs the body dies, so Grace having abandoned the
soul, the spirit it self is dead. And how many do we discern every where,
in whom the tokens of this death are sensibly apparent, men dead in themselves,
only Satan moves in them, Satan walks in them, so that they move but like
prodigies, like the bodies of those which Satan is said to make use of for the
atcheiving of his wicked illusions. St. Aug: observes three sorts of dead
persons whom Christ raised up unto life, representing three distinct sorts of
his spiritual death: first the daughter of the Ruler of the Synagogue, which
was dead in the house, resembling those that are dead-hearted, senseless of
the impressions of life and grace, such as sit as dead in these Assemblies, as
if we were preaching at their funerals.

Secondly, The young man which was carried out of the Gates of Natin, resembling
those whose hearts and hands are engaged in the outward practice of the dead
works of the flesh

Thirdly, Lazarus that had layen long putryfying in the grave representing
those that have layen from the very womb, overwhelmed with the body of death
and over-set with a cloud of ignorance, and insensiblenes so many dead in all
these conditions and degrees do we observe every where that we have reason to
wish as Jeremy did: oh that our eyes were as Rivers of water, that we might
weep for the dead, for the slain of our people, now then oh wretched men that
we are, who shall deliver us from the body of this death? If we be raised, we
must be raised by the voice, and virtue of the same Christ which raised up
these he that in the Gospel bad the young man, arise, must by his Gospel bid the
new man arise in us. As we are su^moned unto the second Resurrection, by the
voice of an Archangel, so are we here unto this, by the voice of the Angel of
the covenant, in the mouths of the angels of the churches, the ministers. and
here both that voice which sounded from mount Sinai, and that which sounded
from mount Sion, have their part in the action. The law startleth, the Gospel
awaketh and quickneth us. Christ sent the law by his servant, as Elisha sent
his staff, by which yet the dead child was not raised up till Elisha himself
came in person. The terrors of the law quicken in us so much sense, as may make
us sigh for our restoration, the refreshings of the gospel quicke^ in us so
much light, and life as to make us se and run into the arms of our Restorer The
law seems to remove the stone from the mouth of our hearts, as it was removed
from the mouth of Lazarus Sepulcher; but the voice of Christ in the Gospel
sumoneth us to awake and arise that he may give us light, wherein we may be
enabled to know and follow him, that has visited us, and done so great things
for us and now I would that we had made such an advantage of our Attention, to
that powerful voice, that I might have occasiont (...) after a visible, and
evident Resurrection to loose you, as Lazarus was, from the bonds of the
Grave, or to say with the father of the prodigal, lo these my sons were
dead, but now they live: we were dead says the Apostle, but now we are alive
in Jesus Christ, now we feel the pulse of spiritual life beat in the
Arteries of our faith, which assures us that our life is prepared for us; of
our hope which is resolute that it is preserved for us; of our love, which upon
these well-grounded persuasions, is continually running in a cheerful
prosecution and chase thereof. My beloved though we have (...) earth to our
father and dust to our Sire, yet let us not have (...) dust-creeping souls:
surely our hope is higher then the dust, let our conversation then be as high
as our hope is. Though we be made of the earth, yet we are not made for the
Earth. We may observe, that he that requires the erection of our affections,
does with great jealousy withdraw from us all those ensnarements upon which
they may fasten here below. He is such a Bridegroom, as will not that we
prefer the king before himself; this circle the world, before the compass
of his Arms. All these counterfeit delights, which this empty dust is able to
yield us, they are as of purpose, made either not to relish at all with us, by
reason of their shortness and fleetingnesse, or to distate us by the admixture
of some calamity and Bitterness: for if we will be children in understanding
instead of being children in Innocence, if we will still be sucking here, we
must be used as (...) great babes, we must have the breast be smeared and
sowred, to weane out childish longing from it.

But the withdrawing of any of these earthly things from us, does not so much
withdraw us from the Earth as the calling away of those deare-ones in whose
blood, or love we have any interest, the wives of our youths, the children of
our delight. These are they with whom we rejoiced and they being gone, the
remainder of our life seems bitter unto us, and we think with our selves,
what further use is there of us? or what portion have we left upon the Earth?
we cry like children, that have their delights and rattles taken from them.
And at last as when the nurse makes the child beleev she has laid them in the
Cradle to sleep, the child cries to sleep likewise, that he may be near
them: so we when our dear ones are laid down and composed in their beds of
dust, we are weary of waking any longer, our eyes grow as heavy as our hearts,
we see nothing to rejoice in, or take comfort in; we desire as Jacob, to go
down to the grave to our sons, we desire to sleep by the sides of our
beloved ones, that with them we may awake again, after the likeness of him
who lays us and them unto our rest, and shall raise us again unto our
refreshing.

Thus should ye (Right Honorable) look after this renowned Lady, who is now
composed unto her rest in the Bed of Earth; suspiring and longing after the
same refreshing, the same hope that hope which is now no longer hope with her
but sight and sense, and possession it self. But if you would have your soul
find the same rest with hers, let your soul seek it as she did. If with her
you would find the kingdom of God seek with her the Righteousness thereof.

Let us awhile look into the Grave with which these dear ashes are entrusted,
for in that house (...) as the Septuagint reads that of Eccles: 13. Though the
Grave be the house of death, yet we Septuag.
shall derive from hence, an example of a gracious life, and of such a death as
undoubtedly ushers in a glorious life.

Anciently there were great treasures hid in the Sepulchers of great ones, and
if we look into this we shall find a treasure too, a treasure of rich example
to us all.

As she was derived of a very noble princely extraction, so she ennobled her
self much more by endeavoring to assure her self of her regeneration and
adoption, than by her birth. That was the honor by which she valued her self,
and indeed the true and genuine Honor of you all, Right Honorable. He that
called Abraham father was everlastingly accursed because Luke. 16.
God was not his father. It is a good observation of Philo, upon that of Gen:
6. These are the Generations of Noah, Noah was a just man and walked with God.
etc. Moses, says he, setting down Noah's Genealogy instead of recounting his
Ancestors, reckons his virtues. It were easy for me to name many noble names
like unto these, to prove that nobility by which she esteemed her self
principally honored. She had a mind of a most excellent co^posure, of a noble
and generous height, but attempered with an admirable sweetness, and humility,
so that I may affirm, that she made use of the greatness of her Spirit in
nothing so much, as either in the magnanimous contempt of unworthy injuries,
(for some such were aimed at her though none could fasten, her virtue had so
Oyled her name, that no Ink would stick upon it) or else in the patient
tollerating of worldly occurrences, and afflictions, and of them she made this
happy advantage that as a thread besmeared with any filth, must be drawn
through some narrow hole for the clearing of it, so the pressure of some
afflictions seemed to clear her from many corruptions, through which nature,
and custom, and fashion and greatness, do yet draw the lines of others lives.

Her understanding was of great perspicacity, and as she failed not to employ
the same for the comprehending of such occasions and affairs, as might
advantage and sustain the estate of her house, and procure and reinforce the
content and comfort of her noble Lord: So principally she directed the strength
thereof for the enabling her self with the knowledge of the mysteries of
Redemption, her delight was in the law of God, she was an unwearied reader of
the Oracles of Gods sacred word, she that aimed at a living again though she
must die, sought not the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, which made us
all obnoxious to die, but the Tree of the knowledge of God, which is (...) the
Tree of life it self, as Thala^ius calls it in Biblioth. Patrum. And as she
had the knowledge of truth to give light unto her Religion, so she had the
truth of Religion, to give life unto her knowledge. I make no doubt but the
State thereof has been much advanced, by her instruction and encouragement in
this house, which has been long honored, for honoring of God. It has
pleased her Lord more then once to make profession, not only what refreshing
her comforts, what support her Counsels have brought him, but now much he has
in the estate of the mind been bettered by her.

I am persuaded, they have been (...) yoke-fellowes in this work, and I trust
they shall be hereafter (...) fellow heirs of one and the same Grace. From him,
and her self, she made a diffusion of her goodness to all hers, educating
them in such purity, and inocency, as is admirable, in those, who (I know not
how) are liable to be betraved by their Birthes and fortunes unto great
depravations, and exorbitancies, so that we may say of her as Greg: Naz: said
of his Sister Gorgonia, (...). Nazian.


She made the fruit of her Body, to become the fruit of the spirit. And of
the same goodness there was a proportionable diffusion amongst those that
depended on her. How many that lived near her, has the Elixar of the same
goodness, rendered of the same quality, and property? her charity and
Courtesy was large and open unto all. I name these as strictures of that fire
of zeal, which she had to goodness. She was not like those which esteem
themselves only members, and others but (...) apostems congenite and
connaturall parts with themselves, her zeal was far from being (...) a
bitter zeal, such as we see in some, like a salt-light, which burns indeed
but spits withal; while she had health she made advantage thereof thus to
demean her self, not deferring the taking up of good purposes (...) etc.
Greg: Naz: till the artlesse Physician takes upon him to Greg: Naz:
dispense what hours of life and continance he pleases unto us, weighing us
out either sickness or health with his severe-rod, and commonly discoursing
and concluding of the disease that brought death, after death it self. But the
greatest part of her life was a Parasceue, a preparation to her dissolution, as
if she had been sensible, that as Christ dyed upon the parasceue, the day of
preparation; so none have any advantage by the death of Christ, but those which
premit such a preparation before their own death, and dissolution. Is it not
admirable that she who had run through some hard lessons, in the School of
affliction, loved the rod so, for the healing, and sanctifying benefit, which
she found in it, that it was her frequent prayer, that God would be pleased
when he called her hence, he would be pleased to call her by a consumption,
rather then by any other way. And accordingly it was so: she conceived, that
many had been shaken with the whirlwinde of a convulsion, and perhaps the Lord
God was not in that wind: many consumed with the fire of adustion and choler,
and perhaps the Lord God was not in that fire: but whereas many have been
summoned away by the still soft voice of consumption, the Lord God is
frequently in that voice. And certainly the Lord supported her, the Lord
perfected his strength in her weakness, for she sustained that affliction with
such admirable moderation, with such strength and vigor of spirit that if any
man had entered her Chamber, if he had not read the truth of her sufferings in
the decays and weakness of her person, he would have thought there had been
none sick there; whatsoever she suffered, there was nothing in her mouth, but
thanks to that gracious hand which lay so light upon her, and made her suffer
no more.

As before, so in her sickness especially, it was her uncessant practice, to
commend her self continually unto God, and that in the most conceived, and
feeling forms in (...), Words winged with affection, and zeal not like those
Estriches wings wherewith our sluggish devotions are usually fledged, which as
the estriches make a fair offer at flying toward heaven, but are held down by
the grossnes of their bodies, so howsoever we seem to soar, yet are we
restrained by our carnal heaviness. But her words were winged so, as to
carry her spirit there where her hope was, far above the reach of Satan,
though he be planted high too, as high as a Prince of the air So that no
marvel if her spirit during her last affliction, were in such a composed
settlednesse, it was out of the enemies reach. She was not in the air liable
to be shaken with Tempests, and winds, but even in heaven it self, which
cannot be turmoyled with any such agitations. She used (...) to seal up her
bosom against temptation by continual prayer, so that Satan durst not attempt
her, seeing what impression seeing whose Image, and superscription, she bore;
Hence was that often comfortable profession, how firm and steadfast she found
her faith! yet she was jealous of her self because she seemed to find no
greater measure of sorrow in her self when she looked back from her future
to her former life: Put she ever used to accuse her want of sorrow with such a
measure of sorrow, as well witnessed the truth thereof. For this respect she
did with exceeding diligence search, and with great Judgment choose,
whatsoever the Scripture could afford her for the establishing of her Spirit,
and the building up of her assurance in the Lord Jesus, committing with her
own hand, even in ^^at weakenes^e, to writing what she had observed, and
contin^ing that pr^ctise till within very few days before her death, before
which she became most peaceably settled, and r^solved, that God according to
that of Greg: Naz: (...) Greg: Naz:
(...) God desires that our hearts should be pricked, but not stabbed
thorough; And her faith being thus strengthened, and established, by continual
prayer and hearing, and by frequent communicating that Sacrament which Ignatius
calls (...) she preserved it in such strength and vigor, that the day of
Ignatius.
her dissolution, I coming to her, she professed, that whatsoever her
sufferings were, yet she did nothing but claspe her self about her-sweet
Savior. And again the same day, I see Satan hovering over me, but though he
be the Prince of the Air (they are her own words) yet he does but hover like
a bird in the Air not being able to seize upon me, I still feel the
advantage. And thus she passed as she was passing away, in the same calm
behavior that she had ever showed, rendering her self into the Arms of her
redeemer: And she having lived thus, and died thus, now she is dead, shall we
think she does not live; No no! It is not impertinent what I have read in
Spartian of Hadrian. Signa mortis Epus: de char: chap: 27.
haec habuit. Annulus sponte de digito delapsus est, but the Ring of faith as
Bernard calls it, never slipped from her, she took it with her, to be married
for ever in it, unto the Lamb, who has graven her in the palms of his hands,
and has set her as a Scale upon his Arm there to remain for ever. Unto which
honor the Lord with her bring us all that we may so live, and so die, and then
so live for ever, without dying any more

Amen.
FINIS.
PErlegi hanc concionem funebrem in Cap. 11. St. Ioha 1. ver. 25. in qua nihil
reperio bonis moribus, aut sauae doctrinae contrarium quo minus cumutilitate
publica imprimatur; ita tamen, ut si non intra tres menses proxime sequentes
typis mandetur, haec licentia sit omnino irrita.

Pride: Calend. Iunii. 1635 Guil: Bray.


