THE NECESSITY AND ANTIQVITIE OF CATECHIZING.

BY I. F.

PRO, Cap. 22. Ver. 6. Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when
he is old, he will not depart from it.

LONDON, Imprinted for R. M. 1617.

DEI VERITAS FILIA

VERBVM DEI



OF THE NECESSITY AND Antiquity of Catechizing.
Question I.
WHat is a Catechism.

Answer.

It is an instruction in the Principles of true religien, which the superior
teaches the inferior.

Questeon 2.
Whether is catechizing necessary.

Answer.

Yea, for these two reasons. First, because otherwise no man could cyther know
or worship GOD aright: Secondly, because it is Gods ordinance,

as hereafter it shall appear.

Question 3.
Of what antiquity is the doctrine and practice of catechizing?

Answer.

It is of great antiquity, as it may appear by a briete and orderly narration
thereof in these three distinct times.

First, from the creation of the world unto the days of Moses.

Secondly, from Moses to Christ.

Thirdly, from Christ to this present.

The first time.
Question 4.
WAs it practiced from the Creation to Moses?

Answer.

Yea.

First, God instructed Adam.

Secondly, Adam and the religious Patriatres in the Church instructed their
potterity from age to age.

Question 5.
Did God instruct Adam?

Answer.

Yea, both before, and after his fall.

Question 6.
Show that God instructed Adam before his fall.

Answer.

This may be the men two days.

First, by reason.

Secondly, by the particular instructions which he gave to Adam.

Question 7.
By what reason can you show that God instructed Adam before his fall.

Answer.

By these two.

First, as no man knows the things of man, save the spirit of man which is
in him: even so the things of God knows no man, but the spirit of God, 1.
Cor. 2.11. and therefore if God had not instructed Adam he could not have known
nor done the will of God.

Secondly, where no Law is, there is no transgrassion, Romans 4.15.

Therefore if God had not instructed Adam, and given him laws, he could not
have sinned; for sin is nothing el^^ but the transgression of the Law, 1.
John. 2.4.

Question 8.
What then be the particular instructions which God gave to Adam before his
fall?

Answer.

They are diverse, and namely, these five.

First, that mankind should be multiplied in the holy estate of marriage,
Matthew. 9.5.
Genesis 2.24. therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall
cleave to his wife, and they shall be one flesh, and all other multiplication of
mankind out of the holy estate of marriage, is ordinarily accompanied with some
judgment of God.

Secondly, that he should have authority and dominion over the fishes of the
Sea, and over the souls of the heaven, and over every beat that moves upon
the earth. Genesis 1.28.

Thirdly, that his meat should be the herbs of the earth, and the fruit of
the trees, Genesis 1.29. for man lineth not by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God, Matthew. 4.4.

Fourthly, that he should not live i^ely, but dress and keep the garden of
Eden. Genesis 2.15.

Fifthly, that he should not eat of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of god
and evil, upon pain of death. Genesis 2.17. for in the day thou eatest thereof,
thou shall surely dye.

Question 9.
Show me now also what instructions God gave to Adam after his fall.

Answer.

God gave Adam these five instructions after his fall.

First, he instructed Adam in the mystery of redemption, Genesis 3.15. when God
speaking to that old Serpent (called the Devil and Satan. Apoc. 12.9.) says
thus. I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and
her seed, it shall break thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel: when he
says, it shall break thy head, his means the seed of the woman, that is,
Christ, the seed of the Virgin Mary, who at his first coming conqueted
Satan, and delivered the faithful out of his thraldom. Hebrews 2.14. For as
much then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself
like wise took part of the same, that through deatly he might destroy him that
had the power of death, that is, the Devil, and deliver them, who through
sear of death, wereall their life time subject to bondage.

Secondly, he instructed Adam to offer sacrifices, which were types and
shadows of the sartifice of Christ's body to be offced to make satisfaction to
God for the sins of all the faith full.

Thirdly, he taught Adam that in offering of sacrifices, he must by faith
apprehend Christ, who was shadowed and prefigured in those sacufices, or else
he could not be acceptable to God: whereupon it is written, Heb. 11.4. that by
faith Abell offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice then Cain.

Fourthly, he taught Adam, that those were acceptable to God which beleeuedin
the promised seed of the woman, that is, in Christ, who was to come, and that
those were not acceptable to God which believed not in Christ to come, and so
it was known ever since the fall of Adam that some believed in Christ, and
mere saved, and some did not believe in Christ, and there sore were rejected of
God.

Fifthly, when men began to be multiplied upon the earth, the Lord forbade
the faithful to make marriages with the vnbelauers, as it appears by the
teproofe of such marriages Genesis 6.2. and this is confirmed in the new
Testament, which disagraeth not from the old. 2. Cor. 6.14. Be ye not
unequally yoked together with unbelievers.

Question 10.
Seeing these instructions given to Adam presently after his fall, are
fundamental points of true religion, and the fourth instruction is the effect
of the three former, declare the same more evidently, that it being better
known, may make a deeper impression in our minds.

Answer.

This may be plainly declared four ways.

First, by the examples of Cain and Abel, because Abell by faith was accepted,
Heb. 11.4. and Cain for his infidelity was rejected, 1. John. 3.12. for it was
faith that made Abels work, that is his sacrifice acceptable, Heb. 11.4. and
it was want of faith, that made Kaines work, that is, his sacrifice
unacceptable to God, because without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb.
11.6.

Secondly, the faithful though declining, are called the sons of God, and
the posterity of vnbelecuers, are called the daughters of men. Genes. 6.2.

Thirdly, this difference of believers and unbelievers, was typically shadowed
out in the distinction of clean and unclean beasts, Genesis 7.2. where Noah is
commanded to take into the Arc of every clean beast seven, and of unclean
two. And a plain interpretation hereof we have, Act. 10.15. where the Lord
forbids Peter to count those Gentiles unclean, whose hearts God had
purified by faith, Acts. 15.9.

Fourthly, since the fall of Adam, there was no salvation to any but by faith
in Christ; for all the promises of God are yea and Amen in Christ: 2. Cor.
1.20. and therefore the faithful Patriarchs that lived before and after the
flond, are commended, Heb. 11.5. and the unbelievers of those times are omitted.

Question 11.
You have showed that God instructed Adam both before and after his fall. show
me now that the faithful have instructed their posterity from age to age.

Answer.

This may be showed by an orderly rehearsal of some special faithful persons
from generation to generation.

First, Adam instructed his childri in the mestery of redemption, other wise
they could not have offered sacrifice as they did, Genesis 4.3.

Secondly those patriarchs mentioned, Genesis 5. were Instructors of others, as
the commendation of their faith. Heb. 11.5. may persuade us. And it is
particularly written of Enoch in the Epistle of Jude, ver. 14. and of Noah, 2.
Pet. 2.5. that they mere teachers of others.

Thirdly, Abraham instructed his family: for when Lor was taken and tarried
away captive, he took out of his own family 318. persons, which he had
instructed in religion, and followed after the four kings unto Dan put them to
flight, and brought again Lot, Genesis 14.14. Also the Lord minding to destroy
Sodom revealed his purpose to Abraham, and said thus: Genesis 18.19. For I know
him that he will command his children and his hou should after him, that they
kape the way of the Lord.

Fourthly, the commendation of Lot, 2. Pet 2.7. Witnesses his raligious care
in this point.

Fifthly, Isaak was careful for his sons, that they should be religious, and
was grieved for the profanenes of Esau. Genesis 26.35.

Sixthly, Jacob was religious himself, and therefore careful for the
instruction of his children.

Seventhly, Job living in the days of Iaakob, or near that time, was careful
that his children should fear God, as it appears, in that he offered
satrifice for them whiles they were feasting. Job. 1.5.

Eighthly, and lastly, when the Israelites were trady to depart out of Egypt,
the Lord commanded them, that when their children should ask them why they
keep the Passover yearly, they should teach them the reason thereof. Exodus
12.26.

The second time.
Question 1.
You have showed that instruction in religion was used from the creation to
Moses, show me now the continuance thereof from Moses to Christ.

Answer.

This may be showed two ways: First, by the commandment of God. Secondly, by
the continual practice.

Question 2.
What commandment has God given for instruction of youth?

Answer.

If may suffice to mention two.

The first is written, Deuteronomy. 6 6. All these words which I command thee this
day shall be in thine heart, and thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy
children, and shall talk of them when thou tarriest in thine house, and as
thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.

The second is written, Psalm. 78. v. 5 Heestablished a testimony in Iaacob, and
appointed a law in Israel, which be commaunden out Fathers, that they should
make them known to their children.

Verse 6. That the generation to come might know them, sucn the children which
should be horn, who should arise and declare them to their children. Verse 7.
That they might set their hope in God, art net forget the works of God, but
keep his commandemen's.

Question 3.
Show me also the continual practice.

Answer.

This may be showed by these examples following.

First, Joshua the Captain and governor of Israel says thus, I and mine
house wilserue the Lord, Joshua 24.15. professing both for himself and also
for his Family, that they will serve the Lord, though others decline and fall
a way.

Secondly, King David instructed Solomon his son, as Solomon confesses,
Prou. 4.3. for I was my Fathers Son, tender and dear in the sight of my
mother, when he taught me and said unto me: Let thine heart hold fast my
words, koope my commandments, and thou shall live, etc.

Also David provided that his children were instructed by others besides
himself, for it is thus written, 1 Chr. 37.32. Iehiel the son of Hachmony
mas with the Kings sons.

Thirdly, Queen Bathsheba the mother of Solomon, admonished her son of three
things, as Solomon himself confesses, Prou. 32.2.

First, that he should not give his strength to women, ver. 3.

Secondly, that he should not giu^ himself to drink wine, ver. 4.

Thirdly, that he should defend the afflicted, and the poor, ver. 8.

Fourthly, Solomon instructed his children, as it appears, Prou, 4. verse. 1:
Hear ye children the instruction of a Father, and attend to know
understanding, ver. 2. for I give you good doctrine, forsake you not my Law.

Ver. 10. Hear D my Son, and receive my sayings, and the years of thy life
shall be many.

Ver. 11. I have taught thee in the way of wisdom, I have led thee in right
paths, etc.

Fifthly, Obadiah the Governor of Ababs house, says thus to Eliah: 1. King.
18.12. But I thy servant fear the Lord from my youth, whereby it is evident,
that he was instructed in his younger years.

Sixthly, Josephus in his fourth ^ooke, and eight Chapter of antiquity and his
second book against Appion, that the children of the Jews could ^nswere as
readily to every point of ^he Law, as to their own names.

The third time.
Question 1.
YOu have shewde the continual practice of catechizing or instructing of the
younger sort from the creation to Moses, and from Moses to Christ, show me now
the continuance thereof under the Gospel from Christ to this present day.

Answer.

This may be showed three ways

First, by reasons grounded upper Scripture.

Secondly, by the commandment of God.

Thirdly, by some examples.

Question 2.
What be the reasons which prove the continuance thereof under the Gospel.

Answer.

They are fine.

First, the three reasons renderen Psalm, 78. Why youth should be instructed
under the Law, hold also under the Gospel.

First, that the generations to come might know the commandments of God, Psalm.
78.6.

Secondly, that the generations to come might declare the same to their
children, Psalm. 78.6.

Thirdly, that all generations to come might set their hope on God. Ps. 78, 7.

Secondly, the instruction of youth is part of the moral law, even of the fifth
commandment, and therefore continues under the Gospel.

Thirdly, the covenant betweena God and his Church (which is perpetual, Esai
54.10. Ierem. 32.32, and 33.20.) cannot continue, except youth be instructed.

Fourthly, the doctrine of Baptism is continued under the Gospel, and
therefore the instruction of youth is continued.

Fifthly, there is under the Gospel as well milk, that is, the first principles
of religion, given to young Christians as stronger meat to the elder sor^^
according to the Apostles speech an^ practice, Heb. 5.15. 2. Pet. 2.2.
1. Cor. 3.2. I have fed yo^ with milk, and not with strong meat, for you
were not hitherto a^^ to be are it.

Question 3.
What commandment then ha^ God given in the new Testament?

Answer.

Two commandments specially.

The frist is Eph^s. 6.4. And ye fathers prenoke not your children (...)
wrath, but bring them up in the instruction, and information of the Lord.

The second is, Galat. 6.6. Let him that is taught in the word, communicate to
him that teaches in all goo^ things.

Question 4.
What examples can you allege

Answer.

These.

First, John the Baptist preache^ repentance, Matthew. 3.2. and fait^ in Christ,
Acts. 29.4. and als^ baptized young Christians, Matthew. 3.6.

Secondly, Christ preached the same doctrine, saying Mark. 1.15. Repent and
believe the Gospel. Also he baptized. John 3.22. By his Disciples, John 4.2.

Thirdly the twelve Apostles were commanded to preach the same Doctrine,
Matthew. 10.7.

Fourthly, the seventy Disciples were also commanded to preach the same
Doctrine Luk: 10.9.

Fifthly, Peter preached the same doctrine and baptized, Act. 2.3.8.

Sixthly, Philip preached to the Samaritans, and baptized them. Act. 8. verse.
5.12. Also her instructed and baptized the Eunuch, Act. 8.26.

Seventhly, Paul at Philippi converted and baptized both Lydia, Act. 26.14. And
also the Keeper of ye prison, Act. 16.30. And at Corinthus, he baptized
Crispus and Cains: 2. Cor. 1.14. and the household of Stephanus, 1. Cor. 1.16.

Eighthly, Timotheus was caterhized by his mother Eunice, and by Lois his
Grandmother, 1. Tim. 2.5.

Ninthly, the principal heads of the Christian Catechizing, set down Heb.
6.2. Witness the pr^ctise of catechizing in all churches, and may serve in
stead of all examples.

FINIS.

