THE HONEST MAN: OR, The Art to please in Court.

Written in French by Sieur Faret.

Translated into English by E. G.

LONDON: ^ted by THOMAS HARPER, (...) for Edward Blount. 1632.

TO THE RIGHT Noble, Honored, and learned Gentleman, Richard Hubert, Esquire,
Groom Porter to his Majesty.
Sir,
ALL Seamen in their courses must ne^^ssarily sail by their Cards; But in this
Art and Sea of the Court, and Honest Man, there prescribed; I never so much as
dreamt to present them as binding rules, to your truly liberal and knowing
Virtues; Your own honored bosom being died in grain of that generous honesty
that comprehe^ds all rules and laws in it self that direct and manage you,
and show you running, like an unbyast Boule, through all fashions and factions;
to make way only for the best, and example them: To make gamefull recreation,
only help spirit, and continue health; clearing it of all the avarice and gall
in Gamesters. To make humane and discreet bounty help comfort virtue, not
rendering her the drudg, and slave of Policy* Those Natures being the banes and
monsters among humanes, the Hydraes that poison and drown humane goodness;
whose contraries made a shame with your ^eet disposition; may be hoped in time
to (...) dishabited and ^andoned. And t^en will the Court ^uance virtue by
^ample; and her ^uthority inflict pu^shment only upon ^ce; no good seeing done
by power; but what by hearty and knowing will, is first naturally suggested and
taught. A Cour^ so humane, would make a whole kingdom such a Court* agreeing
like a Center, and his Circle. Ambitious lines drawn there by great men, would
be as righteous as round and all earthly happiness accounted to consist in
quiet; even the quiet of free and equally plente^^s peace. Till which come,
like the Rain^ow, be all your Court-actions still ^ee as the Sun, and ^^em
quiet with their ^^rcularly swift free^es. Commanding ever

Your poor and loving Obseruant, Edw. Grimeston.

The Contents of this Book.
A description of the Court page 1 THe King, Princes, and great men page 3
^eane men 4 ^ortune and the vices which follow her 5 ^ecessity of Counsel 7
^he subject of this Discourse 9 ^f precepts, their profit and weakness 10
Of the Birth 11 ^f the advantages of Nobility 13 ^f the happiness of the
Birth 18 ^f the profession of a Gentleman 23 ^e ought to be an honest man 25 ^e
must be curious of his honor 27 Of quarrels 29 Against quarrellers ib. Of the
knowledge of quarrels 30 Against vanity 33
Of the disposition of the body 38 Of exercises 39 Of games of Hazard 44
Against gamesters ibid. Covetous men 46 Idle persons ibid. Desperate men 47 Of
the natural grace 49 Of affectation and negligence 52 Of affected negligence
56 Against the affectation of beauty 58
Of the qualities of the mind 62 That virtue is more lovely, and vi^ more
odious in great men then i^ others 6^ Of the advantages of virtue 6^ Of the
means in general to attain to virtue 67 ^f learning and the contempt which
Gentlemen make of it 68 ^f the excellency of Learning, and how (...) fitting it
is chiefly for Gentlemen 71 that opinion we have of learning 74 ^f the Sciences
which an honest man should learn 75 ^f the questions of Philosophy 76 ^f the
Mathematiques 77 ^f house Government 79 ^f the choice of Histories 80 ^f the
Politiques and History ibid. ^udgment of the best Historians 81 ^f other
Historians in general 90 ^f experience and judgment 91 ^f writing well in
prose 97 ^f Poesy 98 ^f Painting and Music 100
Of the Ornaments of the soul 102 ^f religion and faith ibid. Against
Atheists. 104 Of other virtues in general 106 Of the fear of God ibid.
Of a Courtiers life 109 Of servitude 110 Of Toiles 111 Of disquietnesse 112 Of
ambition ibid. Of fear and hope 113 Of the cares of ambitious men 114 Of the
tranquillity of wise men 115 A good man may live in the corruption of the Court
without blemish 116 Of the end a good man should propound to himself in Court
118 Of action and idleness 128 That every good man is bound to follow the
Court. 133 Of the entry into the Court 135 Of the choice of a friend 136 Of
estimation, and how it is gotten 138 ^f the means to purchase friends 141
Against dissembling 143
A division of life into actions and words 145 ^f actions of valor and the
conduct of courage 148 ^f modesty in speaking of himself, freedom in
commending others 150 Of good offices 152 ^f liberality 155 ^he covetous man
157 The Prodigal 158 Of Presents 160 Of other actions in general 164 Of words
which make the second part of the division of life 166 That judgment serves for
a guide 168
Of the entertainment of the Prince 169 Of the first entrance of an honest man
to the King, and how it should be made 170 Of silence and words near the King
175 He must observe the Princes inclination 176 The Prince a warrier 177 A
peaceful Prince 178 The Prince that loves learning and exercises 179 That he
must be careful not to displease the Prince 180 Of respects and impudency 183
Important precepts for the entertainment of Princes 184 Of the submission that
must be used in councelling great Princes 186 Of obsequiousness to Princes
189 Against flatterers 190 The misfortunes which grow by flattery ibid. What is
to be observed in begging from his Master 193 ^ee must not be importune at
his Princes pleasures 195
^f the conversation of equals 197 ^f errors committed in the conversation of
friends. 199 ^isfortunes that follow counterfeit friends 203 ^f estimation, and
the means to get it 206 ^dicious spirits have less luster then they which
abound in imagination and memory 208 ^he difference which they conceive of
intellectual things, and those which fall under the exteriall senses 210 ^f
opinion, her blindness and tyranny 213 ^n example to prove the force of
opinion 215 Another example upon the same subject 22^ The third example upon
the same subject 22^ The Authors excuse upon the (...) last examples 23^
Of the conversation of great men 23^ Of the courtesy of great men in (...)
Court, and what esteem they make of good men 23^ Of honest respects, and those
which are importune 237 Against the obstinate makers of complements 239 Of the
equality of humors 243 Of the knowledge of honest and sham^full customs 24^ Of
the advantages to be known o^ great men 249
General maxims of conversation 251 (...) must vanquish his passions and
^bdue his humors 252 ^he obstinacy of the mind 256 ^pleasing 259 ^n honest man
knows how to live with fantastique and violent humors 260 ^th mild and cold
humors 262 ^th amorous humors 263 (...) principal precept of pleasing 267
(...) the liberty which is found among honest men. 268 against great talkers
270 (...) the difficulty of keeping silence 271 (...) the discommodity of great
talkers 274 ^dinary impertinences of great talkers 276 Ordinary vices of great
talkers 28^ Of the difficulty which men have (...) keep the secrets which are
committed unto them. 28^ An example upon this subject 283
Of commendation of honest men. 289 Of their wisdom 291 Of the government of
their tongues 292 Of their facility to do good 293 Of the mildness of their
spirits 296 Of their manner of exposing what they know. 298 Of their modesty to
judge and speak of themselves 299 Of their integrity 302 Against liars and
perjured persons 303
Of Jesting 308 That honest jesting gives life to conversation 309 That wilful
jesting is dangerous 312
Of pleasant words 315 (...) the excellency of pleasant words 316 (...) those
things which he must observe 319 That he must avoid jesting 320 That he must
never jest upon miserable men, nor wicked persons 322 Nor honest men 324 Nor
Officers ibid. Nor great men 325 Nor himself 326 Nor his friends 327 Nor
honest women ibid. ^incipall rules of pleasant speeches 328
(...) the difference of ages, manners, and conditions which must be observed
330 ^w an honest man should carry himself amidst these different conditions
33^ The last precept in the conversation of equals 33^
Of conversation with women 338 Description of a Circle 340 The Queen and
Princesses 341 The Ladies 343 Maids of honor 344 Of the conversation of the
Louver, and of its discommodity 345 Of the choice must be made in the City 347
Of small precepts 348 Of the exterior presence 349 Of apparel 351 Of the
manner of the fashion of apparel, and of the suting of it 353 Of the
apparrelling of men 357
Of action which is the soul of words 360 (...) the accent of the voice 361
that they must respect women 364 (...) pleasing among women 365 ^easons why
they should honor women. 368 that the virtue of women is equal to that of
men. 370 ^ow necessary women are in Court 375 ^f the services that are to be
done to women 377 that the most chaste are many times most subject to slanders
379 ^ice is odious in the conversation of women 383 ^f slanderers ibid. ^f
blasphemers 384 ^he obstinate and dull 385 ^he proud ibid. That judgment gives
order to (...) conduct of life 39^ Diverse aduertisements upon the design of
this Treaty 39^

Errata. Emendata. Page 82 line 13 no not P. 104 l. 7 it it it is P. 125 l. 5
belly belie P. 141 l. 11 sitting fitting P. 143 marg. quality equality P. 247
l. 13 he same the same

THE HONEST MAN: OR, The Art to please in Court.
A Table of the Court.
IF Ambition does not raise the whole ^ame of Princes Courts, yet at the least
we may say that she puffes them up to that boundless growth, as many times it
makes even Sovereigns to hate their own glory, and the pomp which does
enuiron them, proves insupportable unto them. The natural desire which all men
have to attain unto honor and riches, ingageth them insensibly in this goodly
confusion, and there are few found which (...) wise enough to avoid (...)
surprizall of this ^asing disease, amidst many objects which (...) procure it.
The King, Princes and great men.
Princes (...) great men are about ^ing like goodly stars, ^ich receive all
their ^t from him, but it is (...) confounded in this ^at light; and al^ough
their brightness ^th not appear but ^hen they are remote ^m him, yet it is
never ^rious, nor full of ^tre, but when as this first fountain of glo^ poures
forth it self upon them and distribute^ unto them certain beams of his
magnif^cence. The greatest pa^ of the meaner sort consume themselves nea^ this
fire, Mean men.
before they ca^ be warm, and fortune who takes delight to display upon this
Theater the most remarkable tricks of her malice and lightness, makes a sport
at the ruin of a thousand ambitious men, to raise one to the top of (...)
precipice, Fortune and the vices which follow her
which she ^pares in a manner (...) all those which suf^ themselves to be
^nded with her favors. ^uy, Avarice, and Am^ion, which always ^end her, reign
par^ularly with her about ^ngs, whither they ^aw an infinite number (...)
mercenary spirits, whom the disorder of ^satiable covetousness, ^ill not suffer
to con^in themselves in a life full of sweetness an^ tranquillity, to ca^
themselves into the t^mults wherewith gre^ Courts (like unto gre^ Seas) are
continual tossed. There these fur^ sow hatred and disco^ amongst those that a^
nearest allied; they practice treason of all side^ and make the seeds (...)
baseness and cowardiz^ to spring up, even i^ those souls which naturally have
impression of generosity. They in ^re so many ruinous ^signes which arm ^en
one against ano^er, and make most ^rishing Monarchies ^esolate, and in the end
^ouble the whole frame ^f humane society, and ^iolate the most sacred ^awes
which are observed in the world. Amidst these pernicious dangers which they
procure, in my opinion, such as follow them, cannot be too well advised,
Necessi^ of couns^
to preserve himself from the misfortunes which do accompany them: and there
is not any man settled in so firm a station, whom the authority of those that
are more powerful, or the envy of his equals, or the malice of those which are
under him, may not pull down from the top of his greatest prosperities.

The Subject of this Discourse.
IT is my design to represent in this Discourse, as in a little table, the
most necessary qualities, be it of mind or body, which he ought to have,
that desires to make himself pleasing in Court. But to imagine that my advice
can raise him above Fortunes wheel, so as others which have the like proiects
may not stay him in climing, Of Pre^eps, their ^rofit and ^eaknesse
or pull him down when he shall be mounted; it is a proposition too ridiculous
to fall into my reasonable sense. Precepts serve but as a guide, and execute
nothing of themselves, they facilitate the beginning and progress of those
things which you undertake, but they have not the power to finish any thing;
and there is nothing but the happy birth, which with these foreign aides,
raise a man unto the height of that perfection, whereof we have but a gross
Idea.

Of the Birth.
IN the mean time, not to trouble the order which I have propounded unto my
self, to abridge as much as possibly I may, the infinite number of things
which may be written upon this subject; I will first of all say, that I hold
it most necessary, that he which will enter into this great commerce of the
world, should be borne a Gentleman, and of a house of some good note. Yet I
will not banish all those to whom Nature has denied this privilege. Virtue
has no affected condition, and the examples are frequent enough, of those
which from a base birth, have raised themselves to heroique actions, and to
eminent greatness. Of the advantage of Nobility.
Yet we must confess, that they which are well borne, have most commonly, good
inclinations, which the others have but rarely, and it seems they come unto
these men naturally, but are encountered in the others but by chance. There
flows with the blood, certain seeds of good and evil, which spring up with
time in our souls, and produce in us good or bad qualities, which cause us to
be beloved, or make us odious unto the whole world. They whose Ancestors have
made themselves famous by their memorable exploits, find themselves in some
sort engaged to follow the course which is laid open unto them: And Nobility,
which; as a goodly lamp, gives light to all their actions, excites them to
virtue by these domestique examples or retires them from vice by the fear of
infamy. And, doubtless, as they which are borne among the multitude, do not
think themselves bound to exceed those from whom they are extracted; In like
sort a man of a good family will hold himself worthy of blame, if at the least
he should not attain unto the same degree of estimation whereunto his
predecessors had mounted. I add hereunto the opinion of an excellent Master in
this Science, who says that a good birth is a most powerful charm to gain
the good conceit of those whom we desire to please: And there is no doubt, but
of two men equally well constituted, which should present themselves in any
assembly, having given no former impression of them, which might make their
worths known; when as they should come to understand, that the one is a
Gentleman, and the other not, this last must employ much time, before he shall
purchase that good opinion which the Gentleman has gotten in a moment by the
only know^edge which they have ^ad of his extraction. Besides these reasons, I
^ay moreover, that the ^reheminencies which ^re tied to Nobility, are ^o great,
as a man of judgment and courage, which should find himself imbarqued with a
favorable wind in Court, without this advantage, might fall daily into a
thousand occasions, which might cause him to blush, and to hold down his head.

Of the happiness of the birth.
It is true that in all sorts of conditions, there are found some, who by a
secret favor of heaven have the happiness to be borne accompanied with so
many gifts o^ the mind and body, as it seems that Nature her self has taken
a delight to frame them with her own hands, and to enrich them with all the
charming graces, and most capable to gain men's affections. In like sort there
are some found so unfortunate, as a man may say they are cast into the world by
force, or that they are not made but to serve for objects of sport and scorn
to other men. As these with all their care and diligence shall hardly make
themselves sufferable: so the others have so great a facility to do well, as
with little labor, and in a manner without thinking of it, they become
excellent in any thing they undertake, and make themselves pleasing to any one
that has eyes to look on them. Betwixt these two extremes, there is found a
mean of those which have not received such ^xtraordinary favors of Nature,
neither have ^hey any remarkable ^mperfections; and these ^ay, with the help
of ^recepts, and their con^inuall care, correct their ^efects; and in the end
^eserue the esteem of those which give it. From ^his esteem, does pre^ently
grow that good ^pinion, which we would have our honest Man should learn to
^et, wheresoever he comes: But to attain to this point, I find that the most
assured means is, to preoccupate the opinions of such, by whom we desire to be
beloved. This is one of the highest mysteries of our Art, which shall be
discovered in its place when as I have represented the principal qualities,
which he should have that pretends to pass for an honest man, before so many
eyes which behold him in Court, and amidst so great a number of refined wits,
from whom the most secret defects cannot be long concealed.

Of the profession of a Gentleman.
IT seems then, that as the good birth is not sufficient, if it be not
fortunate, so neither of them will profit much, if they be not carefully
manured. As there is not any man which does not make choice of some profession
to employ himself: so in my opinion there is not any more fitting nor more
essential for a Gentleman; then that of Arms. He must be active and
earnest, and tie himself unto it as to a thing whereof he ought to make his
ordinary practice. The greatest part of other things which are required in him
are not held necessary, but so far forth as they may serve as an ornament to
this, and may give him some luster, to make him shine with the more grace.
Nobility is chiefly gotten by Arms, and must be preserved by Arms, and opens
a way to great reputation, and so to great honors. It seems then, He ought to
be an honest man.
that the strongest ambition which he can have that wears a sword, is, to be
esteemed a man of courage and hardy, and consequently to be held a man of
government, and good. They which join malice to valor are most commonly
feared and hated, like savage beasts, for that having the power to do evil,
they have also a will: But they whose good courage is accompanied with good
intentions, are beloved of all the world, and respected as tutelary Angels,
whom God entertains amongst us, to oppose them against the oppression of the
wicked.

In the mean time, He must be curious of his honor.
as there is not any man which is not jealous of his reputation, especially in
matters of his profession, how much more ought a Gentleman to be moved, for
that which concerns his Arms, which are the true marks of his Nobility?
Herein he ought to be exact without curiosity: for, as the honesty of a woman
having been once polluted with some blemish, can never be restored to its
first purity, so it is impossible that the reputation of a Soldier having
been once blemished with some base action, can never be well repaird, but
there will remain something to reproach him: Likewise in occasions of honor,
as in great commands at war, it is not lawful to err twice.

But this point is so nice, Of quarrels.
as most young men, either for want of experience, or by too much heat; and
others either for want of judgment, or some capritious humor, lose themselves
by this wretched course. Against quarrels.
Hereby we see daily, that divine laws are profaned, that the authority of
ordinances is violated, and that the clemency of our victorious Monarch is
sometimes forced to yield unto his Justice. The most healthful remedy that I
can find for this mischief, Of the knowledge of quarrels.
which may be termed incurable hereafter (if this cure be not put in the
number of the Kings miracles) is in my opinion to learn the knowledge of
quarrels in time, whereof they have made a kind of Science by their much
refining them. Most part of those which precipi^te themselves into ^his brutish
fury, do it most commonly for ^eare they should not ^oe enough, in the
ignorance and vncertain^y wherein they find themselves, whether they be
obliged to come to this extremity or ^ot: So being ignorant of the degrees of
offen^es which deserve these bloody satisfactions, we see nothing but examples
of extrauagancy and humors in these quarrels, and not one beam of true honor
which is the most precious treasure of Nobility. It is one of the most
insupportable abuses which has crept into our age, to imagine, as they do,
that true and heroique valor does only consist in fighting; as if this virtue
had no exercise, but in the destruction of mankind: It has more eminent
effects, and we may say that extends it self, in a manner, upon all the most
glorious actions of life. I could willingly speak more upon this matter, but
my ^biect calls me back.

I will then say that ^eare unto this excellent part, Against vanity.
there is most commonly found a ^ice which may be ^eld inseparable from those
eminent Qualities, and which do in a manner spoil the good fruit which they
produce. It is that foolish vanity wherewith most men suffer themselves to be
abused, losing the use of reason. This defect is odious, and makes them worthy
of contempt, which otherwise might deserve great commendations, if they had the
patience to attend until they were voluntarily given them, and not pull them
away, or seek to obtain them by force, as they do in a manner daily. Many of
our Valiants would imagine that they were not so, if they did not make a
thousand sower faces, and as many savage and ridiculous counten^nces, to
terrify all the world, by whom these silly men imagine, that they are looked o^
with fear and ad^ration. All their discourses are upon the proceedings of
Encounters, and combats, and he that should cut off in their entertainment, the
terms of assaults and fightings, I believe they would be reduced for their
greatest knowledge, to the complements of the French tongue. Their bragging is
grown to that height of brutishness, as they contemn the company of women,
which is one of the sweetest and most honest recreations of man's life. Dancing,
Music, and other exercises of a Gentleman, seem unto them a kind of
effeminacy, and unless it be to fasten a Petard, or to blow up a Mine, they do
not hold themselves worthily employed. This humor, with all words which have
any ^ncture of pride and sufficiency, ought to be ^uoided, as most dangerous
rocks, whereas the good esteem of a man may suffer shipwreck.

Of the disposition of the body.
WIth all these advantages of a good birth, and of courage, which are required
in any man that will cast himself into the Court; I find that an able body is
most necessary, that he be of a goodly stature, rather mean, then to tall,
rather slender then too far, his limbs well fashioned, strong, supple, active,
and easy to accommodate himself to all sorts of exercises, either of war or
pleasure. Having all these gifts of nature, it does import to employ them, and
not only to learn all that is taught in the Academies and Schools, Of
exercises.
but also all the actions of dexterity which are in use, and fitting for a
Gentleman. Not to be a good horsman, nor to know how to manage Arms, it were
not only a great disadvantage, but also a shameful ignorance, not to know the
essential principles of his profession. Other exercises, although less
necessary, are useful in a thousand occasions, to gain the esteem and
affection of those by whom we desire to be beloved. I do not only exact,
that he be expert in all sorts of managing, as to vault, break a Lance,
run at the Ring, and all the combats at Barriers, Tilt and Turney: These
actions are too apparent, and are too commendable in the world, to be unknown
by him, that will make himself to be looked on with approbation, and deserve
glory and praise. I will also (i^ it may be) that he lear^ to play of the Lute,
an^ Gitterne, and Vial, seeing that our Master and Mistresses are pleased
there with; that he be skillful in Hunting that he be active to Dance, play
at Tennice, to Wrestle, to Leap, to Swim, to Shoot and in all other sports
which are not so simply honest, but they many times prove profitable. The
greatest part of these things ^ing divided, are in ^eth of small moment, but
being all vni^ed together, they make a perfect man, who is not looked on, but
with some kind of admiration, especially when they are beautif^d with the
qualities of the mind, which gives them the last lineaments of perfection. I
could desire als^, that he should not be ignorant of any games at Hazard
which have course amongst great men, Of games of Hazard.
for that thereby he may sometimes grow familiar in their companies provided
notwithstanding, that he be no gamester.

Against Gamsters
We must confess, that of all the vices which are pardoned in honest men, I
see none more pernicious, then this unrestrained heat of Play. They which are
only rich, are not wise if the suffer themselves to be transported with this
passion: There are none but great Princes (whose condition can ^uer be
miserable) which may abandon themselves boldly unto it; yet most commonly with
loss, although they be the Masters of Fortune. Amongst the rest we see few
but covetous men, idle persons, and such as are desperate, that dare engage
themselves in this folly. They Which burnt with a desire of money, Covetous men.
and care not how to employ all means to get it, imagine that there is not any
one more easy then this. Those voluptuous and effeminate souls which know not
how to employ themselves, Idle persons
conceive that there is no any thing more diuerting, then to spend their time
in this base exercise. And they whom Fo^une has reduced (...) that extremity,
Desperate men.
as to (...) to day, as if they should die to morrow, ^ke with reason, to ^ch
that in hazard, ^ich they durst not ^pe for by their indu^. But not to extend
(...) self farther then (...) project will allow (...), it shall suffice to
(...), that this frenzy ^th not only draw an ^fallible ruin of the ^ods of
Fortune, but it tends to the ruin of the mind. The disquietnes and perpetual
waywardness which accompany those which fall into this precipice, are they not
strong reasons to retire any man that has any remainder of judgment? And all
the time and care which a man must employ in this miserable trade, may they not
be numbered amongst the greatest losses, which they can make, which are borne to
gain the ^earts of Kings and Princes?

All the good parts which we have produced, Of the natural grace.
are most considerable in a Gentleman, but the fullness of these things
consists in (...) certain Natural Grace, which in all his exercises, yea, and
in his least actions, must shine like a little Beam of Divinity, which is seen
in all those which are borne to please the world. This point is so high, as it
is above the precepts of Art, and cannot be well taught: All the counsel which
may be given therein, is, that they which have a good judgment, for the conduct
of their carriage, if they find not themselves endued with this great gift of
Nature, seek to repair this defect by the imitation of the most perfect
examples, and of those which have a general approbation. ^ood education is
also (...) great force: for as we have often seen young Lions, to leave their
savage instinct, and to become familiar among men; even (...) it oftentimes
falls ^ut, that men borne of sour disposition, have so vanquished their defects
with extraordinary care, as they have done all things by the force of ^eason,
as pleasingly as others by the sole bounty of their natural dispositions. But
how happy are they which need not any instructions to please; and which have
been, as it were, watered from heaven with this grace, which does ravish the
eyes and hearts of all the world. Of affectation and negligence
In the mean time, to make this thing of so great importance a little more
plain, I conceive that we may say, that as this grace whereof we speak,
extends ge^erally to all his actions, and has an inte^est in his least
discour^es; there is in like sort (...) general rule, which serves, if not to
get it, yet never to stray from (...). That is, to fly, as from a mortal
preci^ice, that wretched and ^mportune affectation, which does blemish and
defile the goodliest things, and to use a ^ertaine negligence, which does hide
all Art, and does witness that he does not any thing but as it were without
thought, and without any kind of constraint. This, in my opinion, is the pure
spring of a good grace: for every man knowing the difficulty they find in
doing excellent things well, they admire those with whom they succeed easily;
As on the other side the greatest and most rare, lose their ^ice, when as there
ap^eares any constraint. (...) effect, the blackest malice whereof envy ^akes
use to ruin the ^putation of those which are in good e^eeme, is to say, that
all their actions are made with a design, and that all their dis^ourses are
premedita^d. And therefore Orators have no greater Art, then to cover it (...)
their Orations, the which being on^ known they lose their credit, and are not
able by their eloquence to persuade even the most simple and ridiculous.

Of affected negligence.
We must also consider upon this subject, that affected negligence, that
apparent contempt, which they use in their least gestures and looks, a^
greater vices then too much care, whereof a^ the fault is to do wel^ beyond
measure, and ^ceed the ordinary li^its. And in truth as ^ey have sometimes
b^amed certain Paint^rs, that their works were too perfect, and that they
would show ^emselues more learned then Nature: The ^e we may say of ma^y, who
striving to ^cell, cast themselves ^eyond perfection, and ^atch but the shadow
^f the good which ^ey pursue with too much heat. Even women; Against the
affectation of beauty.
do they not daily lose that which they seek with so great passion? There are
few seen which desire not to be fair, or at the least to seem so. And
therefore when nature fails them in this point, they fly unto Art to succor
them: Hence grows so many ridiculous cares to make their complexion smooth,
that they may seem young; to settle their looks, to make their eyes plea^ng,
to set their hair (...) order, to make the ^orhead smooth, to pull ^way the
eyebrows, ^o make their counte^ance more pleasing; and finally to repair, if
^hey could, the very li^eaments, which are ^mprinted upon them ^y the hand of
God, as caracters which they cannot deface. Thus we see that this too visible
affectation, and this irregular desire which they have to seem fair, is the
cause why our eyes suffer in looking on them, and show plainly, that this grace
which they study, is a lesson which cannot be learned but by those which seem
they would be ignorant of it. We cannot deny, that a Lady which after she
has adorned her self, could do it so artificially, as they which have beheld
her, were in doubt, ^ether she had only ^eam't to add some^ng, be not more
p^easing then another, ^ho not content to ^ele her self ouer^rthened under the
^mp of her apparel, ^re show her self so ^aistered, as it seems ^ee wears a
Mask ^stead of her counte^ance, and dares not ^ugh for fear she should show
two fa^es. These are the defects of affectation whereby we may easily judge,
how contrary it is to that pleasing simplicity, which shol^ shine in all the
actions both of body and mind.

Of the qualities of the mind.
AS for those of the mind, they are in a manner infinite, and are always
excellent, when as they have virtue for their guide, which as the light of
(...) Sun does make (...) the objects to which (...) does communicate (...)
self, more beauti^ll and glorious. Cert^inly virtue has more ^eet and
powerful ^durements, That virtue is more lovely, and vice more odious in great
men then in others.
when as (...) meets with a man of (...) good fashion and ^uality, then in
ano^er that is counterfeit, and of a base conditi^n. But we must al^o confess,
that if he were the most illustr^ous and goodliest Princ^ in the world, if he
were found to be vicious, and of a bad constitution, the greatness of his
birth could no privilege him, bu^ make him to be generally hated. They Which
will aspire to the conquest of hearts and gain the love of the best, and
soundest part of men, must first get this inestimable treasure, which has
always been held the ^eraigne good of ^se men. Of the advantages of virtue.
We may (...) say with truth, that a^ong all the things which we possess,
^rtue only is not sub^ct to the Empire of ^ortune: All the rest ^pend upon her
ty^nny: Sometimes she ^kes delight to ouer^row Thrones, and (...) trample upon
Scep^ers and Crowns: ^ometimes she makes (...) sport to blemish the luster of
the most flourishing beauties, to ruin riches, and to deceive the best advised
by unexpected accidents. Only virtue is above all her outrages, and the
fullness of her excellency is, that she gives admiration to vice it self, and
does imprint a respect in the hearts of the wicked. In all sorts of conditions
of man's life which we can imagine, virtue ought to be the first object which
he can propound: But she is so essentially the end of all those which desire
to be respected in Court, that although she be not seen but with disguises
and blemishes, yet every man will make the world believe that he inioyes it
purely and without Art. The principal means which serve to attain unto it,
are, Of the means in general to attain to virtue.
in my opinion, good education, diligence and, labor, good custome^ the
conversation (...) good men, a desire^ glory, the example (...) his
predecessors, an^ learning.

Of Learning, and the contempt which Gentlemen make of it.
TO speak with truth, Learning is a great ornament and of inestimable price
whosoever know well how to use it. In the mean time, I know ^ot by what
misfor^une, it seems that our Nobility can never free ^hemselues from the
^lame which foreign Nations have given them for many ages, to contemn so rare
a thing and so befitting their profession. It is certain that the number is
not small in Court, of these ill bred spirits, who by a feeling of brutish
stupidity, cannot imagine that a Gentleman can be learned and a Soldier
together. Yet I will not deny, but that learning does many times encounter with
sottishness and extrauagancy. There are but too many of those, to whom the
Greek and the Latin have served to no other use, but to make them more
impertinent and obstinate, and who, instead of bringing from their studies a
soul full of wisdom and mildness, ^ue been puffed up ^th Chimeraes and ^ide.

Yet we must con^sse, Of the excellency of learning, and how fitting it is
chiefly for Gentlemen.
that when this ^nowledge falls into an exquisite spirit, it ^oth produce such
^onderfull effects, as we may say that such (...) do profess it, have ^me
things above a ^an, and are elevated (...) a condition approa^ing to divinity.
A^oue all it is graceful and most necessary for those which ar^ borne to great
fortunes, and it seem its proper use is to be^ employed in the government of
people, to lead Armies, to practice the friendship of a Prince or foreign
Nation, to negotiate treaties betwixt Kings, and in all other eminent actions
which assure the authority of Sovereigns, and makes estates to flourish. Who
does not see on the other side, that she lo^eth her estimation and grace, in
common hands, and that being ^as it is) of a noble essence, it is a shameful
exercise to see it crawle and languish as it does at this day in the Schools
of the University; among the suits and tumults of the Palace, and amidst the
contestations, whereas Physicians exercise themselves upon the lives of men.
What opinion we ought to have of learning.
But do I not exact a perfect knowledge of the Sciences, which the Ancients
called Encyclopaedia, and which certain spirits, sick with too much
curiosity, have foolishly admired, as the Sovereign good of life. I esteem
Books in regard of tne profit which men may draw from them, and I love them as
one of the sweetest and most innocent pleasures that a virtuous man can choose:
But I do not refer so much unto them, as to believe that their instructions
can make us happy or unfortunate, nor that our contentment depends upon the
opinion of those men, which did not always discourse with more reason then
they do at this day. Whatsoever they be^eue, Of the Sciences which an honest
man should learn.
I do not hold it necessary, that he should ^ouble himself with all the
quarrels of Philosophy, which it may be would consume* man's whole age
unprofitably. And he might reap more benefit in studying in the great Book of
the world, then in Aristotle; Of questions of Philosophy.
it is sufficient if he have a reasonable tas^ of the most pleasing questions,
which are sometimes propounded in good company. I desire rather that he should
be passably instructed in many Sciences, then solidly profound in one alone;
seeing that our life is too short to attain vn^ the perfection of the ^ast of
those which ^ey propound unto ^s: And that he which ^n speak but of one ^ing,
is bound many ^mes to hold his peace: ^et him be skillful in ^e Mathematiques,
Of the Mathematiques
^e which is useful ^or a Captain, to for^fie regularly, and to draw plots;
to add substract, multiply, and divide, to make the practice easy, to frame
Batalions; let them learn the upper and lower Sphere, and make his ear
capable to judge of the delicacy of the tunes of Music: It does not much
import, that he should pierce into the secrets of Geometry, and the subtilties
of Algebre, nor suffer himself to be ravished with the wonders of Astrology.
As for the government of a family, Of house government.
it is sooner learned by use then by rea^g, and if the Court ^th furnish a
thou^nd examples of pro^sion, it has also man others of good hus^ndry. Of the
Politiques and History.
The Politics and Morals are his true ^iences, and History (which has been
always termed the stu^ of Kings) is not ^uch less necessary for those which
follow them. It is, doubtless the pure fountain o^ civil wisdom. All the
difficulty is to make choice of good Authors, Of the choice of Histories.
whereof the number is not infinite: I wi^ make no difficulty to extend my self
somewhat freely in naming the best, for that I know most of our Gentlemen apply
not themselves unto it, for want of knowledge of those whose reading may profit
them. Be^ld the judgment which an able Critique gives of some of them, (...)
the which he ads no^ing, but that, which (...) my opinion, he should ^ot have
forgot. A^ong the Grecians, Judgment of the best Historians.
^erodotus, Thucidides, ^enophon, and Polibius, ^re the most esteemed.
Herodotus.
The first has such ^harming graces in his ^anguage, as he gives ^o Fables
the authority ^f a History. The second is grave, abounding in sentences,
Thucidides.
succinct in his style; eloquent in his Orations, and sound in his judgments.
The third is pleasing and faithful and in his works, Xenophon
subjects may learn to obey, and Princes to reign. And for the last, good
Judges hold, that he is not so exact as Thucidides, but he is no less
profitable. His Maxims agree better with ours, Polibius.
he is very sufficient, and when as he ^mes to stray, it is but to instruct
and to make them that read him more capable. Plutarch ^th not properly writt^
a History, Plutarch.
but parts of a History; yet he is worthy to be an ordinary companion to ^ose
which desire to ^ntertaine great men. His judgment is so ^eat, as he casts
forth ^ames able to enligh^en the grossest vnder^tandings, and does open an
easy way (...) guide a man to wi^dome and virtue. Among the Latins, Tacitus.
Tac^tus (according to the opinion of all politicians) holds the first rank,
and one of hi^ admirers preferres his before Titus Liuius, i^ not for
eloquence, ye^ at the least for instructions, which is the pa^ which we now
consider. Who can better comprehend so many things in so few words, then he
has done, and ^midst the thorns of his narration, cause so much grace and
majesty to flourish? what ^ror is there in man^ers which he does not
reprehend? in ^ounsels, which he ^oth not reveal; and (...) causes, which he
^oth not teach? Cer^ainly he is admirable (...) one thing, whereof (...) man
would say he ^euer thought, and ^oth that excellently, which it seems he had
no will to do; for without troubling the order and course of those truths
which he relates, he does not forbear to add precepts, with a dexterity
like unto those, which know how to work Pearls and Diamonds with gold and
silk artificially, so as this Book is not only a History, but a fertile field
of council, and a perfect lesson of wisdom. It is true, that as he is sharp,
piercing, and succinct, so they which read him, must have a quick and
apprehensiue understanding, lest they find that obscurity wherewith some have
taxed them. Salust, without doubt, Salust.
would deprive him of this eminent glory, if we had all that he has written,
but by the little which we have remaining, all that we can say, is to judge
that he had a genius like unto Thucidides. Titus Livius for the greatness and
majesty of the History, Titus Liuius.
for the pureness and copiousnesse of discourses, and for the full eloquence
of Orations, is the first of all. But he is more barren in sentences, and
instructs rather by the multitude of examples, then by the abundance of
judgments. It suffices to say of Caesar, and of Quintus Curtius, Caesar.
that they ought to be familiar companions to a good Captain. The one has
words worthy of his memorable exploits, which have made the whole earth to
tremble, and brought under the yoke the most proud, and indomable liberty that
ever reigned in Commonwealths. And the other might in some sort comfort
Alexander, Quintus Curtius.
for that he lived not in the time of Homer; seeing he has by his writing
revived his glory with so great advantage. After these there are many others
which have appeared from age to age, Of other Historians in general.
and the which we may hold to be very good: But we may likewise say, that
they serve rather to content the curiosity of such as love the diversity of
Histories, then to teach wisdom. Above all things I hold it profitable and
graceful, not to be ignorant of the principal things which have past with us
and with our neighbors in our times, and if it may be, to know the beginning
and continuance of so many Realms estates, and different governments which are
raised upon the ruins of one Empire.

Yet I do not believe that the knowledge of all these things, Of experience and
judgment
is an assured means to attain unto wisdom they serve but as a ligh^ to
those which seek it* Her seat is in the understanding, and no^ in the memory,
and exprience it self (o^ whom they say she is the daughter) proves sometimes
a stepmother, and does precipitate rather then guide her. She brings a
facility to execute speedily, but in doubtful events, whereas examples fail,
she remains confounded without the support of this predominant power of the
soul, to whom alone is reserved the glory of resolving. The number of
occurents which may happen in the life of man is infinite; every day does
produce a multitude, and in the continuance of so many ages past, you shall
find few events so conformable one unto the other, but you may observe some
notable difference.

Moreover you shall hardly find, that many persons which have attained to the
same end, have gone one and the same way: as likewise they which have used the
same means have not always attained to the same end. Delays have sometimes
been the cause of great victories, so have they been the loss of famous
battles. Whosoever is not naturally capable to discern the times, and to
consider of the variety of circumstances in all occasions which are offered,
shall never reap much fruit by his experience, nor by History: And the Laws
themselves teach us, that to judge soundly of occurrents, the example does not
suffice without the rule. I confess, that it is most profitable to have seen
and practiced many things, and to know many accidents which are past: not that
they serve to dispose well of the present, but for that in the different
successes, the understanding is quickened, which does excite and produce in
subtle and piercing spirits, certain seeds of wisdom, which nature had
concealed: so as by the multitude of these examples, we see in the end that
this rule follows, by the means whereof the understanding is made capable to
judge.

Besides the Sciences and History, Of writing well in Prose.
it is so necessary to frame himself to a good style of writing, be it for
serious matters, or for complements; be it for love, or for so many other
subjects, whereof the occasions grow daily in Court, that they which have not
this facility, can never expect any great employments, or having them, they
must attend an vnfortune success. To make verses is an exercise more pleasing
then necessary, Of Poesy
and which by the malice of ignorant men is fallen into contempt, the which
should cover the confusion of our age. In effect, it is a shameful thing to
see that this admirable language, whereof the wise men of antiquity did
believe, that their gods ^ade use in heaven, ^ould without reason ^ee so
disesteemed, as their Altars are not re^erenced. The chief beginning of this
abuse ^rodeeds from so ma^y wretched Poets which profane Poe^ry, in whose
hands it ^oseth its estimation and glory. The number is so small of those which
may worthily attain to such high mysteries, as the best ages could hardly
produce two or three that were excellent in this divine perfection, which
admits no mean. Of Painting and Music.
Painting and Musicque are so inseparably tied unto it, as the one passes for
a silent Poem, and the other for the soul of Poetry. To finish this long
repetition of Arts and Sciences, I say that one of the most particular studies
of a Courtier ought to be the knowledge of Languages: And if he ^ndes the
dead too difficult, and those which are living and in use too many in number,
^et at the least, let him understand and speak French, Italian, and Spanish,
for that they do concur better with ours, and have more course then any
other, both in Europe, and among Infidels.

Of the ornaments of the soul.
WIth these advantages of the body and mind, whereof we have hitherto
discoursed, I desire he should be endued with the true ornaments of the soul,
that is to say, with christian virtue, which comprehend all the moral. The
foundation of all is religion, Of Religion and faith.
which, in my opinion, is no other thing, but a true feeling we have of God,
and a firm belief of the mysteries of our faith. Without this principal
there is no integrity, and without integrity no man can be pleasing, no, not
to the wicked: let us then believe that God is, and that he is an eternal
wisdom, an infinite bounty, and an incomprehensible virtue, whose definition
is not to have any; who has neither beginning no^ ending, and of whom the most
perfect knowledge that we can have is to confess that we cannot know enough.
It is true, that it it a dangerous presumption to speak the truth. But how
abominable is the weakness of that new and proud sect of frantique spirits,
Against Atheists.
who having not submission nor reverence enough to humble their weak and blind
understandings, before this great and immortal Light and finding no proportion
betwixt their gross and ignorant discourses and the wonders of this holy and
first essence, dare exceed so far in their impiety, as to deny ^^thing which
the Birds ^ublish, brute Beasts ^cknowledge, the most ^nse^sible things prove,
^ll nature does confess, and before whom the Angels tremble, and the Devils
ben^ their knees.

Of the other virtues in general.
Upon this great an^ firm support of Religion all the other virtues must be
grounded which after they hau^ made us agreeable unto God, they make us
pleasing unto men, and give us a certain secret satisfaction to our selves, Of
the fear of God.
which makes us to enjoy a solid peace in the midst of the distractions of the
Court It is the fear of God which is the beginning of this true wisdom, which
comprehends all the precepts which Philosophy has given us to live well: It is
this fear which makes us hardy in dangers, which fortifies our ^ope, which
guides our ^esignes, which orders our manners, and makes us to be cherished by
good men, and feared by the wicked. By her we appear good without hypocrisy,
devout without superstition discreet without malice, modest and humble without
baseness and generous without arrogance. Whosoeue^ feels himself furnished
with this treasure and with the qualities which we have represented, and
moreover supported by a good natural understanding, to assure his carriage,
may boldly expose himself in Court, and pretend to be respected with esteem
and approbation.

Of a Courtiers life.
^T is true, that there ^are an infinite number of reasons which might divert
any man that knows the miseries; and it had been better for many to have had
but one unknown virtue, then a life so full of luster and danger. Every man
sees, that the corruption is in a manner general, and that the good which is
done, is without any design, and the evil as it were by profession. Of
servitude.
Servitude is so necessary, as it seems that the liberty which a man reserues
to himself, is an usurpation which he makes upon the Sovereigns authority,
who has for his noblest object the glory to extend his Empire upon the wills as
well as over the lives and fortunes of his subjects. And what can be more
unworthy of the condition of a wise man, then to subject his reason to that of
another, whose (it may be) is dazzled with the splendour of his glory and pomp?
Of toiles.
To this troublesome condition are tied a thousand pains and toiles, which
spring from this furious heat, which they have to testify their affection to
great men, and to give them proof of their perfect servitude: Of disquietnesse
so as they hold themselves the most unfortunate, whose sweatings they spare,
and whose quiet they do not disquiet. If to the toil of the body they did not
add that of the mind, the best part would fail to accomplish his misery,
that is engaged in this kind of life. Of ambition.
Ambition which consumes him, and the insatiable desire of wealth and honor
which torture him, make him to conceive a thousand proiects above his strength.
The body in the end vanquished by weakness and weariness, yields, the spirit
only (to its loss) is infatigable, and whilst the members rest, it afflicts
it self with a thousand cares which devour it. Fear assaults it, and makes
it to sink, Of fear and hope.
and hope supports it and releeues it, to give it in prey to this first fear;
and in this intestine war, are stirred up all the other passions, which
nourish a secret hell in our souls, whose torments cannot be expressed. Of the
cares of ambitious men.
In an instant we must think of the means to preserve that which we enjoy,
to attain to that which we want, to frustrate the attempts of those which
cross us, to surmount hatred and en^y, to keep back such ^s will go before
us, (...) hinder those which ^ollow us, and it seems that every man's health
^oth not so much con^st in his own preser^ation, as in the ruin of others. Of
the tranquillity of wise men.
How much more sweet and calm is the life of wise men, who have peace with
themselves, and know how to entertain it with all the world? These, says
Aristotle, are gods among men; and if it be lawful to speak boldly in words,
we may say, that God is an Eternal Wise Man, and that a wiseman is a god for a
time. A good man may live in the corruption of the Court without blemish.
In the mean time, mauger all these reasons and difficulties, a wise man may
in the midst of vices and corruptions, preserve his virtue pure and without
blemish. There is nothing required but good designs, and although the hell of
the damned be not full but of good intentions, yet that of the Court being
accompanied with lawful and reasonable thoughts, it will have no troubles but
they will be easy to support. Of all the errors of the mind, there is none so
dangerous as not to see the end that is propounded unto us; and commonly they
see, that of the true knowledge, and wise election of a good end, depends the
conduct and success of those things we undertake. Wherefore their most
profitable knowledge that will live in Court, is to understand what may be the
most worthiest subject of so dangerous a commerce.

Of the end a good man should propound to himself in Court.
When as men unite their desires and wills in any one thing, there is great
likelihood that they hope for support and advantage, and those things which they
desire by a common consent are most como^nly such as they believe to be most
noble, most perfect, and most profitable. The consent they bring to obey one
alone, is a sign that they hold this kind of government more excellent then
all others: As in effect the true and lawful power of Sovereigns is nothing
but the tying and uniting of Authority and Justice for the preservation of the
public good. And consequently all they which have subjected themselves to
this power, aspire to approach near unto it, and seek to maintain it with the
hazard of their lives and fortunes. And therefore the good of the Prince is not
separated from that of the State, whereof he is the soul and heart as well as
the head: and the good of private men is not considerable in the general, but
so far forth as it is profitable to the Princes person, from whom alone they
expect all the good and evil which is dispersed in the body of the Monarchy.
This being true, and it being likewise true, that every thing tends to an end,
as to the fullness of its perfection; what more worthy object can a wise
Courtier have, then the honor to serve his Prince well, and to love his
interests more then his own. It is the only mark he should propound unto
himself: All the rest are false and deceitful: and degenerate either into
baseness or malice: and what end soever they shall make choice of, it will not
only be uncertain, but also full of disquietnes and discontents, whereof the
occasions grow hourly by multitudes, ^n this great confusion of men, which
aspire all to one end, which ^s the favor of their Master. The course of
nature and Justice is easy, safe, and inno^ent, and every project which
strayes from the ^ules of Reason, has error for its guide, and punishment does
fol^ow it. Whosoever seeks a good thing contrary ^o his duty, deserves to
encounter a certain evil, or a dangerous good: But the fault is only in him
which indures the pain, and it is not so much the condition and nature of the
Court, which draws these misfortunes after it, as it is a just punishment to
do evil in Court. I know well that the covetous and ambitious will find this
maxim very rigorous, but what law can be both just and pleasing unto them?
Let them only consider (if they have any remainder of virtue and judgment) that
they belly their professions, and betray the Princes desire, who respects no
other thing of them, but that they should love the good of the estate, more
then their own private advantages; and that in doing the contrary, they
overthrow the order of reason, which requires that the interest of private men,
should yield to that of the public. Let them also consider, that Justice and
nature, prefer the preservation of the head and heart, before all the other
members, and that the Prince himself is obliged to this law which they find
so hard, seeing that the health, of his people, ought to be as dear unto him
as that of his person. When as honors and favors are offered them (...) this
kind, they will ^nde them so much ^he more sweet and ^leasing, for that they
^aue sought them and ^otten them by lawful ^eanes: and if they ^nfortunately
fail of ^em, they will bear (...) without murmuring, and comfort themselves,
^nowing that they had ^eserued them, and ^at it was only For^nes fault that
they ^id not enjoy them.

Of action and idleness.
All these great advantages both of min^ and body, which h^therto I have
represented, are in truth of ^ difficult acquisition, and of a painful
practice* But in the course of man's life, the knowledge of things, how perfect
soever it be, i^ but a fruitless treasure* if it be not accompanied with
action and practice. A Gentleman which shall be endue^ with all the gifts
ca^pable to please, and to ^urchase estimation, should make himself ^nworthy
to enjoy them, if instead of ex^osing them to this ^reat light of the Court, ^e
should go and hide them in his village, and communicate them ^nly to rude and
igno^ant people. Action a^one does distinguish ^ower and weakness, and we
cannot observe ^he difference that is ^ound betwixt a great Minister of State,
and a poor wretched Artificer, whilst they are both asleep. Rest in great
men is a crime, and Idleness does make equal the valor of good Captains, and
the wisdom of Philosophers, to the baseness of Cowards, and to the folly of
ignorant men. If virtue were a barren good, and without fruit, she had reason
to seek darkness and solitariness; but seeing she is naturally incli^ed to
engender in over minds a dispositi^n like unto her own, and that her most
wor^y exercise is to communicate her self, who ^an without injustice mother
the seeds in fa^age places, remote from the commerce of men? To make this truth
more apparent, do we not see that those bodies which approach nerest to the
seat of divinity, have the least rest? The heavens, as the nearest to the
fountain of all perfection, move with an infatigable swiftness; the earth on
the other side, as a dull and heavy mass, and which does participate less of
that celestial vigor, remains immovable, and in a manner without action.
Whatsoever any thing has good, it is discerned by action, and this fain^ and
effeminate idleness, which is observed, is ^o other thing but the ^ecessity of a
defective nature. That every good man is bound to follow the Court.
This being ^ue, every man whose ^ondition seems to in^ite him to follow great
men, and who feels ^is soul full of good ^ntentions, is he not ^ound to go
and supply a place, which, it may be, a wicked man will get, whose counsel,
without doubt, would prove pernicious to the whole estate, if he had means to
ge^ the Princes ear open unto him? Here an honest man (whom I do not
distinguish from a good man) must endeavor to be profitable to his country, and
making himself pleasing to all the world, he is bound not to benefit himself
only, but the public in like manner, and particularly his friends, which
shall be all virtuous.

By the purchase of ^^ch friends, Of the entry into Court.
I desire ^^at they which will ^^e pleasing, should ^^ake their first entry
^^to the Court. When (...) any one comes new and unknown, I hold (...) most
necessary, that ^ee stay some time to ^onsider the estate of ^o tempestuous a
sea, before he imbarque ^imselfe, to the end he may have leisure to ^ake his
distances, and ^o make his proiects with discretion and dexterity. Of the
choice of a friend.
The most intricate difficulty which is found at this entry is to know how to
make choice of a friend which is faithful, judicious, and of experience, who
may give us good directions, and let us see, as in a table, the customs which
are observed, the powers which reign, the factions and parties which are in
credit, the men which are esteemed, the women which are honored, the man^ers
and fashions which ^re in course, and ge^erally all the things which cannot be
lear^ed but upon the place. These instructions are ^o much the more necessary,
for that the er^ours which are committed in the beginning, are in a manner
irreparable, and leave an opinion of us, which many times is not forgotten
until we be ready to retire both from the Court an^ world. Of estimation,
and how it is gotten.
The first an^ most profitable lesson which they can practice, is, at their
entrance, to gain the opinion of great men, and honest men, and to strive to
deserve the favor of those women which have the reputation to give estimation
unto men, and to make them pass for such as they please, as there are some
found, that have gotten this prerogative, the solid ^ndation of this opi^n is
virtue and me^ but if it be not a ^pinesse near ap^aching unto a mi^le, we
should many ^es have leisure to ^w old before we ^uld make our worth ^own, if
we were not ^sted by the esteem (...) those that love us, ^o are likewise
them^ues esteemed. Wher^re the assistants of ^s first and faithful friend,
whereof we have spoken, may eas^ly purchase us the favor of many other^
friendship being as it (...) a good which take delight to communicate it self
among virtuous persons, and which like to a burning torch, kindles as many as
they please* So as in this multitude of different judgments and of spirits
busied with such variety of objects, who do not trouble themselves much (...)
examine strictly the ^erit of those which ^esent themselves, we ^ay say, that
they are ^hers which give us ^his esteem, and that ^e only are to preserve
(...). Of the means to purchase friends:
But seeing that these friends are so necessary (...) good, it is fitting they
should know by what means they may be gotten. And not to ^nsist upon the
infinite number of Elogies and Phrases, which all wise men have given to the
noble passion, by t^ which our wills and interests are united, (...) not busying
my (...) with so many pleas^ questions which (...) made upon this subiect^ I
will say in a wor^ that to make himself worthy of love, he must know how (...)
love. This is the (...) and abridgment of (...) the precepts; and (...) this
Science does no^ fall into vulgar spirits so it belongs only to those which
are full of (...) noble generosity, to produce the effects, and to frame a
perfect Idaea. The extreme liberty, ^he just pleasing, the ^ound fidelity, the
true confidence, the facility to oblige, and the fear to displease, are
apparent tokens: But the motion of the heart is the true Judge, and the
sovereign Arbitrator. They which deceive under these shows; Again dissembling.
and have nothing but their vanity, for the object of the good office which
they do, and who dazzle the eye of the credulous wit^ these illusio^s, of
friendship and counterfei^ imbracings, they do^ soon or late disgrace
themselves, and draw upon them a public hatred. Contrariwise, they which love
without art, are most commonly beloved in the like manner, and as i^ is an
effect of virtue to produce her self, so this treasure of friendship
multiplies infinitely when it is in its purity.

A division of life into actions and words.
OUR whole life is employed and consumed in actions and words, let our friends
have always the best; and those which are indifferent will suffice for the
common sort. But upon this division, it is necessary to ground the discourse of
that which remains for him to do, who we conceive has not any other need,
but to preserve the estimation which they have gotten him, which have commended
him in Court. We will come to words, when we have discoursed of effects. Among
the greatest actions, which make ^e life of a Gentleman ^orious, those of va^r
are, without doubt, ^e most eminent and ^ommendable. This ^irtue holds the
first ^^nck in the opinion of ^ur Nobility, and as ^hey are naturally war^ke,
and the exercise ^f Arms being their ^ue and essential pro^ession, so they
have ^mposed upon it so eminent a name, as it ^omprehends all the ^ther
virtues. He must, without doubt, Of actions of valor and the conduct of
courage.
have resolute courage, and firm resolution to dy^ a thousand times rathe^
then to yield to an^ baseness. But if thi^ foundation by not supported by
conduct an^ dexterity, he will hardly purchase that esteem by the means
whereo^ he may win the inclination of those which know how to value merit. He
which find himself in occasions either of a battle, or o^ an assault, or in a
skirmish, or in any other ^ke encounters, must ^unningly seek to se^arate
himself from ^he multitude, and per^orme his great and ^ard exploits in the
^east company that may be, wherewith he ^esires to make his ^ourage famous. Let
^im endeavor above ^ll things, to do well ^n the view of the chief ^f the
Army, and if it ^ay be, in the Kings eye. How many heroique actions, and
worthy of memory have been smothered in the press and multitude of simple
soldiers, and how unfortunate is their valor who have none but mercenary men
for spectatours, who fight less for honor then for booty. Of modesty in
speaking of himself and freedom in
The fullness of this virtue is his modesty, to speak discreetly of his own
actions, and his freedom in highly commending those which have made ^hemselues
worthy. commending others.
Hereby we suppress their envy which oppose themselves against our glory: And
as this manner of proceeding as generous, so the commendations which we give
unto another have this advantage, as they procure us the acclamations and
praises of those whom our deeds have obliged. Let us then bind unto us as many
as we may by good words, and by solid effects. Of good offices.
This is the second part of actions which makes us to be esteemed and
cherished by all the world. They which are officious can never wan^ friends,
and they which want no friends can never fail of good fortune. They are not
regarded but as men borne for good, and they find something defective in their
condition which have not ^he happiness to be ^nowne. It is a sweet
^atisfaction to a mind well bred, never to be wanting to do service where it
is needful, and they are happy which having a will have also the power: To
succor the miserable, to bear a part with the sorrows of an afflicted man,
to assist the weakness of those which are oppressed by an unjust power, to
prevent by our services the prayers of such as have need of our assistance, to
protect the innocent, to second the designs of good men, to reconcile
quarrels, to pacify differences, to smother the bad affairs of the obstinate
and weak, and finally, wholly to employ his mind, authority, and industry,
not to do any thing but what is good: Are not these actions, if not divine,
yet at the least more then humane, especially in an age whereas humanity seems
to be banished out of the world? Whosoever has an inclination to these
things, is, without doubt, affected to liberality. Of Liberality.
This virtue holds a great rank among the principal actions of life, and they
which can, and have a will to practice it, cannot fail to please: Seeing there
are few men (...), but it does tame and win. It must have discretion for a
guide, for otherwise it would degenerate into profusion, and so ruin it self,
and consume the matter which should entertain it. It must be without art or
vanity, but without good government it cannot long subsist. She must know her
own forces, and contain her self in so pure a mediocrity, as neither avarice
nor prodigality may ever blemish ^r: for as Valor tem^rs that heat of courage
which makes dan^rs seem less then ^ey are, and disperseth ^are, which makes
them to seem greater; ^o Liberality brings a moderation betwixt the insatiable
desire of ^etting, and the blind contentment of giving. The covetous man is
pleased to bury his gold ^n his coffers, The covetous man.
and to hide it from the Sun, which does produce it his unmeasured heat to
gather riches cannot be satisfied, and it is like unto fire, which the more
matter it encounters, the more it deuoures. The prodigal man on the other side
poures forth his good^ unprofitably in idle expenses, The Prodigal.
and does not impart it to any, but to vicious persons, and such as are most
riotous: So as the subtle Stoics had reason to compare his riches to ^ose
fruits which grow on precipices, and ^me to be only for (...) use of ravening
^ds, and wild beasts. ^t he that is truly li^rall, knows how to ^ue without
losing ^at which he gives, and ^e unto those goodly ^rings, which never ^ying
up, furnish the ^owers and herbs with much water as shall ^ee needful to
keep ^em fresh and in vigor, so he knows how to employ his bounty upon
honest men, and not to draw the bottom of his liberality dry. He will learn
the art to make his presents in good sort, Of presents.
and to accompany them with judgment, so as nothing shall seem^ little that he
gives. And doubtless, the rareness is many times more co^siderable then the
magnificence: In winter a Nosegay of Roses well preserved, of inestimable price
^o a curious Lady; and ^n the spring, a ripe A^ricock is worthy to be served to
a Queens ^able. Wherefore we must observe the things which may please him
whom we desire to ob^ige; and seeing it is in our choice to give what we
please, let us have a care that the thing which we desire they should receive
from us may last long, to the end that our present may be in some so^
immortal. In this so ungrateful persons an^ forced not to forget them, for
that their memory is often refreshe^ by the objects which their eyes represent
unto them. But above all things, he must have a special care, not to present
any thing that may be unprofitable or unseemly: as to present monsters to a
woman great with child, Looking-glasses to a ^ule creature, Gloves a religious
person, ^ooks to an ignorant ^an, and Arms to a ^hilosopher, who loves nothing
but his books, ^ally not to fail in ^is practice, it does ^waies import to
con^der the rank, the ^ge, the reputation, the ^eanes, and the birth ^f those
to whom we will show our libera^ty.

But not to insist longer to examine al^ the kinds of actions, Of other actions
in general.
i^ shall suffice to say upon this subject, that it is most necessary, that he
which aspires to make himself pleasing in the Cabinets of the Court, and in
all other good assemblies, must accompany all his actions with great
discretion. He must be advised and active in all his doings, and he must not
only be careful to attain unto all the good conditions which have propounded
unto him, but the course and order of his life must be regulated with ^uch a
disposition as ^he whole may be answerable to every part. Let them be equal
in all things, and never contradicting himself; ^et him frame a perfect and
solid body of these goodly qualities, so as ^his least actions, may seem to
be quickened with a spirit of wisdom and virtue. Let him be ready without
rashness, vigilant without disquietnesse, hardy without insolency; let him be
modest without melancholy; respective without fear, let him be pleasing
without flattery, let him be sufficient without intricatenes, and above all let
him be just without dissembling. Of words, which make the second part of the
division of life.


After actions come words, which makes the second part of our division, and are
the greatest and most ordinary co^merce of man's life. Here memory does reign
particularly, for that besides, that this pleasing facility, to express,
depends of her, the which we observe in many persons, and admire in women, in
whom it does chiefly abound; she does also furnish suddenly an infinite number
of things, which serve as a nourishment to entertainment. It is impossible to
prescribe certain rules how a man should use his words, That judgment serves
for a guide.
by reason of the infinite diversity of encounters which are in the world,
where we shall hardly find two spirits that are altogether like. Wherefore he
that will accommodate himself to the conversation of many, must make use of
his own judgment for a guide, to the end that knowing the difference of one
another, he may at every instant change his language and his maxim, according
to the humor of those with whom chance or his designs have engaged him.

Of the Entertainment of the Prince.
THE most glorious and most profitable object that he can make choice of to
employ his entertainment worthily, is, without doubt, toward his Sovereign.
The first thing that is necessary for him to attain unto this honor, is to
be well known; but I would have it in the best manner. Of the first entrance
of an honest man to the King, and how it should be made.
I find nothing so flat nor cold, as those dry reuerences which so many
impudent persons presume to make unto the King, when as they have nothing to
say unto him, nor any man has any cause to speak of them. A gallant man will
never be infected with this vanity, if his reputation has not past before him,
to make his access the more easy: or if he which presents him has not a long
subject to entertain the Prince, with the famous services which this new man
has done him, or may do him hereafter, of the occasions of honor where he
has been an actor, of the good qualities which he does possess; and finally,
if he has not in him wherewith to give a pleasing subject, to court him, who
in bringing him in shall be bound unto him, for that he had made choice of him
to do this office. Being settled in this manner, in his Masters conceit, I
would have him employ all his thoughts, and all the forces of his soul to make
him to know his worth: let him at the least love his person as well as his
dignity, and that all his actions, desires, and words, may tend to please him
without flattery. Hereby in profiting one alone, he makes himself profitable
at the same instant to the whole Monarchy, and his knowledge and wisdom, like
noble and vigorous seeds, produce in the soul of Princes, flowers, whose
fruits are imparted to all their subjects. So as he which shall love his
Country, will be pressed with a desire to be beloved of great powers, and will
love those which are seated in the Throne, to watch over the public good. He
will strive to plant in their minds the lively seeds of virtue: he will be
ready to obey them, and wisely observe time, place, and other circumstances. Of
silence and words near the King.
His silence likewise as well as his discourses will depend upon the motion and
will of his master, and he will be always so circumspect in speaking unto
him, as he will never be held importune, nor indiscreet. That which is spoken
to purpose is always good, as likewise those things which are out of season,
are never pleasing. The cause of this vice, to desire to seem eloquent upon
all occasions, proceeds from a foolish and ridiculous vanity, to be esteemed
sufficient, which most commonly has nothing but shame, not to be hearkened
unto, besides, the blame of lightness, and extrauagancy, which does accompany
it. He must observe the Princes inclination.
They which have the happiness to have an easy access to Kings, and which
may present their words with confidence unto their ears, will first of all,
observe his humor whom they serve, and seek to conform themselves to the best
and strongest of his inclinations. If he loves war, The Prince a warrier.
they must entertain him with hardy designs, with the means to make great
Armies subsist, of the good order and discipline that must be observed, of the
knowledge he ought to have of his troops, of his sufficiency to command them,
of the marks of a good soldier, of the qualities of an excellent Captain, and
generally of all the secrets of military wisdom. If contrariwise he be
peaceable, A peaceful Prince
they shall not propound unto him but the means to make justice reign, and to
maintain the public tranquillity, to settle his authority, to ease his
subjects, to husband his treasure; to make trade to flourish, to preserve
friendship with his neighbors, to purchase the love of his own subjects, and
to be feared of strangers, and finally to make himself Arbitrator of the
differences of all the Princes of the earth. The Prince that love learning and
exercises.
If he take delight in learning, let him that will please him, observe to what
Science he is most addicted, and apply himself particularly to that study. If
he loves honest recreations, let him be diligent to serve him, and to follow
him in all his exercises. That he must be careful not to displease the Prince.
But let him have a special care never to make any show of way wardnesse, or
that he does any thing by constraint, in doing that whereunto he thinks he
is not bound, but by his own free will. There is nothing that does more ^rosse
the spirits of great men, then this forced obedience, which ^hey observe
sometimes ^n the service of those which do besiege them rather then follow them.
There are some so ill advised, as they never present themselves before them,
but with so sad and discontented a countenance, as they always seem to make
them some reproach. Others to play the good soldiers, are always in a posture
of ostentation and braging, and make their looks and gesture so savage, as a
man would say, they came to quarrel with their Master, There are others so
familiar, from their first entry into the Court, as they approach unto the King
with a smiling and familiar countenance, as if they would embrace their equal,
or do some favor unto ^n inferior person. These men should do more wisely,
to go and ^ide their impertinen^ies in the village, Of respects and impudency.
then ^o come and consume their estates in Court, and to serve tor objects ^f
scorn and con^^mpt. It is therefore ^ost important in all ^he parts of
entertain^ent, to be always ^odest and respective, ^e it in exteriall
gestures (...) in words; and they ^^nnot long subsist, which think to purchase
credit with great men by impudency. This course may well succeed with some, but
it ruins more then it does advance. Important precepts for the entertainment
of Princes
Certainly we must confess, that this familiar haunting with the Sovereign,
is one of the most dangerous honors, wherewith they are intoxicated in Court:
And if he be not of an excellent disposition, it is a difficult thing to
attempt to en^ertaine him often, but ^here will escape some^hing that will
displease him. For if he once persuades himself that ^hee is more sufficient
^hen he that gives him counsel, or that enter^aines him, he will presently
contemn him, and if he finds himself less able, he will hardly endure him.
Naturally all men are vexed to be of less worth then they that obey them, but
especially they that are bound unto them by the greatness of their condition,
seeing there is nothing wherein they yield more unwillingly, then to acknowledge
themselves to be of less judgment then another. Wherefore the most subtle
Politicians advise all men, Of the submission that must be used in councelling
great Princes.
never to seem too wise with their Masters, and teach never to give him
counsel, but such as are timorous and doubtful; that is to say, to speak
unto him in an accent ^ull of submission, and which seems rather to ^ropound
his advice ^hen to approve it, to ^he end that he may now thereby that he
^hakes his opinion to ^eeld unto his judgment. Whosoever shall ^o in this
manner, shall ^iuert from him the ^atred and complaints which follow sinister
e^ents, which are so hard for great Princes to endure, for that they imagine
that Fortune should obey them as well as men. We observe in effect, that they
have in a manner all this weakness, to impute the misfortunes which befall
them, to the bad conduct of those which are about them. And hence grows that
common precept amongst refined Courtiers, that the counsel which they ^iue
unto Kings, must ^ee slow and conside^ate, and the service they ^eeld them
quick and ^ctiue. Above all, they ^old it for a maxim, Of obsequiousnes to
Princes
^euer to contradict them: for his extreme ^ower is most commonly accompanied
with so sensible an apprehension, as the least word that does contradict him,
wounds him, and it seems he would make his opinions a part of his authority,
yet for all this he must not prove a flatterer. Against flatterers.
This vice is too base to fall into the thoughts of an honest man, besides, he
is no sooner discovered, but it ruins his credit and reputation, which thinks
to raise his fortune upon so bad a foundation. O how unfortunate is a Prince,
The misfortunes which grow by flattery.
who instead of faithful servants, finds himself environed with these
public plagues, who infect their minds with a thousand vain and foolish
imaginations, whereof the subjects do afterward feel the fatal effects. This
misery is the more to be feared for them, being in a manner inevitable to
their condition; for that being forced, as they are, to hear all the world,
and to make use of many persons; and flattery covering her self with a mask
of fidelity and true love to them as she does, i^ is in a manner impossible for
him to avoid the deceit. Let a good man fly the reproach of such pernicious
malice, being notoriously infamous, and let him not speak any thing that may
breed the least jealousy. I will admit that he be cunning and witty, but I
cannot endure a servile obsequiousness, and unworthy of a man of honor. Let
him never disallow of his Ma^ters opinion with pre^umption, but with a constant
modesty, and let him propound his ^pprehensions as desi^ing to seek the best,
and not as believing he had found it. What is to be observed in begging from
his Master.
If he would demand any benefit or favor from him, for himself or for any
other, let him represent it so full of justice, as he may not seem to have
obtained ^t by force and unwillingly; for that such a grace is worse then an
absolute denial. Let him never press it in such sort, as if he happen to be
refused, they may not think that they had disobliged him: for that we often
see, that when as Princes have not granted some favor to a suitor, they judge
that he which demanded it, with much instance, has desired it with great
heat; so as having no means to obtain it; it seems he should conceive some
secret hatred against him from whom he had expe^^ed it. Then the Prince upon
this imagination begins to hate them, so as many times he cannot endure their
presence. He must not be importune at his Princes pleasures.
He must also carefully avoid to be present at his Sovereigns private
pleasures, unless he have ^he honor to be called: ^or that there are times
and places where they are glad to be at liberty, to say and do whatsoever
shall please their fancies, and there will not be seen nor hear^ of any man
that man censure them and kee^ them in awe. If b^ chance he finds him self
surprised and engaged, let him seek t^ free himself as wittily and as
speedily as h^ can. And thereby w^ may conceive, that the time and the place
(...) no less considerable, then the person in this painful kind of
conversation.

Of the conversation of equals.
THat of inferiors and equals, or of those that have no other thing above us,
but some title depending of that supreme power, is not so strict, nor so
difficult as that of the Master. But it is more dangerous to commit errors then
in the other, whereas his spirit is always attentive to those things whereof he
vndertake^ the discourse. This i^ especially observed among private friends
whereas our minds finding themselus freed from that constraint, which holds
them in suspense in other companies, then give way to all their natural
motions, with such negligence as it many times makes us unlike that which we
seem in public, Yet this liberty must never be so neglected, but it must
be restrained within the rules of a sweet and honest respect, Of errors
committed in the conversation of friends.
without offering violence to the mind, which suffers him to reap the
contents of this pleasing kind of entertainment in their purity, and without
any mixture or bitterness. But this temper is more difficult then it seems
and many cause the^ to be admired i^ Court, and in famou^ assemblies, which
cannot learn the art t^ live as they ought with those which are mo^^ confident
and familiar with them. The reason here of is, that they do not love those
we^^ by whom they are beloved, and from the vanity they have to think, that
being honest enough, not to lose any of those which they have once gotten, they
do not labor but faintly to preserve the^. They do not expose their good
humors, but where they hope ^o extend their conquests, and they reserve
^hemselues to act the best parts which they have learned upon great Theaters.
In the mean time, what in^ustice do we unto those which love us, to afford
them only the defects of our spirits, and to give unto those unto whom we are
scarce known, whatsoever we have excellent to please them? This shows our
ignorance of that precept of wisdom which teaches us, that the estimation of
the mind does not consist in advancing it self, but to march regularly and
equally. And, doubtless, her true greatness is not so much observed in great
and extraordinary things, as in those which be mean and common. Let them
which desire to attain to a solid esteem, seek to avoid this humor, which is
properly that of dissembling, which is so generally disgraced in Court.
Misfortunes tha^ follow cou^t^ng (...)
Hereby many have lost themselves, who after they had lived long disguised,
have in the end found (being discovered) that what they advanced on the one
side, they spoiled on the other, and that the ruins of their first friendships
drew after them the fall of all the rest, which they had built upon such bad
foundations. And in truth a small matter is able to disgrace a man in the like
things, and cause him to be held treacherous and a bad friend, or any thing
else that is worse, for that these vices being tied unto the soul, which is
hidden from us, we are glad (amidst so great a multitude of persons which carry
a good show in Court) that they teach us which are good, and which are bad: And
when as our imagination is once won, we must have very apparent proofs to
the contrary, and many to call it back again: besides, it does seldom happen,
that we take any pains to disabuse our selves. In the mean time, the report
of these things multiplying infinitely, as it is usual in those which are not
good, these politic and refined Courtiers find, that by little and little
every man retires from their conversation, Of estimation, and of the means to
get it.
and that they are utterly ruined in their esteem, for that they sought rather
to be great then good. Wherefore all our cares ought to be employed to win
speedily and by good courses the opinion of honest men, seeing that all the
world knows how much it does import to shorten the way which may guide us to
an eminent esteem. One man alone in a great Court like unto ours, cannot do
all himself, and if he be not assisted by many, he will many times find
himself oppressed with age before he shall be well known by his equals:
Judicious spirits have less luster then they which abound in imagination and
memory.
It is not sufficient to have merit, he must know how to expose it to view.
Industry helps much to make virtue glorious, and it is a strange thing, that
they which are most judicious, have most commonly need of this assistance: for
that the effects of judgment are so slow in regard of those which spring from
the viuacity of imagination, and from the qiucknesse of memory, that if good
Judges did not take the pains to plead the cause of these judicious spirits,
as well as to judge it, they should be many times in danger to lose it. I would
therefore for this reason especially, that whenever our honest man shall make
his first entry into any great man's house, or meet in any assembly, whereas all
their countenances shall be unknown unto him, as well as the humors of the
persons which are present, he should cause a good opinion to be conceived of
his spirit, before he does produce his person. The difference of opinion which
they conceive of intellectual things, and those which fall under the exteriall
senses.
And we may not fear in this point that which is seen in many others, where
it many times falls out, that by hearing the excellency of some thing to be
much commended, they frame so perfect an Idea in the imagination, and conceive
it to be so admirable, that when they come to measure it with the original,
how great and rare souer they find it, yet in comparison of that which they had
^onceiued, it seems little and defective. We must consider here, that those
things which are thus ruined by their own reputation, are such as the eye can
judge of at the first sight: As they which have never been at Paris, and hear
so many wonders spoken of it, may well imagine that it is greater and better
peopled, then they will find it when they see it. But in the good quality
which men possess, it is not so, for they see the least part of them
outwardly: so a^ the first day we begin to converse with any man, although we
find nothing appaching unto that which we had expected, yet for all that we
do not abandon the good opinion which we had conceived: But attend to
discover daily some hidden virtues; retayning constantly that first impression
which was framed in his mind by the testimony of many sufficient men. These
first impressions are so powerful, Of opinion, her blindness and tyranny.
or rather so tyrannous, as although they (...) no solid foundation, bu^ common
reports, ye^ they usurp upon reason the authority of a Judge, and does so
blind the understanding, as it cannot discern truth from falsehood, nor good
from bad. The Italians have a certain tale which does not unfitly proue^ the
force of opinion But for that of late years it has been renewed in France,
with the same circumstances, it were better to deliver it as we know it
happened, then to ^ly unto strange names. ^t is of a Gentleman very well bred,
An example to prove the force of opinion.
and of excellent merit, who being happily borne to Poe^^ry, showed good proofs
of his genius, and of the force of his judgment, to make him hope for the
approbation of those which do not look so narrowly unto it, and to make him
merit a good reputation. Yet as fortune busies her self in the distribution,
as well as of riches and dignities. This man was so unfortunate, as nothing
that he did could give any taste to those men whom he desired principally to
please. He saw well that this distaste, grew from a preiudicate opinion, and
judging soundly of his works, as he did, they might find that if they deserved
not extreme praises, yet they did not merit any contempt; he makes use of a
pleasant policy, to show them the injustice which they did him. He had first of
all a care to recover a piece of Malherbes works, which the curious had long
expected, and whereof he had the first copy, the which he had promised to
show unto them whom he would surprise. Going unto them to keep his word, and
to deceive them with all, as he did, instead of the verses which they expected,
he presented them with others, which he himself had composed upon the same
subject. He had of purpose, caused them to be Printed with the name of Malherbe
in the beginning, to the end he might give the more authority to his
invention. These men whom the reverence of that Name had already disposed to
the admiration of his verses, in the end of every Stanze these began to make
exclamation, and to testify such extraordinary rauishments, as it seemed to
be some work that had fallen from heaven, they held it so divine. Having
given them leisure to return from this profound ecstasy into the which it
seems admiration had plunged them, he intreted them to peruse certain others
that were written, which he said were his own, and were in truth those of
Malhrbe, and besought them to judge, that as the subject was the same, so the
manner of disposing it would be found diverse. What an effect of imagination?
In a manner all of them by a common consent, stayed to cross the first verse,
with a thousand impertinent and ridiculous reprehensions: every word made three
or four faults, not any one was French, nor lodged in its place, there was
nothing but roughness and transpositions, neither were the commaes well
placed, and to see them make the anatomy of these verses, you would have said,
that they were come from ^uisserland, and not from France. The second nor the
third were no better entreated then the first; and if night had not surpr^sed
them upon the fourth, without thinking of it they would have concluded at the
end of the Stanze, that Malherbe wanted common sense: I leave yo^ to think what
the con^fusion might be of the good Judges, when a^ they knew the true authors
of both pieces I will only insist to consider, the strange effects of Opinion,
the which although it be ^considerate and blind, makes the mind of man to
yield at her pleasure, and gouernes he will with such an absolute command, as
^f she had reason for her guide. If it be lawful for me to speak of mine
own interest without any impertinency, you shall see, that it is not without
cause, that I term her power tyrannous, seeing she is able to make men to be
esteemed in the world for what she pleases: an able man for a Sot, a wise man
for an extrauagant, a stayed man for one that is deboist, and generally
overthrow all the order, which reason and nature have settled in the world.
Another example upon the same subject.
I have no great humor to sell my self for other then I am; neither have I any
desire to make my self to pass for a man that is very regular in his life:
And certainly the toiles and disorders, in the which all they are engaged which
follow the Court, will not suffer them to practice these goodly virtues which
require that sweet and peaceable estate of life, after which I sigh so
heartily. Yet I may say with truth, and of this truth all they can be
witnesses, which have conuersed familiarly with me, that I have never exposed.
my reason to hazard, to be surprised with any excess: If the love of honest
men, and of their conversation has made me to pass, with them which I have
known, a part of my life in honest recreations, and amidst innocent pleasures,
I have cause to commend my good fortune, to have lived in that sort, rather
then to be sorry, to have been in such companies. In the mean time, I know
not how it happens, that my name by misfortune rimes so fitly to Cabaret, as
both good and bad Poets, my friends and strangers confusedly, and with the same
liberty, have made use of this rhyme, which they found so fitting, and have made
it so public, as most part ot those which know me not well, imagine I am
some Tavern Bush, or a perpetual drunkard. In like manner, The third example
upon the same subject.
in one of the assemblies of France, whereas they gave to every man an Epithet,
which did express some defect or some virtue that was in them, I had that of
Old given me, for that by my looks I seemed to have ten years more then I had
in effect: Since that time my friends, and many men of quality have accustomed
themselves to call me so, so as it has befallen me more then once, that I
have had some difficulty to make my self pass for my self, with some men
that had never seen me, for that I had not a long white beard, nor any other
mark of an old man. As for this point of age, it is indifferent to me what they
say or think; I do only allege this to approve what opinion might do. But
as for the other example which concerns good manners, The Authors excuse upon
the two last examples.
wherein every man is bound to preserve his reputation, I confess, that I
should be glad that they would take me for what I am, and that they would
rather know me by my actions, then by their jests which they sing in the
streets. But seeing that my actions are too common to have any luster, I assure
my self, that they will not hold it strange if I ^^ew my self what I am, and
if I make use of the occasion of this discourse, to make this declaration.

Of the conversation of great men.
IT is most necessary then to avoid bad reports, and to purchase a good opinion
in the imagination of every man, if it may be. But particularly it does import,
as I have often said, to prevent that of great men: for that the esteem which
they make of any one gives a certain authority to his reputation, which does
dispose the spirits of all the world to believe great things of him so
powerfully, as in a moment he finds himself on the top of this esteem;
whereas I would have an honest man to place himself and to maintain it by the
excellency of his actions and conduct He that can come unto his degree, to
deserve that men of eminent condition shall make ^ccompt of his virtue, it is
easy for him to attain unto that favor, to be received into their familiar
acquaintance. I would he should begin thereby to display the good qualities of
his mind, to converse well and pleasingly with them; for that it alone, to be
familiar with such men, may raise him higher, and make him pretend to great
matters. Of the courtesy of great men in our Court, and what esteem they make
of good men.
I may boldly say, that our Courts have this advantage above all others in the
world, that an honest man, although he were but meanly borne, and durst not
approach near unto great men but with servile submission, so as if he can once
make his worth to be known, he shall see them strive, and take delight to
admit him to their familiar confe^ence. In effect, there are few of our Princes
which stand so strictly upon the high points of their rancks, that if man have
made himself remarkable by some excellent part, they will not hold it a glory
to cherish him. Their receptions are at the least binding with the virtuous,
and in a manner all men testify, that they are more glad ^o be visited and
entertained by them, then by many persons of great condition, who being
admitted into good houses, but only in regard of their qualities, they never
enter, but they are troubled to find out some honest excuse not to see them.
When as he which has nothing but his virtue for a guide and support, has
attained to this high degree of glory to see himself as it were a companion to
those whom he might with honor term his Masters; he must learn to use so
notable an advantage so discreetly, as he may never fail in any of the
respects which they are accustomed to yield to such eminent persons:

Of honest respects, and those which are importune
He must also be careful not to fall into the other extremity of those which
continually seek occasions to practice their ciuility; for in the end by their
over much honesty, they might grow importune. Great me^ in truth look for that
which is due unto their condition, but they fear nothing so much as to meet
with those troublesome person^ which are always in ambush to draw from them
some bad complements, or to accommodate them with some unprofitable service.
And to speak^ plainly, I do not wonder if those persons for whom alone it
seems that pleasing things ^aue been made, find ^ese honors rude and
troublesome, seeing there is not any one of those which are under ^em, but does
find them insupportable. This defect is one of the greatest in conuer^^tion,
Against the obstinate makers of complements.
and there are ^ew seen, which do not abandon themselus other to entertain
an extrauagant man or a quarreller, then one of these wilful makers of
complements. About all to a free minde^ which believes that every word he
speaks in his discourse bind his faith: It is a tyrannous torment to
encounter with the kinds of troublesome spirits. There are i^ truth occasions
where it is impossible to avoid these thorns, but honest men know how (...)
pass them over, an^ not be moved. So there are none but new comers, and such
as are naturally inclined to swaggering, that will take offense. So as it seems
this odious kind of entertaynment is now left for a portion to some wretched
hang-bies, who would not imagine they were of the Court, if in their common
entertaynments they should not find something fit to be infected with their
impertinent ceremonies. If that be true which is said, that there are some
spirits so sick, as to make a private study of this ridiculous science, I
wonder truly that they do not chase them out of all commonwealths, and punish
him with the same penalties which the laws did ordain against the troublers
of the peace of the state: seeing there is not any which so much trouble humane
society as this importune kind of ^en. An honest man will never abuse him^fe,
neither in his words nor in his actions, especially in the ^^mpany of great
persons, who would be ^^sently distasted with (...) superfluous ceremonies
wherewith he should think to oblige ^^m.

But he must consi^, Of the quality of humors.
when he returns ^m this great world, he must have a strong judgment to carry
himself among his equals and inferiors without making any show that his head
were surprised with these fumes: for if he were so weak, as to suffer himself
to be intoxicated, he would soon become the contempt and scorn of all men.
This equality living in the same course with his friends and private persons,
coming from the cloth of estate and greatness, is a wonderful charm to
ravish generous hearts: for that as there is nothing more insupportable, then
the insolency of those whose judgment the favor of great men does overthrow: In
like sort, there is nothing so pleasing unto them, nor which is a more true
presage of a solid virtue, then not to be dazzled with the luster of such great
magnificence. Of the knowledge of honest and shameful customs.
Yet he which inioyes this honor must observe, not to make his conversation
and friendship common to all sorts of persons, lest in the end it grow in bad
repute with those which will think theirs is much imbased in being familiar
with him. An able and sufficient man may not, for many resons, mingle himself
among the base multitude, nor have any conversation with infamous persons. It
will require much time to accommodate a familiar salutation which some famous
Bawd or a lewd woman, or some other infamous person has given him in the
presence of many men of quality. And if some one of the company, or he himself
does not put off this acquaintance with a jest, it is to be feared, there will
remain some bad impression in their minds, which have made a particular
reflection. It does therefore import to have none but good customs, for the
which he may not blush before such persons, whose iealousies are so much the
more to be feared, for that they seldom take any pains to search out the
truth. Whosoever can part with a good grace from these great assemblies, may
easily hope to find entry in all others, and to be desired and received with
joy and applause. Of the advantages to be known of great men.
One of the greatest benefits which can come unto him to be thus known, is,
that the wicked fear to assault him, and the envious dare not but with
trembling practice their malice against him. They know not how with safety to
pour forth their poison against his life; for that as they see, he has many
which approve his actions, they imagine they are so many protectors of his
virtue. So as even they that hate his glory, are forced to publish it with
others, to the end that in commending one, they may reserve a power the better
to blemish some other over whom they have greater advantage.

General maxims of Conversation.
IN the mean time, be it with great men or with mean, be it with familiars
or with strangers and unknown, and generally with all sorts of different
conditions, there are principal maxims to be observed, faults to be avoided,
and certain directions to be practiced, whereof if a man which thinks to
sail with a prosperous wind, takes not heed, he will hardly avoid shipwreck.
He must vanquish his passions, and subdue his humors.
One of most important and general maxims which he ought to follow in this
commerce, is to moderate his passions, especially those which do most commonly
inflame in conversation, as choler, emulation, intemperance in discourse, the
vanity in striving to carry himself above other men: And after these,
indiscretion, wilfulness, bitterness, despite, impatience, rashness, and a
thousand other defects, which, like filthy streams, flow from these villainous
springs. And, doubtless, when as a spirit is infected with these venomous
seeds, what hope is there it should produce any other then bitter fruits, and
that they which have known him, will fly from him, as from a man surprised
with some contagious disease. Let us then be Masters of our selves, and know
how to command our own affections, if we desire to gain those of another man:
for it were not just to pretend the conquest of the wills of so many honest men
which are in Court, if we have not first learned to surmount our own will,
and to prescribe it laws able to restrain it within the center of reason.

A moderate spirit, Note.
which will not suffer it self to be easily transported in all its designs,
be it for affairs or for pleasure, will know how to take his time, to press
and defer to purpose, to yield and accommodate himself to occasions, so as
nothing that does cross him shall be able to wound him. If he will, and if his
reputation be not wronged, he knows how to dissemble, and when one expedient
shall fail him, he will always find his spirit settled and quiet, to invent
a thousand others able to furnish that which he pursues. Of the obstinacy of
the mind.
A turbulent spirit on the other side, which suffers it self to be vanquished
by the first motion which assailes him confounds his carriage in such sort, as
he becomes a burden to all the world, and makes himself insupportable unto
himself. He does nothing but by violence, and as there is neither order nor
rule which serve him for a guide, so all his counsels, and all his enterprises
savor of the confusion which reigns in his soul. He never knows how to yield
to purpose, and he is so subject to his humors and obstinacy, as he imagines
that whatsoever does cross them, cannot be conformable to sense. These poor
people have much to suffer. So a sufficient man carries himself in another
kind, and will be careful not to make himself such a slave to his
inclinations, as he cannot at all times make them to yield unto that man's, to
whom he has a desire to make himself pleasing. Of pleasing.
This suplenesse is one of the sovereign precepts of our Art; whosoever knows
how to observe, may boldly hope to please: and truly one of the most infallible
marks of a mind well bred, is to be thus universal, and susceptible of many
forms, so as it be with reason, and not through lightness nor weakness.
There is a rusticity and stupidity, to be so tied to his own complexions, as
he can never yield in any point. A spirit well made, adds to all that he
encounters, and as it was said of Alcibiades, he was so apt, and did all things
in such sort, as it seemed he had a particular inclination to al those things
which he undertook. An honest man knows how to live with fantastic and
violent humors.
There are no humors so extrauagant, with whom he cannot live without
contention, nor so fantastique, with whom he finds not some means to agree.
If he encounters any man that is transported with choler, he knows cunningly
how to yield to the first violence of this passion, which draws all after it
which makes resistance, and will insensibly cool this blind heat of revenge,
and by little and little, cause the Arms to fall out of his hands, who not
long before, had no other thoughts but of blood and fury. When on the other
side, With mild and cold humors.
he finds himself with those mild and cold humors which never abandon one
station, and whom no injury is able to move, or rather which dare not put
themselves in choler, lest they should engage themselves in some bound of
revenge; he will never produce any but examples of wisdom and moderation of
the mind, and not playing the coward in his discourses, he will learn to
carry himself so discreetly, as he will never cross his ^pprehensions, whose
affection he desires to gain. With amorous humors.
With an amorous man he shall have good sport, for there being few Gallants in
Court which have not been troubled with his sweet folly, he shall learn by
his own experience, all those things which please them that are sick. He will
daily discover new graces and beauties in the party beloved which it may be the
lover himself had never perceived. There shall be no allurement in the mind
which he shall not commend, nor any lineaments in the countenance, which he
shall not examine with admiration. And to make his pleasing perfect; h^ may, in
this point only, incline a little to flattery, with some kind of lawful
excuse, and especially if the end be good. She shall have no defect, but he
shall disguise it with some term of sweetning. If her complexion be black,
he shall say it is brown, and that such was the greatest part of the beauties
which antiquity did admire. If she had red hair, he will allow of the
judgment of the Italians and other Nations which love them so, and that of the
most dainty and amorous Poets, who never brag of any hair but of this color.
If she be too lean or too little, she will be so much the more active and
nimble; if too fat, it will be graceful: the excess in height will pass for
the stature of a Queen or Amazon; and in the end he will cover every
imperfection with the perfection that is nearest unto it. The principal
precept of pleasing.
The principal thing whereof he must be careful, is, that he show no
dissembling in his discourse, and that his countenance do not belly his tongue,
nor ruin that in a moment which his spirit had some difficulty to invent.
Without doubt ^t is a troublesome constraint for a free mind to be often among
such different humors, and so contrary to his own, and how sufficient and
pleasing soever he be, it is a difficult thing, but in the end it will engender
way wardnesse, to counterfeit himself in this manner, and to torture himself
so often. Of the liberty which is found among honest men.
But when he finds himself in the company of honest men, who, like himself,
shall have all the parts of generosity, he may fully recompense his bad hours.
He may there with all liberty suffer his inclination to work, and open his
mind unto the bottom, without any fear that his apprehensions should be
crossed: for that virtue being generally equal, it makes the opinions of those
which follow it conformable. O what a pleasure does a good mind feel, when he
encounters others of the same temper; and how imperfect are all other joys in
regard of his, which is so much the more pure and sweet, for that he knows
better then any man, that the contentment which he inioyes, is the sovereign
good of life. Against great talkers.
But we must leave this humor of pleasing, to contradict those which talk
too much. Truly this defect is one of the greatest in conversation, and one of
the most pernicious in man's life; as likewise the power to hold his peace, is
one of the most profitable Sciences. Whosoever has not this command over
himself, must be very circumspect not to hazard his fortune in Court. It
seems there is no virtue so easy to attain unto as this; Of the difficulty
of keeping silence.
and yet we may say, there is not any more difficult nor more rare. There are
found more valiant persons, more liberal, more chaste, and more moderate, in
their most violent passions, then we see o^ those, which know how to observe
silene as they ought. I do not know any proof more evident of ou^ weakness
and indiscretion then this; to say that all wise men and in all ages, have
proclaimed that the tongue was the mos^ profitable, and the mos^ pernicious
part tha^ was in man, according to the good or bad usage: They have all ^^ught
us, that it was ^ot so tied with so ma^y natural chains, nor ^^uironed with so
ma^y obstacles and ram^iers, but to advertise ^s, that the speech, like
precious treasure, ^s contained therein, whereof the conduct is so delicate, as
it cannot ^ow out abundantly without some notable danger. And yet we see in a
manner all the world to abuse it in such sort, as we say, that whosoever has
a tongue in his mouth, carries with him his most cruel and fearful enemy. Of
the discommodity of great talkers.
We may well say with truth, that they which at no time, nor for any
consideration, cannot stay this excess of words, are enemies to the sweetness
of conversation. What an insupportable pain is it for any man, especially if
he be alone, and and pressed with some design, to encounter with such men who
will never leave him until they have murdered him with the report of all
their affairs, and with all the suits of their kinsfolks and neighbors? In
companies where they meet there is scarce any man speaks but they, or if any
person of authority and judgment begins a serious discourse, they are so
impudent as to interupt him to deliver their own fooleries: for their spirits
having not the force to argue iudiciously, have presently recourse unto their
babbling, and do like those lame men, who being forced to take their horses,
dare glory to gallop before those who being a foot, they could not follow with
a simple pace They have always the most pleasant, Ordinary impertinences of
great talkers.
or the most strange, or the most admirable thing in the world to tell, and yet
they have never but the same part to play, and they are so flat and stale, that
at the first word, they begin to wound the attention of the most patient: Their
most pleasing discourses, and most ordinary, are of the goodly exploits of the
deceased Monsier Biron, or of some other Captain of another age: And when as
they will undertake to relate news, they have so little judgment to choose
those which be good, whereof men are curious, as they busy themselves rather
to expose some gazette of things which have past at Mexico, or at Goa, for that
it is far from us, and they have no care to inform themselves of the siege
of Cazal, or of the progress which the Hollanders make in the Low-Countryes,
for that it is at our door. Finally, all their discourses are so out of
season, as good things become bad in their mouths, and those which are
pleasing lose their grace. They only which can be silent with judgment, know
how to speak in the like manner. Thersites whom Homer had a design to
represent, as the most impertinent and vicious man which was in all the
Grecians Army at the siege of Troy, does not describe any of his defects with
greater care, then that he had been a great and insupportable talker; and in
one place he makes King Agamemnon to strike him on the head with his Scepter,
to teach those to hold their peace, which have not learned to speak. Ordinary
vices of great talkers.
They which are possessed with this talking spirit, are not only importune, and
tire the ears of all the world with their ridiculous fables, but they also
observe, that they are most commonly vain, blasphemers, detracters, notable
liars, and unreasonably curious of another man's secrets, Of the difficulty
which men have to keep the secrets which are committed unto them.
that they may have the content to entertain the first commer, that will give
them the hearing. This last vice, is one of the most malicious and the
blackest, which defiles the soul of the wicked. I will speak of the rest
which l have mentioned, when it shall be time: Now I cannot in a manner but
grow into choler, generally against all men who are so little faithful, as you
shall hardly find any one, that is able to conceal another man's secrets, but
he will suffer him. self to be carried away by this pressing temptation, to
impart it at the last, to his confident and discreet friend. An example upon
this subject.
The example a of Midas, although it be fabulous, does pleasantly prove this
verity. This poor King desiring to hide his Asses ears which Apollo had in
despite caused to grow instead of his own, had an unspeakable care to hide
them with the great Ornaments of purple which he did usually wear; but he
could not prevent it, but in the end his Barber discovered them. This man not
daring to reveal this secret to any man, lest he should ruin himself, and
not able to conceal it any longer, by this shameful lightness, which is in a
manner natural to all the world: In the end finding himself violently pressed,
and having no power to retain his tongue, which was stopped with a thing which
he might not ^eak unless he would ^aw his life into appa^^nt danger, he
resol^ed to go and discharg ^^mselfe a far off in ^e fields, of this
im^ortune burden, which ^id so much disquiet ^im. Having looked ^ound about
him, and ^^nding himself alone, ^ee began to make a ^eep hole in the earth;
after he had cast himself into it, and bent himself down against the bottom
of t^ hole, he began to sa^ with as low a voy^ as possibly he could King Midas
has Ass^^ ears. Being thus i^ some sort eased, he covered the place again
with earth, left the secret, it may be, should escape. Yet having no filled it
well, there remained a little ris^ whereas the rain water having fallen lon^
into it, in the end i^ made a small marish, i^ the which by succession of time
there grew many Reeds: These Reeds with their nourishment, drew unto them by
degrees (says the fable) the words which the Barber had delivered in that
place, so as upon the least wind which did blow, they did whistle out he same
words: King Midas has Asses ears. How many do we find at this day like
unto this Barber, to whom they have no sooner let fall a secret in their ear,
but as if it were some violent poison, their hearts work until they have cast
it up? It seems (said an Ancient) they they have their tongns pierced, and
cannot retain any thing: whatsoever their thoughts conceive flows out, and
their indiscreet and rash words (like an arrow shot right up) falls as soon
upon themselves as upon others. It is one of the greatest misfortunes of this
vice of speaking much, that it is not only ridiculous, but most commonly fatal
to all those which have their souls and tongues sick of that disease.

Of commendation of honest men.
TRuly I do not wonder, if they which are able to discern and judge of this
kind of men, which by a word of excellency, they usually term honest men,
countenance, cherish, and embrace them as they do; seeing that they alone
(amidst the corruptions of the vices which I have blamed in this discourse, and
an infinite number of others; whereon I dare not insist, either for their
beastliness or their baseness) preserve as an image amongst them those pure and
in^ocent manners, whereof, ^hey say, the delights of ^he paradise of our first
^athers were compo^ed. But there are so ^ew found, as we need not to multiply
the number of the Phoenix much to make it equal ^o that of these admirable
persons. Of their wisdom.
How wonderful is it to see them amidst so many rocks whereof the Court is
^ull, sometimes to avoid one, sometimes to resist the force of some contrary
wind, sometimes to yield to the violence of the waves, and in those places
where as others dare not approach for fear of perishing, to pass freely
without any show to have been in the least danger? Of the government of their
tongues.
Their conduct is accompanied with so much judgment, as there is not any
darkness so obscure, that can make them to stay; and particularly, that o^
their tongue is so certain, as it never precipitates it self. Their judgment
keeps it always within the bounds of reason, and retains the rashness of
its motion with more force then a well fortified Banck can stay the violence of
a river, or the ouerflowing of a torrent. They have so well applied their
souls to good, Of their facility t^ do good
and have so accustomed them to fly from vices which corrupt conversation, as
it seems they naturally practice all the virtues, which even the wise themselus
by the force of their discourses, had some difficulty to put in practice. Of
their courtesy.
They are civil and courteous without study, not only to serve and respect
those which are above their condition, and to honor their equals, but also to
defer many things to those which are their inferiors: And these things
succeed with the greater approbation, for that they do them without any art
^or constraint. Their access of their familiar communication.
Their access is so easy and pleasing, as there is not any man but desires
their company, and when as they have conuersed with them, find so much
sweetness in their spirits, so much integrity in their souls, and so much
judgment in their discourses, as they hold themselus happy which may spend
their whole lives in their company. If any one speaks unto them, Of the
mildness of their spirits.
they are attentive without interruption, and when it is time to answer, they
do it with order and judgment. If the propositions which are made before them
are so absurd, as they cannot endure them, they show them the absurdities with
so much ^weetnesse and mode^^y, as they hold them^^lues more bound that ^re
reprehended, then ^f they had the appro^ation of many others. They are seldom
seen ^ngry, or moved with any foolery or lightness that is done in their
presence: for they have accustomed their taste, not to reject every thing that
is not plea^ing unto them. Being ^hus judicious, the infinite diversity of
forms whereof the mind of man is capable, there is not any opinion so
ridiculous, nor so contrary to their sense, that does wound them; neither are
there any that seem so reasonable unto them to deserve well, as they grow
amorous and obstinate to maintain them. Of their manner of exposing what they
know
That which they know, they do not pour it forth indifferently upon all
occasions. And if they have not place to speak to purpose in company, they had
rather stay a whole day without speaking, then to deliver the goodliest things
^n the world out of season; Of their modesty to judge and speak of themselves.
yet in those things which they deliver, how sound soever they seem to be,
they never pronounce them with authority, nor in an accent which may testify
any satisfaction of their minds: But withal the tempers that may sweeten this
imperious time, and free them from all suspicion of their own sufficiency.
They are never heard speak o^ their predecessors, no^ of themselves; they know
well that such discourses are nor pleasing, but to such as use them, and that
there are few men so modest, but they seem to have some touch of vanity. And
who will believe a man speaking of himself in so corrupted a season, says an
excel^ent Philosopher of our ^atter ages, seeing there are so few to whom we
^an give credit, speak^ng of another man, wherein he has much less interest.
In their sports and entertainments, which are less serious, they do always
observe the effects of their excellent judgment. When they will busy
themselves to tell any tales, they make none but such as are pleasant: they are
never troubled to seek any occasion of laughter, and they are so new and so
familiar unto them, as they which hear them are never troubled to see the end,
for that they have formerly heard them. Of their integrity.
One of their virtues, which I love and esteem most, is that they are always
just in their words, as they are religious to hold that which they promise.
Against liars and perjured persons.
Lying seems ^o them a crime as ^lack as murder, and ^hey hold none more
^eruile nor unworthy of a man of honor: unless it may be that ^inde of
perjury which after they have engaged their faith to keep ^he secret of a
friend, or of some other person, (not considering that ^hey violate all divine
and humane laws) ^are reveal it, and sometimes sell it to the total ruin of
him from whom they have received it. A man of a bold spirit says, that this
kind of treachery is in some sense more odious and more execrable then
Atheism: for the Atheists who believe not in God, do him not so much injury,
conceiving that there is not any, as he which knows it, believes it, and
forswear^ his holy name in mockery. It is a less harm ^o misbeleeue in God,
^hen to mock him, and ^hey mock him eui^ently, which do not ^weare by him but
to ^eceiue. But the hor^or of this vice cannot ^ee more shamfully de^cribed,
then it has ^eene by an Ancient, who says, that to vio^^te his faith, is a
testimony that he contemns ^od, and stands in fear ^f men: And can there ^e any
thing imagined ^ore odious, then to seem a coward toward men, and to show
himself hardy against God. The great inconvenience which grows by this first
disorder, is that our understanding guiding it self by our words, he that
does falsify, it betrays public society. It is the only means by the which
we communicate our thoughts an^ wills, if it fails us, w^ are no more united
one unto another, neither do we know one another: If any one de^eiue us, it
troubles ^ur conversation, and ^issolues all the bonds ^f our commerce: and
^nally, this conuersa^^on whereof we now ^eat, is but an infamous and sordid
traf^que of malice. But to ^ontinue our discourse, (...) is time to proceed to
^^at part of entertain^ent which concerns ^sting and pleasant ^^eeches.

Of Jesting.
Jesting is a kind of discourse, a little more free then the ordinary, and
which has something bitter mixed with it, the use whereof is common among the
most gallant, and it is banished at this day amongst the most inward friends of
the Court. If the use thereof be reasonable or not, it is a doubtful question
in my o^inion, and imports ^ur subject, and re^uires to be examined. (...) it
true that Jesting when as it can be con^ained in an honest moderation, That
honest jesting gives life to conversation.
is a sweet ^ourishment of con^ersation, the which would grow cold and ^edious
without these ^leasing mixtures of ^ontrarieties, wherewith it is diuersified,
the which it seems do quic^en it, to give it new vigor and grace. Mos^ part of
men do rathe^ seek that which does divert them with some kind of joy, then
that which entertains them seriously: And as naturally that which prouokes
mirth pleases, so they are easily distasted with those companies which have
always one equal entertainment, to follow those where they find these
recreations. This is particularly observed among a certain num^er of persons
which ^all asleep in the idle^esse of Paris, amidst ^he use of the Court: ^or
if this exercise did ^ot keep their spirits ^n breath, and quicken them from
time to ^^me, it were to be fea^ed they would in the and fall into a sense^esse
lethargy. This ^ind of entertainment ^ignes properly in ^ch companies: so as
(...) seems that honest men falling by chance amongst them, they should
discharge their duties ill, and should fail in the viuacity of their spirits,
if they did not employ themselves to return jests, which are never so mild in
the beginning, but they leave some bitterness in the mind, which is not
easily pulled out. Of all the Jests which I have heard, That wilful jesting is
dangerous.
I did never observe any so modest, but if they came to a second reply, there
escapes some word of the one or the other side which had some tincture of
choler, or at least of despite. And although they dissemble their
apprehension, it is the greater, and there is nothing but vanity that does
suppress it: for it seems that it is a law in this sport, to the end that the
liberty of biting to the quick may be more insolent, that the first which is
discontented to loose the party. Whatsoever it be, he which made the coldest
reply, has not only the shame to see himself vanquished in a thing wherein
they seldom yield, which is the spirit: But moreover, there does in a manner
always remain in his mind the bitterness of those jests wherewith his
adversary has pressed him. I therefore leave you to judge which is most ^itting
and most safe, for any one that desires to please, either not to use any at
all, or if he will break jests with the hazard of the loss of a friend, or to
make himself an enemy.

Of pleasant words.
PLeasant words are not so dangerous, so as the Imagination that conceiues
them, consult first with judgment before he delivers them: and they have this
eminence in particular, that they not only please such as hear^ them, as al
good things do, but they make him that speaks them to be regarded with
extraordinary admiration. Of the excellency of pleasant words.
It seems that they which have thi^ gift, to encounter thu^ upon many subjects
have something diuin^ in them, or some particular Genius, which does often
raise up their spirits above the matter. And doubtless, although there be
sometimes a happiness, and that fortune has a hand in this kind of sport,
which a man would say, is wholly exempt from her jurisdiction: yet we do
usually see, that they which have the ability to make use of it, are adorned
likewise with the most rare qualities of the mind. There are few great
personages of antiquity which have not left us some Apothegmes to this day, and
our age may produce some, who besides this faculty of the imagination, they
have also the other parts of the mind of so perfect a temper, as they have
been held capable of all sorts of difficult employments: some in Armies,
others in foreign negotiations, and generally in the most important affairs
of the State. Of these things whish h^ must observe.
But to make a pleasing use of so rare a thing, as pleasant words are, he must
observe certain rules, and contain himself within diverse considerations,
without the which they many times lose their grace. We must consider what we
are, and what rank he holds upon whom he will break a jest, of what nature
the thing is whereon we will exercise our wits, upon what occasion, in what
company, and finally, what the thing is which we will speak, and whether it be
likely it will pass for current. That he must avoid jesting.
What excellency and beauty soever we admire in this kind of speeches, yet it
is not fit for an honest man, any time to tell any tale, or to make and
encounter upon any subject, how pleasing soever, whose grace cannot be expressed
without ill looks or ridiculous iestures. The least action wherein there is
any show of Buffone^y, is unworthy of the person which he ought to play, and as
he must have a care to vary his entertainment by these pleasing devices; so he
must be curious, they may not have a conceit that he does affect them:
wherefore whenever he shall feel these sharp speeches a^ his tongues end, he
shall not always ven^ them and give them scope; but rather los^ them, then to
diminish any thing of his estimation, or of that which is seemly. He must
never jest upon miserable men nor wicked persons.
He must particularly observe, never to break his jests upon miserable persons
nor wicked men: for that the natural inclination which in a manner all me^ have
to be affecte^ with pity at the pres^ing calamities wherewith they see
miserable when afflicted, will not suffer them to laugh at them, and wicked men
reserve a more severe punishment then that of bare words. There are none but
glorious persons, whom they do not spare, in the most wretched estate that
they can fall into, ^o odious presumption ^s, under what habit soever it be
hidden. Nor honest men.
The persons which he must carefully spare are those which have a public
estimation and are generally beloved of all the world for that it may sometimes
happen, that in thinking to cross them in some word of jest he shall find
less approbation then the who by a secret indignation shall take part in the
apprehension o^ this jest. He must also consider, Nor officers.
never to wound great powers with the like jests, who give order and motion to
the state; nor persons of an eminent condition, Nor great men.
for the one is capital, and the other is not much less dangerous. There is
nothing that does so outragiously offend the feeling of this kind of men, who
have their souls tender and apprehensiue of the least injuries, then does
contempt, whereof it seems the most modest jests have some mixture. Neither may
ye in their presence, make a scoff at a third man's vices, whereunto they
themselves are subject, for that they presently imagine that they are silent
reproaches, which are not cast forth against another, but to strike them. ^or
himself.
I need not advertise any one whatsoever, never to make a jest of his own
defects. As for our friends, Nor his friends.
they ought to be so sacred unto us, as we should not dare to violate them by
any biting words: And he must be very rude, Nor honest women.
and more brutish then Bears, not to entreat honest women with the like
reverence and respect, and to forbear (not only against them but also before
them) to let slip any word, or any thought whose sense may be wrested to some
filthy interpretation. The excellency of pleasant speeches consists principally
in being short, Principal rules of pleasant ^^heeches.
quick, plain, delivered with a good grace, and so fitly, as they may not
savor of study, nor that he has brought them from home: And this is the
cause why they which reply, are more esteemed then they which assail, for they
are less suspected to have premeditated. As for the diverse kinds, i^ (...) a
subject something intricate, whereof, it may be, I will one day treat at large,
as well as of the places from whence they may be drawn. But at this present
it is too long for the little liberty which I have taken in his Discourse. I
will produce no examples, for that the Ancients are common, and those of our
time (not to lose any thing of their grace) it would require we should daily
na^^ persons whom w^ must respect.

Of the difference of age^ manners, and conditions which must be observed.
IT remains now to consider of the difference of ages manners, and conditions
which are found amongst so great ^ number of men, into whose conversation
^^uers encounters may ^aw us: We entertain our selves otherwise with young men,
then with old persons, and the discourses which are pleasing to the one and the
other, do not agree well with those, in whom age ^ath tempered the vi^es, of
these two ex^reames: Neither do we live in like manner with the good as with
^he bad, if by chance we are forced to be amongst them: n^ with such as are
our familiars, as with other that are scarce know^ unto us: nor with persons
that love joy and mirth, as with those that are melancholy and severe: nor yet
with the glorious, a^ with those that are civil and honest. Amidst this
confusion of humors, so contrary one to another, he must have a sound
judgment, to free himself in good sort; but he ^ust be very circum^ect to
distinguish those that are interessed from others which are not, lest he
deceive himself. They which are borne gentile, and with all the qualities
which should accompany Nobility, do principally affect matters of honor. And
they which have nothing more commendable then their riches, are glad that men
should admire the wealth. Persons constituted in great place will have
extraordinary submissions, and generally all they which are happy, are
willingly imperious, and desi^ that men should bow to their great fortune* An
honestman, How an honest should carry himself amidst these different conditions
amidst all these conditions does judge of that which his own man with honesty
permit him, and knows how to yield or retain so much of his courtesy is
necessary, not to be anything unworthy of the person which ^e represents. His
judgment is so fit to find ^mpers in all things, that without flattery (...)
obsequiousness, he will observe that rule of Epictetus, who does ^duise us to
yield without resistance, to the opinions and wills of ^reat men, to consent as
much as may be to those of our equals, and to persuade those wit^ mildness
that are ou^ inferiors. The last precept in the conversation of equals.
To these three maxims I will add for the last general precept, that he must
never attempt to entertain any man to please him, unless he has first duly
considered of his humor, his inclinations, and of wha^ temper his spirit is;
to the end he go not lower nor higher then he ought, but to accompany him so
near, a^ all his discourses may be fitted to his carriage. If he encounter
with as able men as I presuppose he is, I only recommend unto him a firm
attention to that which is spoken before him, and to that which he speaks
himself, to the end that he may not only make his answers to the purpose, but
also pleasing, and may tie his imagination to adorn them with all the graces
of speech and exterior action.

Of conversation with women.
Having now treted of the entertainment of the Prince, and of the conversation
with equals, it remains to speak of that of women, whereof we may say, that as
it is the sweetest and most pleasing, so it is the most difficult and nice of
all others. That of men is more vigorous and free, and therefore for that it is
commonly filled with more ^lid and serious matters, they do less ob^erue the
faults which are committid, then women, who having more active spirits, and not
charged with so many things, do pre^ently discover the least ^rrours, and are
more ready to lay hold of them. There is no place where as this kind of
conversation is seen with more show and luster, Description of a Circle.
then in the Court; when as the Queens hold the Circle, or rather when they
display, as an abridgment of all that which has been glorious and perfect in
the world* Whosoever has read in Poets the magnificence of these famous
assemblies which were made in heaven, when as Juno sent to call a^ the
Goddesses to assist at the pomp of some extraordinary rejoicing: Or whosoever
has taken delight in a clear night to contemplate the Moon among a million
of Stars, to glister with such brightness, and to pour forth so clear a
light, that it seems that all those Stars which accompany her are so many
beams which she casts forth, or rather so many sparcles of her fire, which
she lets fall in heaven. The Queens and princesses.
He that can represent unto himself, at least imperfectly, the access of so
many illustrious and beautiful Ladies before these Queens, to whom they come,
as it were to yield the homage of all that which they have most charming and
admirable. Not to lie, when as a man finds himself before these great lights,
there is not any heart of so little courage, which does not feel it self
secretly tempted with a desire to be an honest man, to merit the honor to
approach, and to be regarded, as of favorable Planets, which make our
inclinations and our fortunes happy, by the sole bounty of their aspects. About
this divine Circle, The Ladies
in the which we may say is found the true center of all the perfections of the
mind and body we see the other Ladies as less lights, shining in a sphere
inferious to the first, which gives soul and motion to all the rest. Not far
from thence, as in a heaven a part, The maids of honor.
appears a troop of young Nymphs which, like unto wandering fires, take such
places as they please in this stately Circuit: And whilst the Queens display
their glory upon their Thrones, to the eyes of all the Court, these fair
Virgins, or rather these young Stars on the other side, cause their beauties
to be admired, and subject unto their Empire the highest and most indomptible
liberties of the earth. This, without doubt, Of the conversation of the Louver
and of i^ discommodity.
is the great Theater of the conversation of women; but the confusion which is
found there is strange, especially at these stately hours at night, the which
is so importune, as the best entertainments are tired. A good company is no
sooner drawn together, but it is presently disturbed by the access of some
troublesome person, o^ its sweetness is interupted by the presence of some
person of great quality, or is altogether disquieted by the nearness of some
spies o^ the Court, who have mercenary ears, and are employed as Physi^ians do
their Horse-^eeches, so as in this place it is rather by ha^ard or by force,
then by election, that they are engaged in conversation; and many times we are
forced to fix upon such a person whose encounter out of that place we would
fly, as from a pestiferous person. Of the choice must be made in the Go^
We must then descend unto the City, and observe who are those amongst the
women of quality which are esteemed the most honest women and where are the
best assemblies, and if i^ may be, draw himself into their companies to the end
they may have an interest to do us good offices, with all those that come to
visit them. Of small precepts.
Here have reserved my self to speak of some sma^^ precepts which in she^
seem more fit to be practiced among the^ then with men: As also most part of
those which we have formerly examined, fall unto practice daily amongst women.
And we must confess that ^hey hold so near one unto another, as they go in
a manner daily together, and they make a perfect union and knitting as of
Sciences and virtues.

Of the exterior presence
The first care that ^e must have that will ^requent the Cabinets and
companies, and accustom himself to the entertainment of women, is to make his
presence pleasing. For the first thing which they consider in a man, is his
countenance and outward gesture, which Cicero calls the eloquence of the body.
He has divided it but into two parts, the gesture and the voice: But in the
subject whereof we treat, we must add the habit, and the composition of the
body it self, which must be of a structure well fashioned and proportionable,
or at the least that he may have nothing that at his first entrance might
distaste the eyes of those which look on him. Of apparel..
As for his apparel, it is better to be neat and handsome, then gorgious,
and all they which have any good relish, had rather see those which are neatly
attyred, then other which are richly covered. Yet the more man can bestow
without imparing his estate is the better, and it (...) one of the most
prof^table expenses that ca^ be made in Court. (...) is in a manner the only
thing which follow those which know ho^ to make use of it, an^ it opens them
tho^^ doors which are many times shut to me^ of great quality, and more often
to virtue. To be well apparelled, ^e must carry nothing that is particular nor
^xtrauagant, and the ^abites must be well ^orted, and with judgment. Of the
manner of the fashion of apparel, and of the suting of it.
Many women judge of the spirits of men by the fashion of their apparel, and
they cannot imagine, but if ^hey be fantastique in ^he form of their hats or
doublets, they are likewise so in their humors. The age is als^ to be
considered in tha^ point: for an old man will be ridiculous in carnation or
green velvet cloak, and a youn^ man will have no goo^ grace to be alwaye^
attired in black, or i^ some other obscure colors. Above all thing he must be
curious o^ the fashion; I do no^ mean that of some humorous people, among the
young men of the Court, who, to seem^ resolute, drown half their stature in
great ^^ots, sometimes they ^unge themselus from ^e armepits to the ^celes in
their breeches, and sometimes they ^rowne all the fashion ^f their faces in the
^immes of their hats, ^eing as broad as the arasolo of Italy. But mean that
fashion, which being allowed ^y the most sufficient amongst great and ho^est
men, serves as a law to all others. I hol^ them fantastic, which grow
obstinate to contradict those thing which are in use, what^soeuer it be, but
principally in a thing so in different as apparel Let an honest man be
careful not to fall into such capritious humors; as likewise no^ to be the
original inuenter of new fashion^ unless he finds himself very capable to
make them succed ^owsoeuer, Of the apparrelling of men.
he must ^eware, lest they ob^rue in him too much are in his attire, and (...)
effect, a man that is ^oo curious, is worse ^en he that is too careless. This
kind of care is not seemly but among women, and a man is never comely, ^ut
when he believes ^t not. So as a man be neatly attired, it does not import to
be gorgious. Small precept.
It is sufficient if he have always clean linen and white, th^^ he be well
shod: as for his apparel, if it be not rich, yet, at the lea^ it must not be
old no^ filthy, let his hat be new, and of the newest fashion; let him always
have his hea^ dried, and his hair i^ order as they wea^ them; let him keep his
beard carefully i^ order, by reason of the discommodity he should otherwise
receive in speaking and eating, and particularly let him always have his ^eeth
and mouth so ^leane, as they whom he shall entertain, may never receive any
annoyance by his breath. An art more studied serves less, then it does hurt:
and ye shall many times see one that seems more pleasing to the eyes of a
troop of Ladies, all Sunburnt, and covered with sweat and dust, that is
returned from the war, or from hunting, the^ these men of wax which dare never
show themselves in the Sun nor approach near the fire for fear they should
melt.

Of Action, which is the soul of words.
ACtion which is a part of the division of this eloquence of the body, whereof
we have spoken, must also be duly ^onsidered of, being as ^t is the soul of
all the discourses which we make. In effect, our words languish if they be not
supported, and we see many men, in whose mouths the goodliest things seem
dead, or at the least, so cold as they move not; and others know how ^o give
life unto the ^east, with such grace, as they delight all those that hear
them. Of the accent (...) the voyc^
But to vanquish two senses at one instant, and equally to besiege men's
spirits, by their eyes and ears, he must have an exact care, that the accent
of his voice may have nothing in it that is rough, nor sharp, nor confused, nor
too regular. The other parts assist those much that speak; but we may say in
some sort of the hands that they speak themselus. For by them in a manner as
often as with the tongue, we demand, we promise, we call unto us, we send
away, we question, and we deny: and finally we express in ^o great a number
of different things, that in his strange diversity of Languages of so many
Nations where with the ^arth is inhabited, it ^eemes that nature has ^eserued
that of the ^ands alone, to make ^t common among all men.

And of all these cares which man has to make the outward action pleasing,
That they must respect women.
the first and principal precept which he must observe that will please
women, is to honor them with all the respects and submissions that are
possible and fitting. It is an effect of their weakness to be of an imperious
humor as they are, and it seems to them that in usurping this authority over
men, which they arrogate unto themselus, they repair in some sort the natural
defect of their little force. Wherefore we see, that all the actions which show
obedience and respect, are pleasing unto them, and they are most commonly in
their greatest favor, which know best how to bend, and submit themselves
before them. Of pleasing am^ women.
He that has the ability, should never bring into this commerce, any but
smooth and silken words wherewith they entertain Kings. And all they which (as
they say) can never speak but on horseback, should proceed on their way, to
go unto the war, and not stay among women. This sex is too mild and quiet to
endure any harshnes or quarrels. Whatsouer is any thing rough amazeth them, and
the least thing that does cross them, discontents them. The most sufficient
among them, have such tender spirits, as they are moved with the least
contestations which oppose their apprehensions, and cross their minds: so as
they which are not forced to yield easily unto their wills and opinions, can
never be in bad terms with them, nor want estimation. Finally, in this point
all the rules of pleasing should be put in practice, and the most humble
submissio^s are graceful to any whatsoever. Reasons why they should humor
women.
And doubtless it is not only for the reasons which are ordinarily alleged,
that women are so honored by honest men* for if that were not, but for the
pleasure which they receive in their companies, to whom they ascribe so much,
the most brutish would be the persons that would make most account of them. ^f
it were not also but (...) consideration that ^hey preserve our kind, ^here
would be few ^ut Philosophers, and ^uch as meditate upon ^he principles, and
vni^ersall causes of things, that would esteem them. Or else if it were ^ot,
that to acknow^edge the pains which ^hey endure in carrying us nine months in
their wombs, in bring^ing us into the light, in nourishing us and in assisting
the defects of our infancy and sometimes of our whole ages. It seem that we
should not ow^ these homages which we yield unto all the sex, but to our mother
in particular. That the virtue of women is equal to that of men.
But it i^ their own virtue which we respect, the which has the greater charm
to make it self to be admired, for that it i^ accompanied with graces, and as
it were enlightened with the beams of beauty. In effect, it differs nothing
from that of men: And Plutarch had reason obstinately to maintain that it is
the same; and to prove it, as he does, by a great number of examples, where it
seems he would draw into comparison the most eminent actions of men, with
those of women, and confer their lives, as of tables drawn with the same
hand upon the same original. And after all, if the magnificence (says he) of
Queen Semiramis be as glorious as that of King Sesostris; if the wisdom of
Tanaquill be no less then that of King Servius; if Porcia equals the force of
Brutus courage; or if that of Tymoclea yields nothing to the magnanimity of
Pelopidas, why should we not reue^ence them in the like ^ort, and recompense
them with the same honors? If there be ^ound any difference, ^t is not in the
nature of the virtue, but in that of the persons which do exercise it, who
being not of the same humor, practice it after a different manner. Achilles
was valiant in one sort, and Ajax after another: the wisdom of Ulysses was not
like to that of Nestor, an^ Cato was not just lik^ unto Agesilaus. Iren^ did
not love her husband in the same sor^ as Alcestis loved hers neither was
Corneli^ generous in the sam^ manner like to Olympi^ yet this does not
conclude, that there ar^ many valors, nor many wisdoms, nor many justices,
nor that every one of these virtues can be multiplied into different kinds*
But we may draw from all this we have delivered, that the generosity of women
is the same with that of men, and that the difference of their sexes makes not
any of their virtues. How necessary women are in Court.
To this we must ad, that without them the goodliest Courts in the world would
be mournful and languishing, without splendour, without joy, and without any
kind of gallantnesse; and we must confess, that their presence alone quicken^
men's minds, and incites the generosity o^ all those which have any feelings
and apprehensions. This being true, as undoubtedly (...) is, what men can be so
stupid and dull, as to refuse respects and honors to those which give them
glory, or a^ the least, inspire them with a desire to get it* These respects
consis^ in a certain expression of humility and reue^^nce by gestures or by
^ords, which testify (...) extraordinary e^eem which we make (...) those
persons to whom we use them. ^hey are also expressed ^y actions; Of services
that are to be done to women.
and by a ^^ousand observations ^^ petty services which ^^e to be done to
women, which being per^ormed in time, and of^^n reiterated, work in ^^e end
stronger im^ressions, then those which are more important, whereof the
occasions fall out se^dome. They which a^ amorous have no nee^ of my precepts,
seein^ they have so many pe^nicious Masters in the art, and are themselus b^
too inue^tiue to impro^^ their folly. But ho^ much is an honest woman to be
pitied, who^ beauty has been sov^ fortunate, as to stirv^ this passion in an
i^ composed soul, full o^ indiscretion and vani^, which are at this ^y the two
greatest ^agues, wherewith the ^^e of the Court is in^^cted. The eyes of ^^e
Basiliske are less ^^ngerous, and less (...) be feared, for the life (...)
men, then the looks (...) vain and indiscreet ^en are to be appre^nded for
the honor (...) honest women. That the most chaste are many times most subject
to slanders.
That which I find most per^cious, is, that the most ^aste, are sometimes
soonest lost by this l^mentable course, f^ reputation consisting as it does,
but in opin^on, which does eas^ turn good into ba^ and being the prope^ty of
vain spirits a^ ways to attempt the things that are most ^^minent: when as
(...) fair woman who ha^ the repute to be virt^ous, has let fall (and may be
by chance) h^ eyes upon them, the conceive that it shou^ touch their
reputation, if they should not make all the world believe that they have
received some particular favors from her: so making a kind of rejoicing of
their idle imaginations, to persuade that which is not, they employ so much
art, as they which are least credulous and least susceptible of scandalous
impressions, are many times forced to conceive bad suspicions. They which are
of this humor, thus to defame women, are themselves disgraced with them, and
they must never expect any thing but contempt, although they had all the lovely
qualities that can be imagined. There are many other defects whereof some in
truth are less malicious, and of less consequence then those whereof we have
spoken, but they keep them no less from the favors of ^is pleasing sex. Vice
is odious in the conversation of women.
Ge^^rally all vices dis^ease those that love ^^rtue, but particularly ^^ey
cannot endure ^^nderers nor blasphe^ers, nor those which ^e obstinate, nor
fan^^stick, nor humorous; (...) any other of those ^^perfections, which ^ew a
rudeness of the ^ind. Of slanderers.
And to speak ^^e^ truth, what can they ^xpect from ill tongued ^^en but
slanders, and an usage so much the more rigorous, as the virtue shall be
em^ne^t? Of blasphemers.
And what respect can they hope for from such, who co^temning heaven it sel^
dare upon all occasion by execrable oaths violate the honor o^ the sacred
name o^ God, and profane the glory of that holy, pur^ and admirable essence*
If they love the sweetness of entertainment and pleasant diuerting humors, as
vndoub^edly they do, The obstinate and dull.
what ^an they find in obsti^ate and dull spirits, ^ut contrarieties and
^elancholy, which are ^dious and difficult to ^o them to endure? The proud.
They do as willingly ^uffer the pride of those ^pirits which are puffed up with
presumption and false glory, whose ^outhes are never o^en but for their own
praises, and to publish their goodly actions. A Gentleman is ver^ ridiculous
that has n^ other thing to speak and they are to be pitied, which are force^
to hear him often. will allow that he mak^ good use of that which he knows,
and whe^in he is excellent; b^ it must be by effects rather then by word and by
hazard (if it may be) rather then of purpose. Although he b^ an excellent good
dancer, yet he shall not always send for the Musicque, nor draw the company
together: But without pressing forward, or making himself to be entreated, he
shall go with the rest, as to a sport wherein he shall not imagine to have
more advantage then in any other whereunto they would draw him. If three be a
party made to fight at Barriers, or to run at the Ring, or if any other
occasion be offered, to show how excellent he is in all exercises; how good a
horsman soever he be, and how active soever he finds himself, he will be
always of that pleasing temper, and will content himself to do well without
making any show to have satisfied himself. The most sufficient man in in the
world, if he brags of it, is but a sot. All that he says or does, do not
please, and the greater care he has to give a luster to his good qualities,
and to make them seem pleasing, does not only obscure them, but also make them
importune. Vanity has this common with rashness, that as it is foolish and
blind, so it is unfortunate. Modesty, in my opinion, is the most necessary of
all the virtues which are in use with the conversation of women: most of the
others get but their esteem, but this gains the heart, and does finish that
which so many subtle directions have only begun.

That ^gment ^es or^ to the ^duct ^ife.
After so many different observations, for the last and most certain of all
other, we must say that judgment is the master of this art; and from its good
or bad conduct, depends chiefly the success of that which we have ^ropou^ded.
All the best maxims fall into confusion, if they receive not order from it,
and in those things which are most evident, we must not leave to consult with
it, as well as in those which are difficult. But especially among women, it is
in a manner impossible, without the help of Judgment, that our esteem should
gain any advantage; for being of a spirit somewhat unequal unto them, if
Judgment goes not before to distinguish them, or if we do not learn from
themselus the things which dislike them, and those which content them, it is a
difficult thing ever to find the secret of their pleasure. So as we cannnot
give any certain rules upon this subject, by reason of the great difference of
encounters, and of the infinite diversity of spirits. It suffices to say, that
the precepts which go to the structure of ^his Art, are common ^o all the
world, like unto public places and fountains: But ^he wise know how ^o make
use of them, and to employ them to their own particular, every man according
to his capacity, and the profession wherein he imployes himself. And finally,
to end this Discourse, I conclude, that to make a perfect honest man, he must
have so many eminent perfections, as those things which are most difficult, may
be easy unto him, and that making him in some sort admirable to all the world
he may have no cau^ to admire any man.

Diverse Advertisement upon the design of this Treaty.
BEhold the feeling and sense of the worst Courtier in the world upon this
subtle and nice subject. And when I consider who I am, what my humor is, my
carriage, my profession, and the contempt I make of the Court, I can hardly
conceive how it could fall into my imagination to write upon this subject. If I
were of some illustrious birth, and greedy to produce my self, to purchase
some esteem: If I suffered my self to be tempted with this foolish vanity,
to enter often into great men's houses, where they do me the honor to open
their doors: If I were delighted to entangle my self in their intricate
business, and finally, If I did love the tumult of this great world, and that
I had wherewithal to make my self pleasing by some of those virtues, whereof
I would have others to have the full possession, my design, it may be, might
find some approbation. But seeing mine own defects, and knowing that I have
but the least of those qualities which I have described, I know not with what
apparent reason I can color my attempt, to make it appear reasonable. I had
rather confess freely, that the fault which I have committed in taking this
pains, is worse then to have remained idle. But after all that which pleases
me most, and which makes me thus bold to publish my conceptions in this
manner, is, that we have not yet, any laws against bad Authors, and that the
crime of writing ill has remained hitherto among us without any example of
punishment. My design is only to represent a good man, more brief^y then
others have done, rather then one of these nimble Cour^iers of this age, whose
most virtuous maxims are not always innocent. If he be insufficient, it is as
I am: and if they find I have not given him good council enough, I do not
see that I am bound to teach them more then I have learned. Yet I propound unto
him sufficient employment for a part of his life and I assure my self, that
he shall not employ many of his hours unprofitably, (...) he will addict
himself to all the exercises which I have shewe^ him to be fitting to hi^
profession. This is ra^ther an Idaea of tha^ which is possible, the^ an example
of a thin^ which is commonl^ seen. He that hat^ not sufficiency to attain to
all these good qualities, let him hold himself to that which he may, and
endeavor, at the least, to have a part of the most necessary, and not give
them over. They which would have me give full and particular precepts of every
thing which I have only mentioned in passing, make a proposition which shows
a weakness of judgment worthy of comparison. When I say that a Gentleman
should be a good horseman, and that he should know how to handle his weapon;
is it not to advertise him to go unto the Academy, and to frequent the
Schools, or to have good Masters in his house, to learn from them that which
he should not be ignorant of? So when I advise him to study the Politiques*
or the Morals, or the Mathematiques; is i^ not to tell him, that he should
carefully read the best Authors which have written of these goodly Sciences,
or that he should confer with learned men? Would they have me stuff my Book
with the royal Manage, and of the noble Art of Defense; and that I should set
down common places of all the History, and the figures of all the instruments of
Geometry? In like manner, when I bring them i^ unto the King, and great men,
must I mak^ these Orations and di^^courses for every day in the week, with a
little treaty of childish ciuility; to the end they may be furnished wherewith
to cour^ them? Is it not suffici^ent that I have enga^ged my self to show them
the way, but the will bind me to go^ it? Howsoever, I have ^nserted in this
little book what I thought most necessary, and have cut off what I held
superfluous. I have mingled my opinions with those of the ancient and modern,
and indeauored to fix my self upon the soundest and most conformable to
reason. If I were now to restore that which I have taken from them, I confess,
that I have so confounded them with mine own, as I could not know them to make
a separation. Bu^ this pains would be so unprofitable, and i^ imports me so
little, whether they believe that I have invented, or that I imitate, that
rather then I will endure the question, I am ready to confess, that the good
things which they shall observe in this Discourse, are (if they please) mere
thefts; that the indifferent ^aue been ill coppied but of good originals; and
that the bad; (if they shall find a greater number then of good) are all of
mine own grows, and of my invention. Let censors tear it in pieces, if they
be not sufficient to blame it, I promise them I will be no more moved, then
when I see my clothes beaten to get out the dust.

FINIS.

